Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914, Supplement, The World War (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1928)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1914Supp).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Supplement, The World War (Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914)

Title pagePapers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914

Supplement, The World War

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Supplement, The World War (Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1914)Contents

Preface

Official positions of principal persons mentioned in the correspondence

List of papers by topics, incoming papers chronologically under date of receipt

List of papers by countries, incoming papers chronologically under date of issue

Pre-War PapersNegotiations relative to the conclusion of treaties for the advancement of general peace (Documents 1-23)

Part I: The Outbreak and Spread of the War — Projects of MediationThe crisis (Documents 24-32)

The first suggestion of mediation by the United States (July 28)—The opening of hostilities (Documents 33-91)

The offer of good offices (August 4–5)—The spread of hostilities (Documents 92-185)

New suggestion of good offices and mediation (September 7–8)—Developments in the Near East (Documents 186-219)

Further appeals for peace (October-November)—Turkey enters the War (Documents 220-263)

Spanish suggestion of joint good offices (December 7)—Establishment of the British Protectorate in Egypt (Documents 264-282)

The war in the Far East: Neutralization proposals—Japan’s entrance against Germany—The extension of operations in China and the Pacific Ocean (Documents 283-354)

Part II: Neutral RightsEfforts toward recognition of the Declaration of London—Proclamations, orders, and decrees of belligerent governments on contraband of war and trade with enemy countries (Documents 355-417)

Correspondence with American citizens, firms, and organizations whose interests were affected by the proclamations and orders of belligerent governments regarding contraband and trade with enemy countries—Action on particular commoditiesShipments of Grain and Foodstuffs—Marine Insurance (Documents 418-422)

Shipments of Copper (Documents 423-431)

Shipments of Cotton (Documents 432-448)

Shipments of Illuminating Oil (Documents 449-452)

Shipments of Naval Stores (Documents 453-457)

Shipments of Tobacco (Documents 458-460)

Interference by belligerent governments with neutral ships and cargoesCases Arising under the British Proclamation Of August 4 and Order In Council Of August 20 . (Documents 461-481)

Cases Arising under the Additional Proclamation of September (Documents 482-515)

Cases Arising under the Proclamation and Order in Council of October 29 (Documents 516-541)

The Proposed “Working Arrangement” with Great Britain (Documents 542-558)

Note to Great Britain of December 26, Protesting against Seizures and Detentions Regarded as Unwarranted (Documents 559-569)

Special Cases: The “Sturmfels”, “Birkenfels”, and “Schneefels” (Documents 570-575)

Embargoes and related restrictions on trade by European neutral states (Documents 576-619)

Embargoes By Germany (Documents 620-643)

Embargoes By the Allied states (Documents 644-680)

Projects of cooperation with other American states for the protection of neutral trade (Documents 681-700)

Mine laying and the establishment of maritime danger zones (Documents 701-736)

The transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag for the repatriation of Americans abroad (Documents 737-763)

The transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag for general commercial purposes (Documents 764-789)

Censorship of the cables by belligerent governments (Documents 790-856)

Censorship of the mails by belligerent governments: ordinary mail (Documents 857-865)

Censorship of the mails by belligerent governments: diplomatic and consular mail (Documents 866-884)

Part III: Neutral DutiesProclamations of neutrality—The President’s appeal to the people of the United States (Documents 885-887)

Enlistments in belligerent forces—The problem of reservists (Documents 888-897)

The transit of reservists from Canada across United States territory (Documents 898-913)

The sale and transportation of contraband goods (Documents 914-931)

Loans to belligerent governments (Documents 932-936)

Treatment of belligerent warships, their crews and tenders, in American ports—Internment of the “Geier” and “Locksun” (Documents 937-951)

Treatment of armed merchant ships—The problem of conversion (Documents 952-986)

Treatment of merchant ships supplying belligerent warships (Documents 987-1042)

Maintenance of neutrality in the Panama Canal Zone (Documents 1043-1047)

Actions of belligerent warships outside territorial waters—Hovering (Documents 1048-1062)

The question of the limits of territorial waters—The Italian six-mile rule (Documents 1063-1067)

Control over wireless telegraphy (Documents 1068-1090)

Observance of neutrality by other American states (Documents 1091-1126)

Observance of neutrality by Liberia (Documents 1127-1144)

Part IV: Other Problems and ResponsibilitiesNew regulations governing the issuance of passports—Emergency Passports (Documents 1145-1152)

Representation of belligerent governments in enemy countries—Protection of their interests (Documents 1153-1185)

Activities of the United States in regard to prisoners of war and interned civilians (Documents 1186-1194)

Protection of American interests and institutions in Turkey (Documents 1195-1233)

Special efforts in behalf of British and French nationals in Turkey (Documents 1234-1254)

Methods of warfare: Charges of illegal and inhumane conduct on the part of belligerent forces—Attitude of the United States (Documents 1255-1285)

Negotiations relating to the work of Belgian relief (Documents 1286-1318)

Negotiations relating to the work of the Red Cross (Documents 1319-1335)

Proposal for the Exemption of Hospital Supplies From Seizure As Contraband of War (Documents 1336-1346)

Index

Preface Preface

Foreign Relations of the United States for the year 1914 contained the following editorial note:

Diplomatic correspondence concerning the World War will be printed in separate volumes of “Foreign Relations of the United States: The History of the World War, as shown by the records of the Department of State.”

The present volume is the first of these supplemental volumes, which are being published for the years 1914 to 1919, inclusive. It is hoped that the other volumes, upon several of which work is well advanced, will follow shortly.

In order that there may be a complete understanding of the method of procedure in the selection of the documents for Foreign Relations, the statement of the principles to guide in the editing thereof, which was ordered and approved by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925, is here given in full:

The publication of diplomatic correspondence relating to matters which are still current often presents an insuperable obstacle to effective negotiation, but it is obvious that after the completion of the business in hand, as much of the correspondence as is practicable ought to be made public. This object is attained by the publication of Foreign Relations which presents, in a form economical, compact and easily accessible, the documentary history of the foreign relations of the United States. The editing of Foreign Relations must, therefore, be recognized as an important part of the duties of the Department of State.

The Chief of the Division of Publications is charged with the preparation for this purpose, as soon as practicable after the close of each year, of the correspondence relating to all major policies and decisions of the Department in the matter of foreign relations, together with the events which contributed to the formulation of each decision or policy, and the facts incident to the application of it. It is expected that the material thus assembled, aside from the omission of trivial and inconsequential details, will be substantially complete as regards the files of the Department.

The development of the science of international law has become a matter of such weight and general concern that it is recommended that the Chief of the Division of Publications, with the help and counsel of the Solicitor, should give special attention to the publication of all important decisions made by the Department relating to international law, with a view to making available for general study and use the annual contributions of the Department to this important branch of jurisprudence. It is likewise believed that the Department may profitably inaugurate the practice of printing a record of treaty negotiations, and it is, therefore, suggested that such material be added, beginning with Foreign Relations 1918, which is now in the process of editing.

When the documents on a given subject have been assembled in the Division of Publications, they should be submitted to the Solicitor or to the Chief of the appropriate division which has had immediate supervision of the topic. The Solicitor, or the heads of these divisions, respectively, are charged with the duty of reviewing the material thus assembled and indicating any omissions which appear to be required. Omissions of the following kind are recognized as legitimate and necessary: (a) Matters which if published at the time would tend to embarrass negotiations or other business;

(b) To condense the record and avoid needless details;

(c) To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by other governments and by individuals;

(d) To avoid needless offense to other nationalities or individuals by excising invidious comments not relevant or essential to the subject; and,

(e) To suppress personal opinions presented in despatches and not adopted by the Department. To this there is one qualification, namely, that in major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the choices presented to the Department when the decision was made.

On the other hand, there must be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating the place in the text where the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing should be omitted with a view to concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of a policy.

Where a document refers to two or more subjects, provided there are no other objections, it should be printed in its entirety, and not divided for purposes of more exact classification in editing. Great care must be taken to avoid the mutilation of documents. On the other hand, when a foreign government, in giving permission to use a communication, requests the deletion of any part of it, it is usually preferable to publish the document in part rather than to omit it entirely. A similar principle may be applied with reference to documents originating with the American Government.

The Chief of the Division of Publications is expected to initiate, through the appropriate channels, the correspondence necessary to secure from a foreign government permission to publish any document received from it and which it is desired to publish as a part of the diplomatic correspondence of the United States. Without such permission, the document in question must not be used. The offices and divisions concerned in this process of editing may be expected to cooperate heartily with a view to the preparation of an adequate and honest record.

While conforming to the general scheme of publication of Foreign Relations year by year, other features in the selection and arrangement of papers for these supplemental volumes appear to present sufficient peculiarities to call for special mention.

For obvious reasons, arising out of the general character of the events and questions dealt with in these documents, their classification within the volumes departs from the system ordinarily followed in Foreign Relations of grouping papers by the countries with which the correspondence took place. With a view to bringing out as fully as possible the significance of the documents selected for publication, other arrangements have been adopted for placing them in their proper context and perspective.

The papers of a general political character relating to the outbreak and spread of the war (omitting those dealing merely with military developments) are arranged in a single chronological sequence, including those connected with projects of American mediation. Those dealing with the Far East are grouped in a separate section, omitted after 1914, because the developments are covered in the regular volumes of Foreign Relations. The other papers are arranged topically under three main divisions, of which the two most important deal respectively with the rights and the duties pertaining to the position of neutrality occupied by the United States.

In regard to the chronological order, as followed in all sections, it should be further noted that, contrary to recent custom, incoming documents are placed, as accurately as possible, according to their date of receipt rather than that of dispatch, except for occasional slight transpositions for the purpose of keeping related documents together. This practice is followed in order to maintain the context between decisions or actions taken and the information available at the time. The users of the documents are thus placed, to some extent, in the position of the Secretary of State through whose hands the correspondence passed. In the case of telegrams, the time of receipt is that noted by the telegraph operator. In the case of other documents, it is generally determined by the earliest date noted or stamped on the original paper.

The principles of selection and exclusion of material laid down in the directions approved by the Secretary of State have been followed in assembling these papers. In cases in which material omitted because of undue length has been published officially elsewhere, reference is ordinarily made to the publications containing it. Instances of this sort which occur in the Supplement for 1915 concern Consular Trade Reports, published currently by the Department of Commerce, and collections of affidavits, etc., relating to submarine sinkings, which were included in the war-time publications of the Department of State under the title “Diplomatic correspondence with belligerent governments relating to neutral rights and duties” (European War, Nos. 1–4; reprinted as special supplements to Volumes 9, 10, and 11 of the American Journal of International Law).

Practically all the papers printed in the departmental publications referred to above are reincorporated into this Supplement; but, besides the inclusion of numerous papers not previously published, the rearrangements, changes, substitutions, and omissions are so extensive that no close correspondence will be found with the older series. Furthermore, documents formerly printed in paraphrase are now given in their actual text.

In addition to the general principles of the editing of Foreign Relations observed in compiling these papers, mention is required, in connection with the Supplement, of certain special lines of exclusion which operate in some cases against practically entire files of correspondence arising out of the World War. Some of these are omitted on the ground that they involve no important questions of policy or international law. Thus, no effort is made to cover the general subject of the repatriation of American citizens stranded in Europe by the breakdown of financial and transportation systems, although during the early weeks of the struggle the efforts of the Government to relieve their situation constituted one of the heaviest drains on the time and energies of the Department of State and the embassies, legations, and consulates abroad. From the considerable file of correspondence entailed, the only papers printed are those bearing on the project of transferring German and Austrian ships to the American flag for the purpose of facilitating this work. For the above-mentioned reasons, also, the correspondence relating to the placing of military observers with belligerent forces is omitted.

Other files are excluded as dealing with no issues in which the policies of the American Government or the interests of American citizens were directly involved. In this category falls practically all correspondence arising out of the fact that the United States was acting as representative of a belligerent government in countries with which that government was at war. The general instructions to diplomatic and consular officers charged with such representation are printed, together with correspondence on certain specific instances in which the limits of their authority to act for the foreign governments came into question; but communications between foreign governments and announcements as to their treatment of the subjects of other governments and their property, which reached the Department’s files only through its service as a medium of transmission without comment, do not appear. The principal files excluded under this canon are those on the treatment by belligerent governments of enemy property and enemy persons—both prisoners of war and civilians. Others affected are those on the representation and protection of interests of particular governments in particular countries. On the same principle is excluded the general file on the designation and rights of hospital ships attached to belligerent forces. A limited selection of documents from the file dealing with allegations as to the use of illegal and inhumane methods of warfare is printed, in order to bring out the attitude taken toward them by the American Government, to which they were so largely addressed.

With particular reference to the sections dealing with problems of international law, the general rule has been to exclude correspondence on particular cases which raise no new issues, but which are settled in a more or less routine manner according to principles determined in other cases for which papers are printed, or which are dropped because the facts are found not to be as first represented.

There is given below an exchange of letters between the Secretary of State and the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, under date of January 8 and 20, 1915, since this correspondence constitutes in some degree a review of the conduct of the Department of State in maintaining American neutrality during the year 1914, and therefore forms a logical introduction to the papers relating to that period of the World War. Papers bearing on all specific cases and statements of fact included in the Secretary’s reply to Senator Stone are printed in this volume, with the exception of those under the heading “Searching of American vessels for German and Austrian subjects on the high seas and in territorial waters of a belligerent,” which are included in the Supplement for 1915.

It may be added that the chief responsibility for the selection and arrangement of these papers was assigned to Dr. Joseph V. Fuller.

Tyler Dennett
Chief, Division of Publications

Correspondence Between the Secretary of State and the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, January 8 and 20, 1915, Reviewing the Maintenance of Neutrality During 1914 The Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations (Stone) to the Secretary of State

Washington, January 8, 1915.

Dear Mr. Secretary: As you are aware, frequent complaints or charges are made in one form or another through the press that this Government has shown partiality to Great Britain, France, and Russia as against Germany and Austria during the present war between those powers; in addition to which I have received numerous letters to the same effect from sympathizers with Germany and Austria. The various grounds of these complaints may be summarized and stated in the following form: 1. Freedom of communication by submarine cables, but censorship of wireless messages.

2. Submission to censorship of mails and in some cases to the repeated destruction of American letters found on neutral vessels.

3. The search of American vessels for German and Austrian subjects— (a) On the high seas;

(b) In territorial waters of a belligerent.

4. Submission without protest to English violations of the rules regarding absolute and conditional contraband, as laid down— (a) In the Hague conventions;

(b) In international law;

(c) In the Declaration of London.

5. Submission without protest to inclusion of copper in the list of absolute contraband.

6. Submission without protest to interference with American trade to neutral countries— (a) In conditional contraband;

(b) In absolute contraband.

7. Submission without protest to interruption of trade in conditional contraband consigned to private persons in Germany and Austria, thereby supporting the policy of Great Britain to cut off all supplies from Germany and Austria.

8. Submission to British interruption of trade in petroleum, rubber, leather, wool, etc.

9. No interference with the sale to Great Britain and her allies of arms, ammunition, horses, uniforms, and other munitions of war, although such sales prolong the war.

10. No suppression of sale of dumdum bullets to Great Britain.

11. British warships are permitted to lie off American ports and intercept neutral vessels.

12. Submission without protest to disregard by Great Britain and her allies of— (a) American naturalization certificates;

(b) American passports.

13. Change of policy in regard to loans to belligerents: (a) General loans;

(b) Credit loans.

14. Submission to arrest of native-born Americans on neutral vessels and in British ports, and their imprisonment.

15. Indifference to confinement of non-combatants in detention camps in England and France.

16. Failure to prevent transshipment of British troops and war material across the territory of the United States.

17. Treatment and final internment of German steamship Geier and the collier Locksun at Honolulu.

18. Unfairness to Germany in rules relative to coaling of warships in Panama Canal Zone.

19. Failure to protest against the modifications of the Declaration of London by the British Government.

20. General unfriendly attitude of Government toward Germany and Austria.

If you deem it not incompatible with the public interest, I would be obliged if you would furnish me with whatever information your Department may have touching these various points of complaint, or request the Counselor of the State Department to send me the information, with any suggestions you or he may deem advisable to make with respect to either the legal or political aspects of the subject. So far as informed, I see no reason why all the matter I am requesting to be furnished should not be made public, to the end that the true situation may be known and misapprehensions quieted.

I have [etc.]

Wm. J. Stone

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations (Stone)

Washington, January 20, 1915.

Dear Mr. Stone: I have received your letter of the 8th instant, referring to frequent complaints or charges made in one form or another through the press that this Government has shown partiality to Great Britain, France, and Russia against Germany and Austria during the present war, and stating that you have received numerous letters to the same effect from sympathizers with the latter powers. You summarize the various grounds of these complaints and ask that you be furnished with whatever information the Department may have touching these points of complaint, in order that you may be informed as to what the true situation is in regard to these matters.

In order that you may have such information as the Department has on the subjects referred to in your letter, I will take them up seriatim.

(1) Freedom of communication by submarine cables versus censored communication by wireless.

The reason that wireless messages and cable messages require different treatment by a neutral government is as follows:

Communications by wireless can not be interrupted by a belligerent. With a submarine cable it is otherwise. The possibility of cutting the cable exists, and if a belligerent possesses naval superiority the cable is cut, as was the German cable near the Azores by one of Germany’s enemies and as was the British cable near Fanning Island by a German naval force. Since a cable is subject to hostile attack, the responsibility falls upon the belligerent and not upon the neutral to prevent cable communication.

A more important reason, however, at least from the point of view of a neutral government, is that messages sent out from a wireless station in neutral territory may be received by belligerent warships on the high seas. If these messages, whether plain or in cipher, direct the movements of warships or convey to them information as to the location of an enemy’s public or private vessels, the neutral territory becomes a base of naval operations, to permit which would be essentially unneutral.

As a wireless message can be received by all stations and vessels within a given radius, every message in cipher, whatever its intended destination, must be censored; otherwise military information may be sent to warships off the coast of a neutral. It is manifest that a submarine cable is incapable of becoming a means of direct communication with a warship on the high seas. Hence its use can not, as a rule, make neutral territory a base for the direction of naval operations.

(2) Censorship of mails and in some cases repeated destruction of American letters on neutral vessels.

As to the censorship of mails, Germany as well as Great Britain has pursued this course in regard to private letters falling into their hands. The unquestioned right to adopt a measure of this sort makes objection to it inadvisable.

It has been asserted that American mail on board of Dutch steamers has been repeatedly destroyed. No evidence to this effect has been filed with the Government, and therefore no representations have been made. Until such a case is presented in concrete form, this Government would not be justified in presenting the matter to the offending belligerent. Complaints have come to the Department that mail on board neutral steamers has been opened and detained, but there seem to be but few cases where the mail from neutral countries has not been finally delivered. When mail is sent to belligerent countries open and is of a neutral and private character, it has not been molested, so far as the Department is advised.

(3) Searching of American vessels for German and Austrian subjects on the high seas and in territorial waters of a belligerent.

So far as this Government has been informed, no American vessels on the high seas, with two exceptions, have been detained or searched by belligerent warships for German and Austrian subjects. One of the exceptions to which reference is made is now the subject of a rigid investigation, and vigorous representations have been made to the offending government. The other exception, where certain German passengers were made to sign a promise not to take part in the war, has been brought to the attention of the offending government with a declaration that such procedure, if true, is an unwarranted exercise of jurisdiction over American vessels in which this Government will not acquiesce.

An American private vessel entering voluntarily the territorial waters of a belligerent becomes subject to its municipal laws, as do the persons on board the vessel.

There have appeared in certain publications the assertion that failure to protest in these cases is an abandonment of the principle for which the United States went to war in 1812. If the failure to protest were true, which it is not, the principle involved is entirely different from the one appealed to against unjustifiable impressment of Americans in the British Navy in time of peace.

(4) Submission without protest to British violations of the rules regarding absolute and conditional contraband as laid down in the Hague conventions, the Declaration of London, and international law.

There is no Hague convention which deals with absolute or conditional contraband, and, as the Declaration of London is not in force, the rules of international law only apply. As to the articles to be regarded as contraband, there is no general agreement between nations. It is the practice for a country, either in time of peace or after the outbreak of war, to declare the articles which it will consider as absolute or conditional contraband. It is true that a neutral government is seriously affected by this declaration, as the rights of its subjects or citizens may be impaired. But the rights and interests of belligerents and neutrals are opposed in respect to contraband articles and trade and there is no tribunal to which questions of difference may be readily submitted.

The record of the United States in the past is not free from criticism. When neutral, this Government has stood for a restricted list of absolute and conditional contraband. As a belligerent, we have contended for a liberal list, according to our conception of the necessities of the case.

The United States has made earnest representations to Great Britain in regard to the seizure and detention by the British authorities of all American ships or cargoes bona fide destined to neutral ports, on the ground that such seizures and detentions were contrary to the existing rules of international law. It will be recalled, however, that American courts have established various rules bearing on these matters. The rule of “continuous voyage” has been not only asserted by American tribunals but extended by them. They have exercised the right to determine from the circumstances whether the ostensible was the real destination. They have held that the shipment of articles of contraband to a neutral port “to order,” from which, as a matter of fact, cargoes had been transshipped to the enemy, is corroborative evidence that the cargo is really destined to the enemy instead of to the neutral port of delivery. It is thus seen that some of the doctrines which appear to bear harshly upon neutrals at the present time are analogous to or outgrowths from policies adopted by the United States when it was a belligerent. The Government therefore can not consistently protest against the application of rules which it has followed in the past, unless they have not been practiced as heretofore.

(5) Acquiescence without protest to the inclusion of copper and other articles in the British lists of absolute contraband.

The United States has now under consideration the question of the right of a belligerent to include “copper unwrought” in its list of absolute contraband instead of in its list of conditional contraband. As the Government of the United States has in the past placed “all articles from which ammunition is manufactured” in its contraband list, and has declared copper to be among such materials, it necessarily finds some embarrassment in dealing with the subject.

Moreover, there is no instance of the United States acquiescing in Great Britain’s seizure of copper shipments. In every case in which it has been done vigorous representations have been made to the British Government, and the representatives of the United States have pressed for the release of the shipments.

(6) Submission without protest to interference with American trade to neutral countries in conditional and absolute contraband.

The fact that the commerce of the United States is interrupted by Great Britain is consequent upon the superiority of her Navy on the high seas. History shows that whenever a country has possessed that superiority our trade has been interrupted and that few articles essential to the prosecution of the war have been allowed to reach its enemy from this country. The Department’s recent note to the British Government, which has been made public, in regard to detentions and seizures of American vessels and cargoes, is a complete answer to this complaint.

Certain other complaints appear aimed at the loss of profit in trade, which must include, at least in part, trade in contraband with Germany; while other complaints demand the prohibition of trade in contraband, which appear to refer to trade with the Allies.

(7) Submission without protest to interruption of trade in conditional contraband consigned to private persons in Germany and Austria, thereby supporting the policy of Great Britain to cut off all supplies from Germany and Austria.

As no American vessel, so far as known, has attempted to carry conditional contraband to Germany or Austria-Hungary, no ground of complaint has arisen out of the seizure or condemnation by Great Britain of an American vessel with a belligerent destination. Until a case arises and the Government has taken action upon it, criticism is premature and unwarranted. The United States in its note of December 281 to the British Government strongly contended for the principle of freedom of trade in articles of conditional contraband not destined to the belligerent’s forces.

(8) Submission to British interference with trade in petroleum, rubber, leather, wool, etc.

Petrol and other petroleum products have been proclaimed by Great Britain as contraband of war. In view of the absolute necessity of such products to the use of submarines, aeroplanes, and motors, the United States Government has not yet reached the conclusion that they are improperly included in a list of contraband. Military operations to-day are largely a question of motive power through mechanical devices. It is therefore difficult to argue successfully against the inclusion of petroleum among the articles of contraband. As to the detention of cargoes of petroleum going to neutral countries, this Government has thus far successfully obtained the release in every case of detention or seizure which has been brought to its attention.

Great Britain and France have placed rubber on the absolute contraband list and leather on the conditional contraband list. Rubber is extensively used in the manufacture and operation of motors and, like petrol, is regarded by some authorities as essential to motive power to-day. Leather is even more widely used in cavalry and infantry equipment. It is understood that both rubber and leather, together with wool, have been embargoed by most of the belligerent countries. It will be recalled that the United States has in the past exercised the right of embargo upon exports of any commodity which might aid the enemy’s cause.

(9) The United States has not interfered with the sale to Great Britain and her allies of arms, ammunition, horses, uniforms, and other munitions of war, although such sales prolong the conflict.

There is no power in the Executive to prevent the sale of ammunition to the belligerents.

The duty of a neutral to restrict trade in munitions of war has never been imposed by international law or by municipal statute. It has never been the policy of this Government to prevent the shipment of arms or ammunition into belligerent territory, except in the case of neighboring American Republics, and then only when civil strife prevailed. Even to this extent the belligerents in the present conflict, when they were neutrals, have never, so far as the records disclose, limited the sale of munitions of war. It is only necessary to point to the enormous quantities of arms and ammunition furnished by manufacturers in Germany to the belligerents in the Russo-Japanese war and in the recent Balkan wars to establish the general recognition of the propriety of the trade by a neutral nation.

It may be added that on the 15th of December last, the German Ambassador, by direction of his Government, presented a copy of a memorandum of the Imperial German Government which, among other things, set forth the attitude of that Government toward traffic in contraband of war by citizens of neutral countries. The Imperial Government stated that “under the general principles of international law, no exception can be taken to neutral States letting war material go to Germany’s enemies from or through neutral territory,” and that the adversaries of Germany in the present war are, in the opinion of the Imperial Government, authorized to “draw on the United States contraband of war and especially arms worth billions of marks.” These principles, as the Ambassador stated, have been accepted by the United States Government in the statement issued by the Department of State on October 15 last, entitled “Neutrality and trade in contraband.” Acting in conformity with the propositions there set forth, the United States has itself taken no part in contraband traffic, and has, so far as possible, lent its influence toward equal treatment for all belligerents in the matter of purchasing arms and ammunition of private persons in the United States.

(10) The United States has not suppressed the sale of dumdum bullets to Great Britain.

On December 5 last the German Ambassador addressed a note to the Department, stating that the British Government had ordered from the Winchester Repeating Arms Co. 20,000 “riot guns,” model 1897, and 50,000,000 “buckshot cartridges” for use in such guns. The Department replied that it saw a published statement of the Winchester Co., the correctness of which the company has confirmed to the Department by telegraph. In this statement the company categorically denies that it has received an order for such guns and cartridges from or made any sales of such material to the British Government, or to any other government engaged in the present war. The Ambassador further called attention to “information, the accuracy of which is not to be doubted,” that 8,000,000 cartridges fitted with “mushroom bullets” had been delivered since October of this year by the Union Metallic Cartridge Co. for the armament of the English Army. In reply the Department referred to the letter of December 10, 1914, of the Remington Arms-Union Metallic Cartridge Co., of New York, to the Ambassador, called forth by certain newspaper reports of statements alleged to have been made by the Ambassador in regard to the sales by that company of soft-nosed bullets.

From this letter, a copy of which was sent to the Department by the company, it appears that instead of 8,000,000 cartridges having been sold, only a little over 117,000 were manufactured and 109,000 were sold. The letter further asserts that these cartridges were made to supply a demand for a better sporting cartridge with a soft-nosed bullet than had been manufactured theretofore, and that such cartridges can not be used in the military rifles of any foreign powers. The company adds that its statements can be substantiated and that it is ready to give the Ambassador any evidence that he may require on these points. The Department further stated that it was also in receipt from the company of a complete detailed list of the persons to whom these cartridges were sold, and that from this list it appeared that the cartridges were sold to firms in lots of 20 to 2,000 and one lot each of 3,000, 4,000, and 5,000. Of these only 960 cartridges went to British North America and 100 to British East Africa.

The Department added that, if the Ambassador could furnish evidence that this or any other company is manufacturing and selling for the use of the contending armies in Europe cartridges whose use would contravene the Hague conventions, the Department would be glad to be furnished with this evidence, and that the President would, in case any American company is shown to be engaged in this traffic, use his influence to prevent, so far as possible, sales of such ammunition to the powers engaged in the European war, without regard to whether it is the duty of this Government, upon legal or conventional grounds, to take such action.

The substance of both the Ambassador’s note and the Department’s reply have appeared in the press.

The Department has received no other complaints of alleged sales of dumdum bullets by American citizens to belligerent governments.

(11) British warships are permitted to lie off American ports and intercept neutral vessels.

The complaint is unjustified from the fact that representations were made to the British Government that the presence of war vessels in the vicinity of New York Harbor was offensive to this Government, and a similar complaint was made to the Japanese Government as to one of its cruisers in the vicinity of the port of Honolulu. In both cases the warships were withdrawn.

It will be recalled that in 1863 the Department took the position that captures made by its vessels after hovering about neutral ports would not be regarded as valid. In the Franco-Prussian war, President Grant issued a proclamation warning belligerent warships against hovering in the vicinity of American ports for purposes of observation or hostile acts. The same policy has been maintained in the present war, and in all of the recent proclamations of neutrality the President states that such practice by belligerent warships is “unfriendly and offensive.”

(12) Great Britain and her allies are allowed without protest to disregard American citizenship papers and passports,

American citizenship papers have been disregarded in a comparatively few instances by Great Britain, but the same is true of all the belligerents. Bearers of American passports have been arrested in all the countries at war. In every case of apparent illegal arrest the United States Government has entered vigorous protests with request for release. The Department does not know of any cases, except one or two, which are still under investigation, in which naturalized Germans have not been released upon representations by this Government. There have, however, come to the Department’s notice authentic cases in which American passports have been fraudulently obtained and used by certain German subjects.

The Department of Justice has recently apprehended at least four persons of German nationality who, it is alleged, obtained American passports under pretense of being American citizens and for the purpose of returning to Germany without molestation by her enemies during the voyage. There are indications that a systematic plan had been devised to obtain American passports through fraud for the purpose of securing safe passage for German officers and reservists desiring to return to Germany. Such fraudulent use of passports by Germans themselves can have no other effect than to cast suspicion upon American passports in general. New regulations, however, requiring among other things the attaching of a photograph of the bearer to his passport, under the seal of the Department of State, and the vigilance of the Department of Justice, will doubtless prevent any further misuse of American passports.

(13) Change of policy in regard to loans to belligerents.

War loans in this country were disapproved because inconsistent with the spirit of neutrality. There is a clearly defined difference between a war loan and the purchase of arms and ammunition. The policy of disapproving of war loans affects all governments alike, so that the disapproval is not an unneutral act. The case is entirely different in the matter of arms and ammunition, because prohibition of export not only might not, but in this case would not, operate equally upon the nations at war. Then, too, the reason given for the disapproval of war loans is supported by other considerations which are absent in the case presented by the sale of arms and ammunition. The taking of money out of the United States during such a war as this might seriously embarrass the Government in case it needed to borrow money, and it might also seriously impair this Nation’s ability to assist the neutral nations which, though not participants in the war, are compelled to bear a heavy burden on account of the war, and, again, a war loan, if offered for popular subscription in the United States, would be taken up chiefly by those who are in sympathy with the belligerent seeking the loan. The result would be that, great numbers of the American people might become more earnest partisans, having material interest in the success of the belligerent whose bonds they hold. These purchases would not be confined to a few, but would spread generally throughout the country, so that the people would be divided into groups of partisans, which would result in intense bitterness and might cause an undesirable, if not a serious, situation. On the other hand, contracts for and sales of contraband are mere matters of trade. The manufacturer, unless peculiarly sentimental, would sell to one belligerent as readily as he would to another. No general spirit of partisanship is aroused—no sympathies excited. The whole transaction is merely a matter of business.

This Government has not been advised that any general loans have been made by foreign governments in this country since the President expressed his wish that loans of this character should not be made.

(14) Submission to arrest of native-born Americans on neutral vessels and in British ports and their imprisonment.

The general charge as to the arrest of American-born citizens on board neutral vessels and in British ports, the ignoring of their passports, and their confinement in jails, requires evidence to support it. That there have been cases of injustice of this sort is unquestionably true, but Americans in Germany have suffered in this way as Americans have in Great Britain. This Government has considered that the majority of these cases resulted from overzealousness on the part of subordinate officials in both countries. Every case which has been brought to the attention of the Department of State has been promptly investigated and, if the facts warranted, a demand for release has been made.

(15) Indifference to confinement of non-combatants in detention camps in England and Frame.

As to the detention of non-combatants confined in concentration camps, all the belligerents, with perhaps the exception of Servia and Russia, have made similar complaints and those for whom this Government is acting have asked investigations, which representatives of this Government have made impartially. Their reports have shown that the treatment of prisoners is generally as good as possible under the Conditions in all countries, and that there is no more reason to say that they are mistreated in one country than in another country or that this Government has manifested an indifference in the matter. As this Department’s efforts at investigations seemed to develop bitterness between the countries, the Department on November 20 sent a circular instruction to its representatives not to undertake further investigation of concentration camps.

But at the special request of the German Government that Mr. Jackson, former American Minister at Bucharest, now attached to the American Embassy at Berlin, make an investigation of the prison camps in England, in addition to the investigations already made, the Department has consented to dispatch Mr. Jackson on this special mission.

(16) Failure to prevent transshipment of British troops and war material across the territory of the United States.

The Department has had no specific case of the passage of convoys of troops across American territory brought to its notice. There have been rumors to this effect, but no actual facts have been presented. The transshipment of reservists of all belligerents who have requested the privilege has been permitted on condition that they travel as individuals and not as organized, uniformed, or armed bodies. The German Embassy has advised the Department that it would not be likely to avail itself of the privilege, but Germany’s ally, Austria-Hungary, did so.

Only one case raising the question of the transit of war material owned by a belligerent across United States territory has come to the Department’s notice. This was a request on the part of the Canadian Government for permission to ship equipment across Alaska to the sea. The request was refused.

(17) Treatment and final internment of German steamship “Geier” and the collier “Locksun” at Honolulu.

The Geier entered Honolulu on October 15 in an unseaworthy condition. The commanding officer reported the necessity of extensive repairs which would require an indefinite period for completion. The vessel was allowed the generous period of three weeks to November 7 to make repairs and leave the port, or, failing to do so, to be interned. A longer period would have been contrary to international practice, which does not permit a vessel to remain for a long time in a neutral port for the purpose of repairing a generally run-down condition due to long sea service. Soon after the German cruiser arrived at Honolulu a Japanese cruiser appeared off the port and the commander of the Geier chose to intern the vessel rather than to depart from the harbor.

Shortly after the Geier entered the port of Honolulu the steamer Locksun arrived. It was found that this vessel had delivered coal to the Geier en route and had accompanied her toward Hawaii. As she had thus constituted herself a tender or collier to the Geier, she was accorded the same treatment and interned on November 7.

(18) Unfairness to Germany in rules relative to coaling of warships in Panama Canal Zone.

By proclamation of November 13, 1914, certain special restrictions were placed on the coaling of warships or their tenders or colliers in the Canal Zone. These regulations were framed through the collaboration of the State, Navy, and War Departments and without the slightest reference to favoritism to the belligerents. Before these regulations were proclaimed, war vessels could procure coal of the Panama Railway in the Zone ports, but no belligerent vessels are known to have done so. Under the proclamation fuel may be taken on by belligerent warships only with the consent of the Canal authorities and in such amounts as will enable them to reach the nearest accessible neutral port; and the amount so taken on shall be deducted from the amount procurable in United States ports within three months thereafter. Now, it is charged the United States has shown partiality because Great Britain and not Germany happens to have colonies in the near vicinity where British ships may coal, while Germany has no such coaling facilities. Thus, it is intimated the United States should balance the inequalities of geographical position by refusing to allow any warships of belligerents to coal in the Canal until the war is over. As no German warship has sought to obtain coal in the Canal Zone, the charge of discrimination rests upon a possibility which during several months of warfare has failed to materialize.

(19) Failure to protest against the modifications of the Declaration of London by the British Government.

The German Foreign Office presented to the diplomats in Berlin a memorandum dated October 10, calling attention to violations of and changes in the Declaration of London by the British Government and inquiring as to the attitude of the United States toward such action on the part of the Allies. The substance of the memorandum was forthwith telegraphed to the Department on October 22 and was replied to shortly thereafter to the effect that the United States had withdrawn its suggestion, made early in the war, that for the sake of uniformity the Declaration of London should be adopted as a temporary code of naval warfare during the present war, owing to the unwillingness of the belligerents to accept the declaration without changes and modifications, and that thenceforth the United States would insist that the rights of the United States and its citizens in the war should be governed by the existing rules of international law.

As this Government is not now interested in the adoption of the Declaration of London by the belligerents, the modifications by the belligerents in that code of naval warfare are of no concern to it except as they adversely affect the rights of the United States and those of its citizens as defined by international law. In so far as those rights have been infringed the Department has made every effort to obtain redress for the losses sustained.

(20) General unfriendly attitude of Government toward Germany and Austria.

If any American citizens, partisans of Germany and Austria-Hungary, feel that this administration is acting in a way injurious to the cause of those countries, this feeling results from the fact that on the high seas the German and Austro-Hungarian naval power is thus far inferior to the British. It is the business of a belligerent operating on the high seas, not the duty of a neutral, to prevent contraband from reaching an enemy. Those in this country who sympathize with Germany and Austria-Hungary appear to assume that some obligation rests upon this Government in the performance of its neutral duty to prevent all trade in contraband, and thus to equalize the difference due to the relative naval strength of the belligerents. No such obligation exists; it would be an unneutral act, an act of partiality on the part of this Government, to adopt such a policy if the Executive had the power to do so. If Germany and Austria-Hungary can not import contraband from this country, it is not, because of that fact, the duty of the United States to close its markets to the Allies. The markets of this country are open upon equal terms to all the world, to every nation, belligerent or neutral.

The foregoing categorical replies to specific complaints are sufficient answer to the charge of unfriendliness to Germany and Austria-Hungary.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1 Dated 26th, presented 28th. See post, p. 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 559].

Official positions of principal persons mentioned in the correspondence Official positions of principal persons mentioned in the correspondence

Abbas Hilmi, Khedive of Egypt.

Albert I, King of Belgium.

Alfonso XIII, King of Spain.

Ancízar, Roberto, Colombian Secretary of Legation at Washington.

Anderson, Chandler P., United States Special Legal Adviser to the Embassy in Great Britain.

Arnold, Olney, United States Agent and Consul General at Cairo.

Asquith, Herbert Henry, British Prime Minister.

Augagneur, Jean Victor, French Minister for Marine.

Bailey, James G., United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in Portugal.

Baker, James M., Secretary of the Senate of the United States.

Bakhméteff, George, Russian Ambassador at Washington.

Barclay, Sir Colville, British Counselor of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires at Washington.

Barros Luco, Ramón, President of Chile.

Bernstorff, Count Johann Heinrich von, German Ambassador at Washington.

Bethmann-Hollweg, Theobald Theodore Friedrich Alfred von, German Imperial Chancellor and Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Birch, Thomas Howard, United States Minister in Portugal.

Bliss, Robert Woods, United States Secretary of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires in France.

Borghetti, Riccardo, Italian Counselor of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires at Washington.

Bray, John P., United States Consul General at Sydney, Australia.

Brun, Constantin, Danish Minister at Washington.

Bryan, William Jennings, Secretary of State of the United States.

Bryn, Helmer Halvorsen, Norwegian Minister at Washington.

Buckner, George W., United States Minister Resident and Consul General at Monrovia, Liberia.

Bundy, Arthur Jones, United States Vice and Deputy Consul at Kingston, Jamaica.

Burleson, Albert Sidney, United States Postmaster General.

Burnell, Albro L., United States Vice and Deputy Consul General at Rio de Janeiro.

Caffery, Jefferson, United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden.

Caldwell, John Lawrence, United States Minister in Persia.

Chamberlin, George Ellsworth, United States Consul at Georgetown, British Guiana.

Charles Francis Joseph, Archduke, Heir apparent to the thrones of Austria and Hungary (after June 28, 1914).

Charles I, King of Roumania.

Chinda, Viscount Sutemi, Japanese Ambassador at Washington.

Christian X, King of Denmark.

Clark, Champ, Speaker of the House of Representatives of the United States.

Clausse, Jean Roger, French Counselor of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires at Washington.

Córdova, Gonzalo S., Ecuadorian Minister at Washington.

Cotten, Lt. Com. Lyman A., United States Naval Attaché at Tokyo and Peking.

Crommelin, J. P., Liberian Minister at London.

Crowe, Eyre A., Assistant Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Great Britain.

Cunningham, Edwin Sheddon, United States Consul General at Singapore, Straits Settlements.

Daniels, Josephus, Secretary of the Navy of the United States.

Davignon, J., Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Davis, George W., Chairman of the Central Committee of the American Red Cross.

Davis, J. O., Collector of Customs at San Francisco.

Dearing, Fred Morris, United States Secretary of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires in Spain.

De Beaufort, Willem Hendrik, Netherland Secretary of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires at Washington.

Decker, Benton C., Commander United States battleship Tennessee.

Deichman, Carl Frederick, United States Consul at Nagasaki.

Delcassé, Théophile, French Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Diederich, Henry W., United States Consul General at Antwerp.

Djemal Pasha, Turkish Minister of Marine and Public Works.

Dominíci, Santos A, Venezuelan Minister at Washington.

Droppers, Garrett, United States Minister in Greece.

Dumba, Constantin Theodor, Austro-Hungarian Ambassador at Washington.

Easterling, Aldis Byron, United States Vice and Deputy Consul at Valparaiso.

Egan, Maurice Francis, United States Minister in Denmark.

Egerton, Sir Walter, Governor and Commander in Chief over the Colony of British Guiana.

Ekengren, W. A. F., Swedish Minister at Washington.

Enver Pasha, Turkish Minister of War.

Estrada Cabrera, Manuel, President of Guatemala.

Evans, Howard, Commander of United States cruiser Albany.

Ferdinand King of Bulgaria.

Findlay, Sir Mansfeldt de Cardonnel, British Minister in Norway.

FitzRoy, Sir Almeric William, Clerk of the British Privy Council.

Fletcher, Duncan U., United States Senator.

Fletcher, Henry Prather, United States Ambassador in Chile.

Francis Ferdinand, Archduke, Heir apparent to the thrones of Austria and Hungary. (Killed June 28, 1914.)

Francis Joseph I, Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary.

Frost, Wesley, United States Consul at Cork.

Garrett, John Work, United States Special Agent in Europe.

Garrison, Lindley Miller, United States Secretary of War.

Gazzani, J. Fernando, Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

George V, King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, etc., and Emperor of India.

Gerard, James Watson, United States Ambassador in Germany.

Gore, Thomas P., United States Senator.

Gottschalk, Alfred L. M., United States. Consul General at Rio de Janeiro.

Greene, Sir Conyngham, British Ambassador at Tokyo.

Grevstad, Nicolay A., United States Minister in Paraguay and Uruguay.

Grey, Sir Edward, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

Gustaf V, King of Sweden.

Guthrie, George Wilkins, United States Ambassador in Japan.

Haakon VII, King of Norway.

Halim Pasha, Said, Turkish Prime Minister (Grand Vizier) and Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Haniel von Haimhausen, Edgar K. German Counselor of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires at Washington.

Harris, William J., Acting Secretary of Commerce of the United States.

Harrison, Leland, United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in Colomjbia.

Hartman, Charles S., United States Minister in Ecuador.

Havenith, Emmanuel, Belgian Minister at Washington.

Herrick, Myron T., United States Ambassador in France.

Hioki Eki, Japanese Minister in China.

Hitchcock, Gilbert M., United States Senator.

Hoffman, Arthur, President of the Swiss Confederation.

Hollis, William Stanley, United States Consul General at Beirut.

Hoover, Herbert, Chairman of Commission for Relief in Belgium.

Horton, George, United States Consul General at Smyrna.

House, Edward Mandell, Personal representative of President Wilson to the European Governments.

Howard, Daniel, President of Liberia.

Howard, Rt. Hon. Sir Esme William, British Minister at Stockholm.

Hsü Hsao-cheng, Chinese General.

Ionescu, Take, Roumanian Ex-Minister of the Interior.

Jackson, Jesse B., United States Consul at Aleppo.

Jagow, Gottlieb von, German Secretary of State.

Jay, Peter Augustus, United States Secretary of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires in Italy.

Jemal, Colonel, Turkish Commander of Army Corps at Damascus.

Johnson, Cone, Solicitor for the Department of State.

Jones, John Edward, United States Consul General at Genoa.

Jusserand, Jean Adrien Antoine Jules., French Ambassador at Washington.

Kahn, Julius United States Representative in Congress.

Kai Fu Shah, Chinese Minister in Washington.

Kato, Baron Masuo, Japanese Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.

Kehl, John E., United States Consul at Saloniki.

Kemp, Edwin Carl, United States Consul at St. Pierre.

Knabenshue, Paul, United States Vice and Deputy Consul General at Cairo.

Kracker von Schwartzenfeldt, Dorotheus, German Minister in Colombia.

Kuli Khan, Ali (Nabil-ed-Dovleh), Persian Chargé d’Affaires at Washington.

Langhorne, Marshall, United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands and Luxemburg.

Lansing, Robert, Counselor for the Department of State and Acting Secretary of State of the United States.

Lathrop, Lorin Andrews, United States Consul at Cardiff.

Law, Andrew Bonar, Leader of the Opposition in the British House of Commons.

Lay, Julius G. United States Consul General at Berlin.

Listoe, Soren United States Consul General at Rotterdam.

López Muñoz, Antonio, Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Lorillard, George L., United States Secretary of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina.

Loudon, Jonkheer J., Netherland Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Lowther, Sir Henry Crofton, British Minister at Copenhagen.

Macchi di Cellere, Count Vincenzo, Italian Ambassador at Washington.

MacMurray, John Van Antwerp United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in China.

Magruder, Alexander Richardson, United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark.

Mallet, Sir Claude Coventry, British Minister Resident in Panama and Costa Rica.

Mallett, Frank Earle, United States Vice and Deputy Consul General at Budapest.

Manning, Isaac A., United States Consul at Barranquilla, Colombia.

Mansfield, Robert E., United States Consul General at Vancouver.

Marye, George Thomas, United States Ambassador in Russia.

Matsuda Genji, Member of the House of Representatives of Japan.

McAdoo, William Gibbs, Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.

McGoodwin, Preston Buford, United States Minister in Venezuela.

McMillin, Benton, United States Minister in Peru.

McReynolds, James Clark, United States Attorney General.

Mehmed V, Sultan of Turkey.

Mellor, Sir John Paget, British Procurator General.

Méndez, Joaquin, Guatemalan Minister at Washington.

Metz, Herman A., United States Representative in Congress.

Morales, Eusebio A., Panaman Minister at Washington.

Morgan, Edwin Vernon, United States Ambassador in Brazil.

Morgan, Henry H., United States Consul General at Hamburg.

Morgenthau, Henry, United States Ambassador in Turkey.

Morris, Ira Nelson, United States Minister in Sweden.

Morris, Leland Burnett, United States Vice and Deputy Consul General and Interpreter at Smyrna.

Müller, F. von, German Minister at The Hague.

Murphy, George H., United States Consul General at Cape Town.

Naón, Rómulo S., Argentine Minister at Washington.

Nathan, Edward Isaac, United States Consul at Mersina.

Newton, Byron R., Assistant Secretary of the Treasury of the United States and Acting Secretary.

Nicholas II, Emperor of Russia.

Osborne, John E., Assistant Secretary of State of the United States.

Owen, Robert L., United States Senator.

Page, Thomas Nelson, United States Ambassador in Italy.

Page, Walter Hines, United States Ambassador in Great Britain.

Peet, William Wheelock, Trustee of American College for Girls at Constantinople and Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Near East Relief.

Penfield, Frederic Courtland, United States Ambassador in Austria-Hungary.

Peters, Andrew J., Assistant Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.

Pezet, Federico Alfonso, Peruvian Minister at Washington.

Pfeiffer, John, President Perth Amboy Board of Trade.

Piazzek, D. F., Vice President of the Board of Trade of Kansas City.

Poincaré, Raymond, President of France.

Radoslavoff, Vassil, Prime Minister of Bulgaria.

Redfield, William Cox, Secretary of Commerce of the United States.

Reinsch, Paul Samuel, United States Minister in China.

Riaño y Gayangos, Juan, Spanish Ambassador at Washington.

Rifaat Bey, Turkish Minister of Finance.

Ritter, Paul, Swiss Minister in United States.

Rodd, Sir Rennell, British Ambassador at Rome.

Romanones, Alvaro de Figueroa y Torres, Count, Spanish Premier.

Ross, Alexander Carnegie, British Consul General at San Francisco.

Salinas, Manuel, Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Saltaneh, Alaos, Persian Minister of Foreign Affairs.

San Giuliano, Marquis A. Di, Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Savage, John Marbacher, United States Consul at Sheffield.

Sazonov, S. D, Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Schack, Von, German Vice Consul and Acting Consul General at San Francisco.

Schliemann, A., Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Schmedeman, Albert George, United States Minister in Norway.

Sharp, William Graves, United States Ambassador in France.

Shukri Bey, Turkish Minister of Public Instruction.

Skinner, Robert P., United States Consul General at London.

Snodgrass, John Harold, United States Consul General at Moscow.

Sprague, Richard Louis, United States Consul at Gibraltar.

Spring Rice, Sir Cecil Arthur, British Ambassador at Washington.

Stephens, John H., United States Representative in Congress.

Stewart, Samuel Vernon, Governor of Montana.

Stimson, Frederic Jesup, United States Ambassador in Argentina.

Stovall, Pleasant Alexander, United States Minister in Switzerland.

Streit, Georgios, Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Suárez, Marco Fidel, Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Suárez-Mujica, Eduardo, Chilean Ambassador at Washington.

Sukhomilinof, Gen. W. A., Russian Minister of War.

Sun Pao-ch’i, Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Sweet, Edwin Forrest, Acting Secretary of Commerce of the United States.

Talaat Bey, Turkish Minister of Interior.

Thompson, Robert J., United States Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle.

Van Dyke, Henry, United States Minister in the Netherlands and Luxemburg.

Venizelos Eleutherios, Greek Prime Minister and Minister of War and Marine.

Victor Emmanuel III, King of Italy.

Vopicka, Charles J., United States Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria.

Wallenberg, Knut Agathon, Swedish Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Watson, John Jordan Crittenden, United States Consul at Roubaix.

Whitehouse, Sheldon, United States Secretary of Legation and Chargé d’Affaires in Greece and Montenegro.

Whitlock, Brand, United States Minister in Belgium.

Wilhelm II, Emperor of Germany and King of Prussia.

Willard, Joseph Edward, United States Ambassador in Spain.

Williams, John Sharp, United States Senator.

Wilson, Charles Stetson, United States Secretary of Embassy and Chargé d’Affaires in Russia.

Wilson, Thomas Woodrow, President of the United States.

Wyndham, Percy C., British Minister in Colombia.

Wyvell, Manton M., Private Secretary to the Secretary of State of the United States.

Yoshihito (Harunomia), Emperor of Japan.

Young, George William, United States Deputy Consul General and Interpreter at Constantinople.

Zimmermann, Alfred, German Undersecretary of State.

Zupelli, Vittorio, Maj. Gen., Italian Minister of War.

List of papers by topics, incoming papers chronologically under date of receipt List of papers by topics, incoming papers chronologically under date of receipt

PRE-WAR PAPERS: NEGOTIATIONS RELATIVE TO THE CONCLUSION OF TREATIES FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF GENERAL PEACE

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

June 15 To the Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs (telegram). President Wilson’s plan for peace treaties accepted in principle by thirty-four countries; Great Britain, France, Norway, and Uruguay to accept soon. Copy of treaties sent to Greece. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

July 15 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Seventeen peace treaties already signed providing for investigation of all disputes prior to war. Form of British and French treaties agreed upon to be signed after submission to self-governing colonies for ratification. Germany urged to ratify on same day. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

July 18 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). No chance of Germany’s signing peace treaty. 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Aug. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Inquiry as to when Great Britain will sign peace treaty. Others awaiting action of Great Britain and France. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Inquiry when France will sign peace treaty. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6]

376 Aug. 15 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Promises definite answer soon as to signing of peace treaty. War causing delay. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6]

Aug. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram).
The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary and the Ministers in Belgium, Spain, and Greece. Eighteen peace treaties ratified; four more to be ratified soon. Again urging Germany to sign before Congress adjourns. 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Aug. 21 [Rec’d] Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). No hope for peace treaty_ _ _ _ 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

47 Sept. 4 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). British Ambassador authorized to sign peace treaty. French treaty ready, United States Government having accepted all changes suggested by France. Spanish Ambassador instructed to sign. Twenty-two treaties already signed. 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

49 Sept. 8 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). France arranging to sign treaty on same day as Great Britain. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Sept. 15 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram).
The same to the Ambassadors in Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. United States has just signed peace treaties with Great Britain, France, Spain, and China; in all, has treaties with more than two-thirds of population of globe. Desires treaty with Belgium also. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Swedish Government has agreed to peace treaty and is ready to sign at same time as France and England. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 24] From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Russian Government has directed him to sign peace treaty. Will prepare draft and come to Washington. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

272 Sept. 27 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Peace treaties with Great Britain, France, and Spain ratified. Treaties with Russia, Sweden, and Greece to be signed in few days. If Germany and Austria will agree to similar treaties success of plan will be complete. Will be gratified to make treaty with them. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Sept. 29 To the German Ambassador (telegram). Great Britain, France, and Spain just ratified treaties of peace. Preparing treaties with Russia, Sweden, and Greece. Austria and Germany have already approved principle. United States will consider any change in detail. Desires early signature. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Oct. 1 From the German Ambassador (telegram). Requests copy of last treaties to send to Germany. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

Oct. 5 Memorandum of Secretary of State. German Ambassador expressed interest in peace treaties; will endeavor to induce German Government to sign one. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Gratification of United States over education of War Minister’s brother and sons at Robert College. Proposes Turkey sign peace treaty with States. Most of great powers have done so. Form of Netherland treaty the one generally followed. Suggests bringing it to attention of Turkish Government. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

Oct. 7 From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Telegram concerning arbitration plan submitted to Foreign Office; promise given that it will receive attention. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 12] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Copies of peace treaties received and submitted to Government. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Oct. 16 To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Just signed thirtieth peace treaty. Ask Japanese Government if it will consider similar treaty. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japan reluctant to join in peace treaties. United States and Japan have conflicting views on China. Dissatisfaction in Japan concerning California legislation Fear of hostile legislation. 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

12 Nov. 16 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Minister in Belgium. Belgium formerly interested in peace treaties but has no time at present for calm and careful consideration. 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

PART I: THE OUTBREAK AND SPREAD OF THE WAR—PROJECTS OF MEDIATION

The Crisis

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 25 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russian intervention inevitable in case of Austro-Servian conflict. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

July 26 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Mobilization of army ordered to begin immediately. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

July 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Situation less acute. Chances of peace improved. Army clamoring for war. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Possibility of matters being arranged without general European war. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

July 13 [Rec’d July 27] From the Vice consul General at Budapest. War between Austria-Hungary and Servia unavoidable. Army being mobilized. Cordon being drawn around Servian frontier and in Bosnia. News suppressed and sale of horses to foreigners forbidden. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

171/res. July 24 [Rec’d July 27] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Demands made of Servia as result of assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, and because of the stirring up on the part of the Servian Government of the Slav population in the southern pas of the Monarchy. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

July 28 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Austrian declaration of war against Servia causing excitement. Russian Army mobilizing. Emperor strongly influenced to declare war. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

178/res. July 26 [Rec’d July 28] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Servia’s answer to ultimatum of Austria-Hungary unsatisfactory. Diplomatic relations broken off. Servia mobilizing. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

July 27 [Rec’d July 28] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). War in Balkans certain. Germany gives moral support to Austria. Italy neutral. Montenegro and Roumania aid Servia. Bourse closed. Martial law. War loan of 300 million crowns planned. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

The First Suggestion of Mediation by the United States (July 28)—The Opening of Hostilities

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 28 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Situation in Europe gravest in history. Civilization threatened. Laboring classes against war. Fear Germany. Suggests strong plea from United. States for moderation and delay. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Inquiries whether offer of good offices of United States would be acceptable in Europe under Article 3 of Hague convention. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

July 28 [Rec’d July 29] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegrams). Transmits Austria-Hungary’s formal declaration of war against Servia. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

250 July 29 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Good offices of United States offered to Sir Edward Grey. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Stock Exchange action deferring settlements for 30 days has quieting effect upon market. French hopeful of confining hostilities to present belligerents. 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

July 30 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Mobilization decree issued. German and Austrian Ambassadors ready to leave. 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

Undated [Rec’d July 30] From the Consul at Gibraltar (telegram). Garrison mobilized 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

July 31 [Rec’d July 30] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). British naval vessels in China dismantled and crews sent to Weihaiwei anticipating hostilities with Germany. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

July 30 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany’s efforts for peace fruitless. General European war certain. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (telegram). Jamaica forts manned, regiments sent to Kingston. German cruiser near. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

147 July 13 [Rec’d July 30] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary. Conditions in Austria-Hungary influenced by assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand. Archduke’s death heavy blow; practical head of army with long years of training; moving spirit of navy; closest friend of Kaiser. Conditions unstable, decline of market values, slackening of domestic industries. Emperor’s health affected thereby. New heir, Charles Francis Joseph, adequate to task; well trained in army. 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 43]

July 30 [Rec’d July 31] From the Consul General at Hamburg (telegram). Imperator will not sail 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45]

July 31 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Russia’s mobilization makes war inevitable. United States asked to take over Russian and French Embassies. Food prices doubled. Requests food, gold, and navy vessel for Americans desiring to leave Germany. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To Ambassadors, Ministers, and Principal Consular Officers in European Countries (telegram). Instructions to telegraph Department daily as to military, financial, and political situation. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Extremest military muster of realm, including Landsturm. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Great Britain has proposed in vain an ambassadorial conference in Europe to avoid war; desires to know if United States has offered good offices at Vienna, St. Petersburg or Berlin. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Allard Bank closed, failed to get money from Russia, Germany, or England. Bank of France refused assistance. Other banks suspend payments. Rumors of mobilization. Permission to issue emergency passports requested. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador in France instructed to ask French Government if it will maintain neutrality. German Ambassador in Washington has asked United States to take charge of German Embassy in France in event of negative reply. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

July 31 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Will accede to a German request that United States take over German interests in France, but only with the understanding that we will do the same for other countries. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53]

July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 1] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Country unanimous for war. Complete mobilization. Railways disorganized. Advising American tourists to leave. Unfortunate if we are again asked to look after interests of Russia’s enemies, as in the war with Japan. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53]

Aug. 1 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Foreign Minister asks if United States will take over German embassies in France, Russia, and any other countries with which Germany may be at war. State Department is asked a second time for instructions and for gold and ships for stranded Americans. Germans think Japan will attack United States. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia will move immediately if operations against Servia do not cease. Country on war basis. Business crippled; stock exchange closed; gold unobtainable; paper depreciated; traffic closed except for troops. 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Germany endeavoring to persuade Sweden to attack Russia. 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in France (telegram). No hope of avoiding hostilities. Some, changes in cabinet. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassain Great Britain (telegram). Anticipate war between Germany and Russia. Crowds flocking from Continent, detained because of canceling of transatlantic ships. British troops concentrating in North Sea. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Germany declares war against Russia. Requests United States to take charge of German interests there. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States anxious to avert war. President asks if British can suggest any way for mediation. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Orders for mobilization to-night. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 2] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (telegram). Despite existing treaties, Italy can not declare war in support of Austria, her enemy and her rival in Adriatic and Balkans. Fleet mobilizing at Gaeta. Financial situation good. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

Aug. 2 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Third request for instructions as to United States taking over German embassies in countries with which Germany is at war. Asks permission to take over any embassies in Germany if requested. 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 2] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Austrian Ambassador, though un-instructed, asks if United States will take charge of Austrian Embassy in Russia if he receives orders to leave. 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Aug. 2 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Great uncertainty and timidity in financial circles. 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 2] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Sweden declares neutrality 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Aug. 2 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Americans are being registered preparatory to being sent home. Trying to effect route from Finland to Stockholm. Consular reports sent through Embassy. 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Reports that German Army advanced through Luxemburg into France. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Germany has declared war on Russia. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (telegram). Greece’s attitude dependent upon Bulgaria and Turkey. Bombardment of Belgrade by Austria. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the German Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). Germany at war with Russia since August 1. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

Aug. 2 [Rec’d Aug. 3] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Reported hostilities between Germany and France; neither desirous of being first to declare war. German Ambassador still in France. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Vice Consul General at Budapest (telegram). Hostilities against Servia extensive. Servia offers stubborn resistance. Prices advance 50 per cent. Situation extremely bad. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Emperor delivered speech before court and military officers; received with enthusiasm by orderly crowds. Minister for Foreign Affairs promises to help foreigners leave country. Fifty thousand troops in Riga; harbor mined; fleet near by. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Aug. 3 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). Norway to maintain strict neutrality. Mobilization for coast defense. Export of food prohibited. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 3] From the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Germany refused permission to enter Belgium. Martial law declared. Antwerp in state of siege. Thousands of Americans present. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

Aug. 3 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Germany demanded privilege of sending troops through Belgium. Upon refusal, Germany invaded Belgium. Engagement at Visé with many fatalities. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Request for financial assistance for American tourists. German Ambassador left no money to help Germans nor to pay Embassy employees. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Belgian group, Interparliamentary Union, requests neutral countries to take steps to safeguard peace and respect for treaties. 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Movement of troops toward Russia. Imperial family and nobility working for Red Cross. Great enthusiasm. Large contributions to war. Americans aided in departing. 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Aug. 2 [Rec’d Aug. 3] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (telegram). Italy to remain neutral. Treaties require her support for defense, not for aggression; was not consulted by Austria. Export of food prohibited. Stock exchanges closed. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

258 Aug. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). In opinion of British Foreign Office, no chance for mediation in European affairs. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). United States will be allowed to act for Germany in Russia. Americans unable to leave yet. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

259 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Czar gave assurances that Russia would not fight unless attacked. Germany’s answer was declaration of war. British believe Germany and Austria planned war long ago and now deliberately carrying it out. Germany the aggressor. Thousands of Americans besiege the Embassy seeking to return home. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the Consul General at Moscow (telegram). Many provinces under martial law. Germans assaulted. Business situation critical. Government bank safe. Lighthouses and navigation closed. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (telegram). Two hundred thousand called to colors, not considered mobilization. Maneuvers on sea. Navy has one million lira available for munitions of war. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Germany tries to justify her acts in Belgium by claiming France intended violating Belgian neutrality. German Minister remains in Belgium. Belgium temporizing until England makes known her position. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

Aug. 4 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Martial law proclaimed. German Ambassador has left Paris turning over Embassy to United States. Raids by French aeronauts in German territory and violation of Belgian neutrality by Germans. 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the German Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). France has attacked German territory several times since August 1. Germany declares war on France. 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). complete mobilization of forces, including territories. Expeditionary force to be sent to Continent. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

Aug. 4 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). King to lead army. German note virtual declaration of war. England to support Belgium. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Regrets telegram from parliamentary group received after war was declared. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

The Offer of Good Offices (August 4–5)—The Spread of Hostilities

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 4 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Same to Ambassadors in Russia and Germany and on August 5 to Ambassadors in France and Great Britain. Good offices of President Wilson in interest of European peace. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany proposes that if Great Britain remains neutral, no attack will be made on north coast of France by German fleet nor on French merchant marine, provided German merchant marine is not molested. Great sums voted for war, amid great enthusiasm. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

263 Aug. 4 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Germany’s answer to England’s ultimatum expected hourly. German and Austrian Ambassadors preparing to leave, turning over their interests to United States. 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

269 Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 4] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ War declared between Great Britain and Germany. Large Britain force landed in Belgium. French and English Fleets in North Sea to engage German Fleet. 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

271 Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ A state of war exists between Great Britain and Germany. 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

265 Aug. 4 [Rec’d Aug. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Ultimatum to German Government: Germany must with-draw her demands on Belgium and respect treaty insuring her neutrality. Designs of Germany to acquire Belgium, Holland, and Denmark. Germany has already asked Sweden to join German side. 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Aug. 5 Memorandum of the Office of the Secretary of State. Belgian Government announces that Germans have violated Belgian neutrality and entered her territory. Belgium will resist by force. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Capital may be removed to Antwerp. Diplomatic corps may follow. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (telegram). Denmark declares neutrality 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

Aug. 6 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Peace offers come too late for Russia. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

1166 Aug. 4 [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Italian Chargé d’Affaires. Italy intends to remain neutral 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

284 Aug. 6 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Rumored that Austria will not join Germany against England, also that Italy may join France and England. Jewish banks forced to help England, France, and Russia. Most important that no belligerent power have wireless on our shore and no belligerent warships leave our ports disguised as merchantmen. 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Move Legation if desirable 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Legation can render more service by remaining at Brussels. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Diplomatic Corps to move to Antwerp. Best for legations to remain in Brussels, especially those entrusted with protection of interests of belligerent powers. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Austria-Hungary has declared war on Russia. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

Aug. 6 [Rec’d Aug. 7] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Reply to President Wilson’s message: France appreciates interest of United States in the destiny of France; message proof of mutual love of peace; France not the aggressor, notwithstanding numerous provocacations. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Aug. 7 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (telegram). Denmark has mined her waters and is mobilizing. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Aug. 6 [Rec’d Aug. 7] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Austria having declared war against Russia, United States to take charge of Austrian affairs. Need increase in Embassy staff. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Aug. 7 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Minister directed to use own judgment about remaining in Brussels. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Vice Consul General at Cairo (telegram). British Army of Occupation renders Egypt liable to attack by enemies of Great Britain; consequently, Egypt claims protection of Great Britain. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). President Wilson’s message presented to Emperor. Reply: Will accept with thanks mediation when honor of flag will permit and when objects of war are attained. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

298 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Interview with Sir Edward Grey: England at war only to preserve her place among the nations; will welcome mediation when favorable opportunity arrives; appreciates offer. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

299 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ President’s message delivered to King, who expressed his appreciation and the hope that his offer of mediation might later be accepted. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Aug. 8 From the Ottoman Embassy. Ottoman Empire to observe strict neutrality. Mobilization for defense only. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Aug. 9 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Had received from, The Hague a telegram, purporting to be from German Government, proposing that Belgium allow Germany to hold Liége as base of operations against France, and requiring Belgium to detach herself from France, offering in return protection from further attack from Germany. The proposal an insult and a repetition of the ultimatum already refused by Belgium. Had refused to present this to Belgian Government, but confidentially allowed the Minister of Foreign Affairs to read it. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Belgian Government would reject Germany’s proposal, if presented. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Norwegian Minister (telegram). Norwegian and Swedish Governments mutually agree to remain neutral and friendly toward each other. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Aug. 10 From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary declared war against Montenegro on August 9. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Germany’s proposal to Belgium authentic. Answer was indignant refusal. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Aug. 9 [Rec’d Aug. 10] From the Guatemalan Minister. Note from President Cabrera tendering good offices. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary has given French Ambassador passports. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Aug. 10 [Rec’d Aug. 12] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Statements of Germany as to who started hostilities, challenged by French Chargé. Germans claim French aviators threw bombs over German territory and also violated Belgian territory. French protest to German Government against violations of French territory, violation of Luxemburg, and ultimatum to Belgium. Germany trying to shift responsibility for war. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austrian troops on the French-German frontier constitute an operation against France. Diplomatic relations severed. 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Suggested to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the mediation of the President. Reply: The time may come; Italy will be glad to exchange views. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 13] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Emperor requests President Wilson’s message in writing. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

Aug. 13 From the Vice Consul General at Cairo (telegram). Great Britain has declared war against Austria. Diplomatic relations between Egypt and Germany have ceased; similar action will be taken against Austria. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

350 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great writing (telegram). Notification that war exists between Great Britain and Austria. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

13 July 30 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Consul at Georgetown, British Guiana. Forwards copy of Official Gazette containing proclamation of the Governor ordering instant mobilization. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

138 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul at Cardiff. British Admiralty has taken over coal for use of navy. Shippers indemnified. News of its destination censored. 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

13 July 31 [Recd Aug. 14] From the Consul at Cork. Report of military and naval activity in the south of Ireland; Queenstown Harbor transferred to military authority. The harbor had been guarded by England against “gun-running” by the Irish for purposes of insurrection. International situation engulfed this issue. Troops hurried to harbor; ships placed on guard; supervision of traffic tightened up; and searchlights used as precautionary measure. 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

796 Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark. Copy of Denmark’s declaration of neutrality transmitted. Only partial mobilization for defense of Copenhagen, in order not to antagonize Germany. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 15] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Communication from the Kaiser to President Wilson, in which Emperor claims Prince Henry extracted promise from King George V that England would remain neutral in a war on the Continent. Later, message from Grey that England would interfere only in case France was likely to be crushed. Because of Russia’s complete mobilization Germany forced to act. Germany would promise not to touch France if England would guarantee French neutrality. Declaration by England 1hat she must protect Belgium’s neutrality. Germany claims France ready to attack Belgium. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). General mobilization ordered. Moratorium proclaimed. Parliament adjourned. French and Austrian guard-ships departed. 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish Cabinet divided. Ministers of Marine and Finance favor France; Minister of War favors Germany; Minister of Interior for neutrality. Invasion of Caucasus probable. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Great disappointment that British Government deprived Turkey of dreadnought. Censorship of newspapers and telegrams. Missions, Girls College, and tourists without money. Requests for relief. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Turkey purchased Goeben and Breslau. Ships’ officers to enter Turkish service. Request for gold to help American citizens. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 16 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Replies to President’s offer of mediation received from Germany, Austria, Great Britain, and France. Inquiry as to whether there will be any further reply from Czar. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (telegram). Mobilization expected. Fleet near Dardanelles. Coal for Government sufficient; supply for private use for 15 days only. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Spain (telegram). Minister of State spoke of financial condition of stranded Americans; expressed desire for more intimate relations between Spain and United States; suggested that the two countries might work together for the advancement of peace and civilization. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram) Roumania disregards agreement of 35 years ago because no provocation was given and no advice asked of her; action depends upon Bulgaria. Bombardment of Belgrade continues and forces advancing into Bosnia. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. French Government, through Sir Edward Grey, presented a virtual declaration of war on Austria-Hungary, declaring that the latter had sent troops through Germany to menace the French frontier and had declared war with Russia, the ally of France. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143]

Aug. 17 To the Guatemalan Minister. The Secretary of State acknowledges with pleasure the receipt of memorandum of President of Guatemala looking to conclusion of European war. 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 18] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Government removed to Antwerp. Legation will remain in Brussels to take care of German and British interests. Spanish Minister remains also, protecting French and Russian interests. Our Consul General in Antwerp recognized in a pseudo-diplomatic capacity. 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Representatives of Grand Vizier believed to be attempting a compact with Roumania and Bulgaria. Turkey anxious for provisions and printing paper from America or from India. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Americans in imminent danger. Urgent request for warships. Demands of Beirut and Smyrna justified. Anti-Christian feeling among Moslems. Goeben and Breslau damaged, Turkey unwilling to pay Germany price agreed upon. Triple Entente charge Germany with steering Turkey’s course so as to provoke Russia into declaration of war. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Aug. 19 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). His course of action approved 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy preparing to take sides against Austria. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

797 Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark. Parliament enacted precautionary measures: Punishment against violations of neutrality; conserving currency of country; strict harbor regulations. Partial mobilization. Britain advises caution and promises aid of fleet. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 21] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (telegram). Greece willing to sign peace treaties with United States but with no other country. Government requests regulations concerning neutral commerce. Greece to remain neutral unless Turkey or Bulgaria enter war. 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Aug. 21 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). President advises Legation to move to Antwerp in order to be in immediate touch with Belgian Government. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). Roumania urged to join Turkey in favor of Austria and Germany. This unlikely as Roumania is strong enough to act independently. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 22 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy making great preparations quietly. Troops sent to north-east border; factories running night and day; Government buying stores and coal from United States. Roumania dangerous, Turkey restless, Islam threatening, British sending 20,000 Indians to Egypt, Japanese seeking medicaments. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Aug. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Following for Navy Department: Italy to declare war on Austria; fleet at Taranto, Abruzzi, Commander in Chief; Austrian vessel sunk; French-English fleet near Corfu. 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156]

Aug. 23 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Spain desirous of strengthening cordial relations with United States and anxious to cooperate in securing European peace. Peace treaty between Spain and United States to be urged. Spanish sympathy with French and English; however, will remain neutral. Department is asked to express to Spanish Ambassador thanks for assistance rendered American citizens. 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Belgian Minister. In 1839, Prussia, France, England, Austria, and Russia became guarantors of the treaty which made Belgium an independent and perpetually neutral state. Germany has broken her treaty and invaded Belgium; therefore it is duty of Belgium to resist. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

131 July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Italy. Italy bound to Germany and Austria by the Triple Alliance; in reality, antagonistic to Austria for holding Italian-speaking provinces on the Adriatic. She is opposed to war and wishes to remain neutral. 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Will make every effort to move Legation to Antwerp as soon as possible. Brussels is surrounded by armies and Antwerp at present inaccessible. Ministers of Spain and 17 other neutral powers still in Brussels. By remaining in Brussels the Embassy and staff have rendered great service to the city and to the Belgian Government. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Britain and Russia wish Turkey to remain neutral; Germany wants her to be ready to prevent an invasion by Russia. Permission asked of Grand Vizier for 20 British merchant vessels to pass through Dardanelles; permission granted but ships prevented from passing through. Triple Entente request that Germans on Goeben and Breslau be returned to Germany; request disregarded. Turkish press creating strong pro-German feeling. Ambassador begs permission to be allowed to urge Turkey against war. 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160]

Aug. 25 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Department accepts judgment of Ambassador concerning moving Legation from Brussels. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

25 Aug. 10 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Portugal. In case of war with Portugal, Germany wishes United States to take over German Legation. Instructions requested. Violence shown Germans leaving Portugal. Anti-German feeling strong, and war probable. Treaty exists with Great Britain whereby Portugal promises 10,000 troops to Britain when needed. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Aug. 26 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Under no circumstances must Ambassador offer suggestions to Turkey concerning her entrance into the war. If opinion and advice are asked, United States is very desirous that European conflict spread no farther, and that Turkey preserve neutrality. 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Aug. 22 [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The German Government invokes the good offices of the United States in securing neutralization of the colonies in free-trade zone, as of Congo Act of 1885; claims that England has committed two hostile acts within free-trade zone. 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Aug. 25 [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Greek Minister inquires about rumored mediation services. German Ambassador thinks it too early for peace; that reported German victory practically decides the war. Germany would not claim territory of France but transfer of colonies only. Mobilization of Italy denied. Germany bitter towards Japan. 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Aug. 26 [Rec’d Aug. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Emperor replies to President Wilson’s message: Appreciates humanitarian sentiments; the war thrust upon Russia; contemplation of peace premature; expresses thanks. 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Aug. 27 [Rec’d Aug. 28] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Germans have broken through lines of the Allies south of Lille and probably at Sedan. French Government contemplating moving to Bordeaux. Request for instructions for Legation. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). German Ambassador, controlling spirit of military party in Turkey, states that Germany intends to prevent Russia’s taking Constantinople. Dardanelles well fortified but will not be closed to commerce unless attacked. Turkey intends to burn Smyrna if attacked. English have no intention of attacking Smyrna but will force Dardanelles if closed to commerce. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Aug. 28 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). United States not a party to the ratification of Congo Act of 1885, therefore is not in position to take action in the matter of neutralization of colonies of free-trade zone, as requested by German Government. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170]

125 Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 28] From the Minister in the Netherlands. Europe n situation: Germany’s quick action proves conflict no surprise to her Stubborn resistance of Belgium and action of English not anticipated. Dutch ports open doors for trade. Opportunity for United States to cooperate with other neutral countries for world peace. Situation in Holland: Troops massed in south along frontier. Americans receiving necessary assistance; arranging financial relief of British subjects also Refusal to transmit message in unknown cipher from Austrian Government to Austrian Legation in Belgium. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170]

Aug. 29 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Ambassador to use own judgment about moving Embassy. 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 29] From the Belgian Minister. Austria-Hungary has declared war on Belgium. 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 30] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). If S. S. North Carolina comes to Constantinople, permission must be secured to pass Dardanelles or other arrangements made for receiving money. Fifty naval officers and 700 sailors arrive from Germany to enter Turkish Navy. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Aug. 30 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). British troops withstood German troops for three days but fell back for lack of French reinforcements. French troops have arrived and conditions are more hopeful. French Government removing gold from Paris. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

57 Aug. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 1] From the Vice Consul General at Cairo. Forwards Journal officiel announcing neutrality of Egypt. Protection by British Army of Occupation. Theoretically Egypt is vilayet of Ottoman Empire. Egypt ruled by Great Britain since 1882 in order to have military control of Suez Canal. Troops from India to guard against Turkish attack. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 2] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). German troops have occupied Brussels. Small force in city; troops encamped outside. Opposition by Belgians abandoned to prevent loss of life and destruction of art treasure. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

18 Sept. 2 [Rec’d Sept. 3] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Thanked by President of France for decision to remain in Paris; he considers it a restraining influence against destruction of art treasures by enemy. France will not accept any terms of peace. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

565 Sept. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). If Germans enter Paris, Emperor will dictate peace terms. Bureaucracy must be struck a swift, final blow at any cost. All Europe condemning German methods. Rumored that Germany is preparing a Zeppelin raid on London. All Americans urged to leave England. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

A1108/14 Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the German Ambassador. Germany, in case of victory, will not seek expansion in South Africa. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Sept. 4 To the Belgian Minister. Acknowledges receipt of Belgian note protesting against violation of neutrality by Germany. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

433 July 31 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden. Germany endeavoring to persuade Sweden to attack Russia. War unpopular with mass of Swedish people. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

132 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul at Saloniki. Epirus struggling for autonomous government. European concert declared Albania independent; opposed by Greece. Epirotes received religious freedom from Mohammedans; took possession of greater part of Albania. Concentration of troops in Macedonia under French direction against Bulgaria. Refugees in and around Saloniki approximately half million; cholera reported. War imminent. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Sept. 4 [Rec’d Sept. 5] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). If Italy takes action against Austria-Hungary and Germany, Roumania will also. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184]

200 Aug. 18 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Ambassador in Germany. Germany demanded that Russia recall her order of mobilization. Martial law in Germany. Enthusiastic crowds calling for war. United States asked to take charge of German affairs in Russia and France. Germany declares French began war. Russians in Germany insulted and imprisoned. England has declared war. Americans in Germany, taken for English, arrested. Violence toward English; friendliness to Americans. Embassy assisting Americans to leave. Hostility toward Italy for declaring neutrality. German victories only published. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184]

953 Sept. 5 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Belgian Minister. Communications inclosed in which Germany again offers to spare Belgium as much as will be consistent with her plan of campaign against France, and in which Belgium, with the approval of her allies, reiterates her defiance. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

New Suggestion of Good Offices and Mediation (September 7-8) Developments in the Near East

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Sept. 7 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Bernstorff expresses the opinion that the Kaiser will consider mediation if the other nations interested will do so. Make inquiry of Kaiser. If reply favorable, other nations will be approached. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

621 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). No peace proposals will be entertained until militarism is crushed. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Sept. 8 To the Ambassadors in Great Britain and France (telegram). Proposal of mediation sent to Germany. It at least gives nations opportunity to explain their attitude, and fixes responsibility for continuation of war. 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

53 Sept. 8 [Rec’d Sept. 9] From the Ambassador in France, (telegram). Telegram from German General Staff advises Americans to leave Paris. Reply: If Germans enter Paris they are expected to protect American property and that of other countries entrusted to her care. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

606 Sept. 10 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). England has exhausted every honorable means to preserve peace. Any terms that England will agree to must end militarism forever. Germany will propose terms that Allies can not accept, thus making it appear that Allies are responsible for continuing the war. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

59 Sept. 9 [Rec’d Sept. 10] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). France’s reply to proposals of mediation: France not the aggressor and can not accept mediation. Will continue struggle to the end. Agreement of Entente powers not to make separate peace. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Sept. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 11] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). Servian forces have taken Sem and surrounding country. Roumania about to enter war. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

110 Sept. 12 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Proposal of mediation presented to Kaiser informally. No reply. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

28 July 30 [Rec’d Sept. 12] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Crisis between Austria-Hungary and Servian: Investigation into assassination; Austrian ultimatum presented to Servia; Servian reply; diplomatic relations severed; war declared. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

130 Sept. 12 [Rec’d Sept. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Foreign Office states that Great Britain, France, and Russia agree to abolish capitulations if Turkey remains neutral. Turkey has proclaimed abolition of the capitulations. Germany claims that rumors were spread by Great Britain, france, and Russia, that this was done at the instance of Germany, in order to place the blame on her in the eyes of neutrals. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

149 Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Chancellor of Germany replies to offers of mediation: War was forced upon Germany; after conquering France, Germany will have to face England and Russia; Germany can only accept a peace which will guarantee rest and security. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

206 Sept. 2 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany. Germany is walking through French, English, and Russian armies; will soon be sending Zeppelins to England. United States should consider that Germany will demand French colonies in West Indies and near Nova Scotia, and possibly French Pacific Islands. One million two hundred thousand volunteers newly enrolled. Emperor at the front. Assistant Secretary Breckenridge arrived. Maj. Ryan now in charge of transportation. 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 197]

182 Sept. 16 [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government renews its request that United States take action toward neutralization of African colonies within free-trade zone. A refusal will compromise the neutrality of the United States. 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199]

Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 18] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). Popular demonstration against Austria-Hungary suppressed. Roumania mill soon enter conflict. 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199]

192 Sept. 18 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Inquiry into request for neutralization of African colonies. Difference between a proposal of the United States on behalf of Germany and one made on her own initiative as a neutral. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

29 Aug. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 19] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Austria jealous of greater Servia and welcomed casus belli; unfriendly to Greece because of Servian agreement for use of Aegean port; charges Russia with trying to get a hold in Balkans and of Constantinople. Embassy has taken over Austro-Hungarian interests. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

112 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Roumania. Roumania to remain neutral, but troops augmented and country practically upon a war basis. Sends interview with Mr. Take Jonesco stating reasons why Roumania will remain neutral. 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

122 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Bulgarian neutrality remains unchanged; nevertheless army practically mobilized. Turkish mobilization causing misgivings. Train service between Turkey and Bulgaria interrupted. Bulgarian Government requests, without success, that Turkish troops on frontier be withdrawn. 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

228 Sept. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 20] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Turkish fleet being manned by Germans. Soon to join war. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

Sept. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 21] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish cruisers enter Black Sea to demonstrate her supremacy. German Ambassador stated that if Roumania attacked Austria, Turkey and Bulgaria would move against Roumania. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

236 Sept. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany wishes United States to act as messenger merely to convey proposal to other powers, concerning neutralization of African colonies. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

Sept. 23 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same to the Ambassador in France and the Minister in Belgium. Forwards communication from the German Government signifying the willingness of Germany to observe the neutrality of African colonies in free-trade zone according to treaties. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

18 Sept. 24 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). War between Greece and Turkey-imminent. Italy can not long, continue neutral. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

661 Sept. 1 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the Ambassador in France. Transmits official notification August 4 of hostilities: between France and Germany, and French protest against the violation of neutrality of Belgium and Luxemburg and the attack upon France contrary to existing treaties. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

Sept. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). English Admiral compelled a Turkish torpedo boat desiring to enter Mediterranean to return to Dardanelles, because of German officers on board. Turkey has closed Dardanelles. 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Sept. 26 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the German Ambassador. Russian Minister of War assured German Military Attaché that Russia had not given orders for mobilization, although order had gone forth two days before. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

Sept. 29 From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). War will be declared by Roumania. Popular demonstrations in favor of such action. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish Government has notified England that Dardanelles will remain closed until English and French ships leave its mouth. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

43 Sept. 11 [Rec’d Sept. 29] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece. Greece as well prepared for war as possible. Public opinion pro-French. Germany striving to win over Greece. 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 1] Unsigned telegram from Constantinople to the British Embassy at Washington. If Turkey can secure coal from United States she will probably go to war. Can difficulties be put in the way? Christians in Turkey will be in danger, especially missionaries. 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Oct. 2 From the Minister in Portugal (telegram). Unofficially affirmed that Portugal, in accordance with English treaty obligations, will enter the war as soon as preparations are completed. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

301 Aug. 31 [Rec’d Oct. 3] From the British Ambassador. Requests that United States take charge of British affairs in Turkey in case of war between the two countries. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

514 Oct. 5 To the British Ambassador. United States will take over British affairs in Turkey in case war is declared. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

163 Oct. 3 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Forwards note from Foreign Office, Bordeaux: Germany having already started hostilities in the Congo basin against the French and Belgian possessions, France can no longer abide by treaties. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Further Appeals for Peace (October—November)—Turkey Enters the War

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Oct. 5 Memorandum by the Secretary of State. Spanish Government pleased to act with United States when time for mediation arrives; asked to guarantee that copper shipments would not be reexported. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Oct. 7 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries (telegram). Pursuant to proclamation of the President, prayer offered in churches for speedy restoration of peace in Europe. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

478 Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Hostilities between Turkey and Russia to begin soon. Turkish Fleet to attack Russian Fleet in Black Sea. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Oct. 13 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries (telegram). Governing board of Pan American Union conveys to belligerent countries, through the Secretary of State of the United. States, hope for peace, universal sympathy, and regrets over disturbance of commercial interests of world. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

288 Sept. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 14] From the Minister in Venezuela. Venezuela bitter against England because of her determination to prolong the conflict. War a greater hardship to South American commerce than to Europe. Proposition that South American countries appeal individually to Europeans at war. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Warlike preparations in vicinity of Egyptian boundaries causing apprehension in England. Massing of Turkish troops at Caucasian frontier and Turkish fleet in Black Sea threatening Russia. British Ambassador fears assassination; reassured by Grand Vizier. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Oct. 22 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy reported to have landed troops at Avlona. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Oct. 24 From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). French, British, and Russian representatives move documents and valuables to American Embassy, anticipating early departure from Turkey. Turkish Secretary of War declares country ready for any emergency. Minister of Public Instruction visited Girls College and Robert College for first time. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

133 Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. King of Roumania pro-German; people in sympathy with France. Germany’s failure to subjugate France in short campaign and Russia’s conquests in Austria-Hungary change situation. Roumania ambitious to annex provinces peopled by Roumanians but held by Austria-Hungary. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

152 Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Minister in the Netherlands. The fall of Antwerp has thrown 400,000 Belgian refugees upon the mercy of Netherland people. An attack on Antwerp by water would involve neutrality of Netherlands. 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

39 Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 28] From the Minister in Portugal. Portugal will certainly enter war as soon as army is reorganized. 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Oct. 28 To the Minister in Portugal (telegram). If war has been declared by Portugal against Germany, send full report. 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 29] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). New Minister of War appointed from the army; Government holds to neutrality while preparing for war. Minister for Foreign Affairs ill. A new minister may mean a new policy. 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 232]

Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the Minister in Portugal (telegram). War not yet declared. Portuguese commission conferring in England. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). To prevent invasion of Egypt by Turks, British decided to destroy certain wells in the Sinai Desert. Turkey had induced Bedouins to try to prevent this destruction but upon request Bedouins recalled. No immediate danger of war between Turkey and Great Britain. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Oct. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Bedouins advancing on Egypt; British demand that Turkey recall them. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British report Odessa raided. Russian gunboat sunk; two Russian steamships damaged; French ship damaged with loss of life. 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (telegram). Policy of neutrality continues in Bulgaria. 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237]

Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Russian representatives demand passports; English and French Ambassadors preparing to leave also Grand Vizier refuses audience with Russian Minister on account of illness. Minister of Finance stated that engagement took place without knowledge of Ottoman Government. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Oct. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 31] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Sublime Porte advised to issue passports promptly in order to avoid violence. Russian representatives detained until Turkish consuls in Russia are accorded safe-conduct. British and French granted safe-conduct. Port of Smyrna closed. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Minister of Interior wished to know what action on part of Sublime Porte would pacify Russia. Reply: Dismissal of all German officers, sailors and soldiers from Turkish employ. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Nov. 2 From the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). General commanding British Army of Occupation in Egypt ordered to assume military control and protection of Egypt. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

Nov. 1 [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Train carrying British and French Sopped by Minister of War, who insisted upon promise that Turkish subjects in England and Egypt be permitted to depart. English have sunk two Turkish vessels and Russians have crossed frontier near Erzerum. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

992 Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). War exists between Turkey and Great Britain. United States has taken charge of Ottoman interests in England. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Nov. 7 From the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). British General in Egypt assumed sole burden of defending Egypt against Turkey; asked no assistance of Mohammedans. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the Persian Chargé d’Affaires. Persian Government has pro claimed neutrality. Good offices of United States solicited to help maintain neutrality. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

2 Nov. 11 To the Persian Chargé d’Affaires. Reply to Persian Government: United States will lend its good offices in every possible way. 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247]

Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 12] The Swiss Political Department to the Swiss Legation at Washington (telegram). President Wilson said to have expressed willingness to negotiate for peace. Swiss Government wishes to start preliminaries with other neutral governments for such a purpose. 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247]

Nov. 14 To the Swiss Legation. President does not believe the time has come for a renewal of the offer of mediation. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

550 Nov. 4 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Clippings from British newspapers concerning attitude of the United States in present crisis. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

1083 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Nov. 19] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). General French believes that Germans have done their utmost; a slow victory for Allies now probable; German commanders know they will be beaten; Allies will insist upon enormous indemnity to Belgium, which Germans will not grant until hopelessly defeated. Germany putting out “feelers” for peace. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

38 Nov. 15 [Rec’d Nov. 20] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Proclamation of holy war of Islam might arouse religious fanaticism of Moslem masses, ending in an attack upon all non-Moslems. German Ambassador reminded of Germany’s responsibility in matter. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

50 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 23] From the Minister in Portugal. Attitude of Portugal unchanged. If House of Deputies fails to declare war, Government will be placed in embarrassing position, owing to promises already made to Great Britain. 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

1117 Nov. 23 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Proposal re neutralization of African free-trade zone not practical since hostilities have been begun by German forces. This to be communicated to German Government. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

324 Undated [Rec’d Nov. 24] From the Minister in Portugal (telegram). Senate and House of Deputies authorize the executive power to intervene militarily in conflict as an ally of England. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

64 Nov. 24 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Requests more information concerning holy war of Islam. Warns Ambassador to maintain strict neutrality. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

53 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Minister in Portugal. Portuguese commission continues to confer with English govern-mental and military authorities concerning conflict. When they return House of Deputies will convene in extra session. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

177 Nov. 10 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Ambassador in Spain. Encloses statement of Prime Miniter: Spain has suffered no offense, the causes of the conflict being foreign to her; Spain desires to keep aloof from war; measures adopted for national defense; in emergency nation can depend upon patriotism of Congress to lead her in defending her honor. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

127 Nov. 7 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the Ambassador in Turkey. Transmits an account of the severing of diplomatic relations between Entente powers and Turkey, and of the present situation. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Dec. 2 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (telegram). Turkish Government proclaimed holy war against Servia and her allies. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

89 Nov. 27 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turks accuse Russians, English, and French of beginning the war. Declaration of holy war, appealing to soldiers to defend sacred ground, tomb of the Prophet, and lives of Mohammedans. Incongruity of Turkish position evidenced by alliance with Christians and by having Armenian and Greek Christians in their army, yet making holy war against enemies of Islam. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Nov. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Italy. Transmits despatches presenting opportunities in Italy for American enterprise. Italian Government has provided additional funds for military purposes. Need for grain and guns. Italy and England have agreed to protect North African colonies. Conviction prevails that the power that wins will next attack America and that America will have to step in to save civilization. 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

82 Nov. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Consul General at Cairo. Martial law proclaimed in Egypt in order to hold natives under more rigid control. Many transports have passed through Suez Canal. Camels from India detained. West boundary unprotected. Khedive and notables in Constantinople. 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

170 Nov. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands. Forwards article from the Gazette de Hollande of November 17, containing plea for peace, proposing that Holland and United States unite in effort for mediation. 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Spanish Suggestion of Joint Good Offices (December 7)—Establishment of the British Protectorate in Egypt

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

13 Dec. 7 From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Spanish Ambassador at Washington had been instructed to inquire if time were ripe for mediation; had met with cold response. Spain desires only to cooperate in any movement for peace. 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

15 Dec. 8 To the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). President appreciates offer of Spain but considers the time not ripe for mediation. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

15 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Spain anxious to cooperate with United States in any plans for mediation. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

132 Nov. 16 [Rec’d. Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey. British and French Embassies searched by police for wireless instruments; horses and carriages taken. Protest has been made to Minister of Interior, who apologized and laid blame on Minister of War. Orders given to have Embassies sealed. Persians paraded to Embassy and presented protest against aggressions of England and Russia. Three Turkish transports sunk in Black Sea; crew and passengers taken prisoners. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

133 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Demonstration in Constantinople for war, crowds visiting Sublime Porte, Sultan’s Palace, and German and Austrian Embassies. Little violence against Russian and British shops. Holy war desired in Germany in order to cause Moslem uprisings in Egypt and India. 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Dec. 11 [Rec’d. Dec. 12] From the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). Prince Hussein, uncle of Khedive, about to be proclaimed by British as Sultan of Egypt. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270]

Dec. 12 To the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). Instructions to deal with Khedive as a de facto official. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270]

7 Dec. 15 From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Kings of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, with their Ministers of Foreign Affairs, will meet to discuss means of lessening economic difficulties caused by war. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

55 Nov. 24 [Rec’d. Dec. 15] From the Minister in Portugal. Parliament authorizes King to aid Great Britain in war. Appreciation of latter assured. Portugal may thus have privileges of a neutral country by secretly giving aid without declaring war. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

353 Dec. 17 [Rec’d Dec. 18] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Since catastrophe to Austro-Hungarian forces in Servia, war has become unpopular. 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

434 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] From the British Ambassador. Because of the war initiated by Turkey against Egypt, Great Britain considers the suzerainty of Turkey over Egypt to be ended. Protection of Egypt undertaken by Great Britain, and a High Commissioner appointed who will also be Minister for Foreign Affairs. 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 20] From the Diplomatic Agent at Cairo (telegram). Prince Hussein proclaimed Sultan of Egypt by King George. Capitulations no longer in harmony with development of country. Changes to be made after the war. 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

35 Nov. 30 [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Situation in Servia gloomy. Four months Servian Army was successful against Austria-Hungary, then ran short of ammunition. Russia has forwarded ammunition over Danube. Servians kept on Bulgarian frontier to protect Macedonia (now new Servia). Russia desires this land to be given to Bulgaria to secure her alliance. Servia objects. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

163 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ King of Roumania and leaders sympathize with Germany; think Roumania should have Transylvania; seeking an agreement with Bulgaria. A commission has been sent to the United States to secure ammunition. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

141 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Bulgaria trying to remain neutral until she finds which way the war turns; anxious for territory belonging to Servia, Greece, and Roumania. Belligerents willing to promise this territory, but Balkan powers object. Sympathies of people with Russia. Government believes more can be obtained from Germany. Quotes extract from Prime Minister’s speech, proclaiming neutrality. 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Dec. 23 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Strong resentment against England and France because of interruptions to commerce. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

57 Dec. 3 [Rec’d Dec. 26] From the Minister in Portugal. Parliament assembled to arrange for a division to leave for the seat of war. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

137 Nov. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 30] From the Ambassador in Turkey. Public and private schools, hospitals, and religious institutions of belligerents seized by police. Teachers, priests, and children allowed to leave. Action condoned by Germany. Dercos waterworks, operated with French capital, seized. Aidin Railway operated with British capital, and Damascus and Extensions Railway, operated by French capital, seized. The Islamic world ready for vengeance. 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

60 Dec. 28 [Rec’d, Jan. 12, 1915] From the Minister in Norway. In conference at Malmö the three Scandinavian Kings agreed upon strict neutrality and a uniform course of action with regard to entry of belligerent vessels into Scandinavian ports, to visitation and detention of merchant vessels, and to trade difficulties in general. Enclosure, communiqué from Norwegian Foreign Office. 159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

The War in the Far East: Neutralization Proposals—Japan’s Entrance Against Germany—The Extension of Operations In China and the Pacific Ocean

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 3 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Withdrawal of British and German naval forces from Yangtze leaves responsibility of protecting foreign interests to Americans and Japanese. Requests that one of the larger United States vessels be left at Shanghai. Proposal to neutralize all foreign settlement concessions in China. 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Request for instructions as to whether to encourage Chinese in proposing to belligerent powers not to engage in hostilities on Chinese territory or adjacent leased territory. 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]

Aug. 6 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Chinese request United States and Japan to suggest that belligerents maintain neutrality throughout their jurisdiction in China. Wish that attitude of German Government be made known. 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]

Aug. 7 To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Legation is authorized to participate in arrangements to neutralize foreign settlements in China not including leased areas. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Department asks for report on nationality and number of troops withdrawn from Chinese railways and those remaining. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum received from Chinese Minister here re neutralization of Chinese territory. Matter under consideration. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

Aug. 8 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Troops in Chinese territory, other than American forces, negligible. Japanese preparing to assist in protecting foreign interests. 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Aug. 7 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). German Chargé d’Affaires states that Japan is bound by treaty to assist Russia and Great Britain in case of war with Germany. 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Aug. 29 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Russian Ambassador denies any agreement between Japan and Russia concerning China. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Aug. 10 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador says England has called on Japan for assistance under treaty of alliance. Rumors that Atlantic Fleet of United States on way to Far East to protect China. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

323 Aug. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Neutralization of Pacific Ocean hardly possible, but status quo in China should be maintained. Grey anxious to prevent disturbance in China. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). German Ambassador anticipates proposition from Japan for neutralization of Orient. This desirable for Germany, as German resistance hopeless. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Japanese Chargé states Japan is ready to take Kiaochow. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey’s desire to preserve the status quo of China gratifying to United States. Inquiry of other nations as to attitude on subject. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Department is making inquiry of Germany respecting the possibility of circumscribing area of hostilities in Far East. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to ascertain views of German Government as to possibility of circumscribing area of hostilities and maintaining status quo in Far East. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Japan unable to refrain from war with Germany. The Anglo-Japanese treaty binds both parties to respect neutrality and integrity of China. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

Aug. 12 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Chinese are basing hopes upon the rumor that the United States is sending fleet to aid China. Requests authoritative information. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). United States is not sending reenforcements to its Asiatic Fleet. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Secretary of the Navy. Forwards cablegram from Naval attaché at Tokyo: Japanese Fleet mobilizing; strong feeling against Germany. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 12] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). From Chinese sources: Japan seeking to cooperate with Great Britain against Tsingtao and upon some pretext planning to occupy South Manchuria and Fukien as well as Kiaochow. 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany does not seek war with Japan; proposes that England, Japan, and Germany reciprocally agree that hostilities in the Pacific be circumscribed. 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Many Japanese leaving Germany. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Transmits Japan’s ultimatum to Germany. Minister for Foreign Affairs states that Japan is not animated by self-interest and seeks no territory in China; intimates that less danger of disturbance if China could borrow money from United States. German Ambassador declares that Germany can not concede Japan’s demands, and prepares to leave. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

Aug. 18 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Great Britain and Japan deem it necessary to preserve the independence and integrity of China and to protect shipping in adjacent waters. 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Forwards note to Japanese Government: United States regrets impending war between Germany and Japan, but is gratified that Japan is acting in alliance with Great Britain, intending to restore Kiaochow to China, preserving equal opportunity of commerce for all nations with China, according to previous agreement with United States. Requests to repeat to Peking. 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). German Chargé discusses informally with China the immediate retrocession of Kiaochow. Chinese Government warned against such action. Desires information from Department. 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). United States refrains from expressing any opinion upon retrocession of Kiaochow to China. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Japan advises China to remain passive as regards Kiaochow. Chinese propose that United States secure the retrocession of leased territory to China. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Aug. 20 To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Department unable to comply with Chinese proposal that United States secure retrocescession of leased territory to China. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

Aug. 22 To the British Chargé d’Affaires. Acknowledges receipt of memorandum of August 18 regarding the protection of foreign interests in Far East by Great Britain and Japan. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

Aug. 23 From the Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Ambassador (telegram). Notification of Japanese declaration of war against Germany. United States requested to take charge of Japanese interests in Germany. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Imperial rescript of the Japanese Emperor. Declaration of war against Germany. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Aug. 22 [Rec’d Aug. 23] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Austria requests United States to transmit following message to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador in Tokyo: H. M. S. Empress Elizabeth should disarm, crew to proceed to Tientsin. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Aug. 24 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Department prefers not to transmit message concerning disarmament of Empress Elizabeth. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japan agreeable to the proposal that the Empress Elizabeth, Austrian war vessel, be disarmed and interned. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Aug. 26 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Satisfactory arrangements have been made concerning Austrian war vessel. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Commander of Empress Elizabeth (Austrian vessel) ordered to join with German Navy in war between Japan and Austria. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Sept. 3 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). German, Japanese, and British forces are disregarding neutrality of China. China unable to prevent it. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 10] From the Minister in Denmark (telegram). Forwards note from German Foreign Office to the German Ambassador: Japanese reported ready to expel all Germans from Chinese neutral territory; requests United States to protest to Japanese Government. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Sept. 12 To the Ambassador in Japan and the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Directed to ascertain truth as to statement that Japanese will expel Germans from neutral districts in China. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Sept. 15 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Press reports untrue; Germans not expelled from Chinese neutral territory. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Sept. 15 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Expelling of Germans from China denied. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Sept. 16 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Inform Foreign Office that reports of expulsion of Germans from certain districts in China unfounded. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

119 Sept. 1 [Rec’d Sept. 23] From the Ambassador in Japan. Forwards Japan’s declaration of war with Germany. General conviction existed that war is inevitable and Government supported by press. Opinions differ as to return of Kiaochow to China. Special session of Diet called to vote war budget. 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

114 Aug. 29 [Rec’d Sept. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austria proposes internment of Kaiserin Elizabeth at neutral Chinese port. Diplomatic relations between Austria and Japan severed. Has taken over Austrian interests. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 328]

Sept. 29 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Japan has formally notified China that she is compelled to take possession of Shantung Railway as far west as Tsinan. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331]

Sept. 28 [Rec’d Sept. 29] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Japanese forces have taken mines and occupied Wiehsien. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331]

Sept. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Japanese Minister declares that Shantung Railway, being German property, is subject to seizure. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331]

Sept. 30 From the Minister in China (telegram). British Legation has urged its Government to restrain Japanese from seizing Shantung Railway. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Oct. 1 From the Japanese Embassy. Japanese, have decided to take over and operate Shantung Railway. Now under complete control of Germans and used to facilitate German military operations. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct 1] From the Minister in China (telegram). China will not oppose Japan, but regrets occupation of Shantung Railway and extension of hostilities; requests United States to ask Great Britain to restrain Japan in her military operations. 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

Oct. 6 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram.) Japanese Fleet has landed a force on Jaluit Island, destroyed the military works, and received surrender of authorities. 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

127 Sept. 22 [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Japan. Special session of Diet voted appropriation for construction of ten destroyers. Quotes speech of Minister for Foreign Affairs: England had requested Japan to furnish assistance under terms of alliance; Japan did her duty; appreciates prompt compliance of United States with her request that she take over her interests in Germany and Austria-Hungary. 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Oct. 20 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japan has taken possession of [South Sea] islands of strategic importance and captured one enemy war vessel in hiding there. 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

362 Sept. 10 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China. China declares herself unable to preserve neutrality in regions necessary for the passage of belligerent troops. Germany protests against Chinese Government’s acquiescence in violations of proclaimed neutrality, thus incurring liability for damage to German interests. China has looked to United States for assistance in vain. United States forces used for police duty should only be brought up to full strength, nothing more. Encloses note of September 3 on this subject from Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs. 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

192 Nov. 4 To the Minister in China. China could hardly hope to keep leased territory from being involved in war, but open ports with cosmopolitan population should be excluded by general consent from military operations. United States Navy Department will increase number of vessels in Chinese waters. United States anxious to promote welfare of China by peaceful methods but could not be expected to entangle herself in international difficulties. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Nov. 7 From the Consul at Nagasaki (telegram). Tsingtao fallen 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

135 Oct. 8 [Rec’d Nov. 11] From the Ambassador in Japan. Japanese newspapers in general approve actions of Japanese Fleet, since Japan has disavowed any intention to seek territorial aggrandizement. Assistance of Japan in preserving order in the South Seas insures safety of international commerce. Yellow journals unfriendly toward both Japan and United States. 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

406 Oct. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the Minister in China. Forwards extracts from the Peking Gazette: Japanese official reply to China re seizure of Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway; speeches in the National Assembly of Liang Ch’i-ch’iao, General Hsü, Chao Wei-hsi, Wang Yi-tang, and General Tsai Ao stressing need for patriotism and military strength to oppose Japan; editorial comments thereon. 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Nov. 14 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Forwards text of telegram received from supposed officers of the Shantung Railway, containing a petition to the Foreign Office that mines and railway seized by Japanese be restored to the company. 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Nov. 16 To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Instructions to present the petition of officers of Shantung Railway to Foreign Office. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

161 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Dec. 17] From the Ambassador in Japan. Reviews newspaper discussion of the final disposition of Kiaochow. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards extracts from Japan Advertiser: Foreign Minister opposed to sending troops to Europe; Japan interested only in peace of Orient. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

Dec. 18 From the Minister in China (telegram). Controversy between Japanese and Chinese, each claiming right to appoint officers in Tsingtao. Six regiments of Japanese troops stationed at Mukden. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Dec. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Japanese demand appointment to Tsingtao customs of 49 officials taken from Japanese customs administration. This will break up Maritime Customs Service. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Dec. 30 To the Minister in China (telegram). Desires to know if China has informed British Government of Japan’s demand regarding Tsingtao customs officials. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

164 Dec. 7 [Rec’d Dec. 30] From the Ambassador in Japan. British Ambassador unwilling to reply to question as to whether German islands captured by Japan have been turned over to Australia for administration. British inquire of Japan’s purpose in entering war. Baron Kato assures American Ambassador that Japan is not in war for selfish purpose but because of her alliance with Great Britain. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Jan. 2, 1915 From the Minister in China (telegram). British Legation was informed unofficially of Japan’s demands in China, and has made informal representations to Japanese. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Dec. 12 [Rec’d Jan. 14, 1915] From the Ambassador in Japan. Forwards extract from the Parliamentary Supplement to the Official Gazette of December 9 containing a speech of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who denies the existence of an agreement between Japan and any nation binding Japan to retrocede Kiaochow to China. Whether Japan will succeed to Germany’s rights in Shantung, is left for future negotiations. 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 352]

170 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Jan. 14, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Encloses extract from Parliamentary Supplement to the Official Gazette of December 10, in which Matsuda charged the Cabinet with having given guarantees to Great Britain and United States that Japan would retrocede Kiaochow to China and that Japanese occupation of Jaluit Island was only temporary, and in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs denies the charge. 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Dec. 31 [Rec’d Jan. 27, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Encloses summary of further replies by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to parliamentary inquiries regarding Japan’s participation in the war, December 10. 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 354]

PART II: NEUTRAL RIGHTS

Efforts toward Recognition of the Declaration of London—Proclamations, Orders, and Decrees of Belligerent Governments on Contraband of War and Trade with Enemy Countries

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

278 Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Forwards British list of absolute and conditional contraband. 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 355]

Aug. 6 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States recommends that the laws of naval warfare laid down by the Declaration of of London, 1909, shall be applied in the present conflict. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Russia, France, Germany, and Austria-Hungary, and the Minister in Belgium.

Aug. 10 [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Forwards German list of articles of contraband. Inquires attitude of other countries. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austro-Hungarian military forces instructed to observe Declaration of London if other nations do so. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, Germany, and the Minister in Belgium (circular telegram). Press Government for reply as to willingness to observe Declaration of London. Austria-Hungary willing to adopt it if enemy will do so. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

413 Aug. 19 [Rec’d Aug. 20] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States asked to ascertain the attitude of Germany and Austria-Hungary as to Declaration of London. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Transmitted to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary.

Aug. 20 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia will observe Declaration of London if British Government does. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Aug. 23 From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary adheres to Declaration of London on condition of reciprocity. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Aug. 22 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany will apply Declaration of London if other belligerents will do so. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

483 Undated [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits Foreign Office note of August 22 regarding Declaration of London, in which England agrees to adopt Declaration subject to certain modifications and additions; also text of order in council specifying those modifications and additions. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia accepts Declaration of London with modifications adopted by England and France. 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 29] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany desires to know attitude of England and France toward Declaration of London; also attitude of United States toward detention of neutral vessels by England. 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany cites cases where England and France have not observed Declaration of London, and asks if American Government acquiesces in such violations. 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Sept. 1 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government asks if Germany and Austria-Hungary have specified the articles which they intend to treat as contraband of war. 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government will observe Declaration of London with certain reservations, additions, and modifications, text of which is transmitted. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

17 Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 81] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary wishes British Government notified that they will treat as absolute or conditional contraband those objects and materials enumerated in Articles 22 and 24 of the Declaration of London. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

88 Sept. 8 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). United States is considering violation of Declaration of London by England and France but declines to express an opinion as to legality of their removal of Germans of military age from neutral vessels as prisoners of war. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

87 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British have decided to adhere to the Declaration of London with modifications and additions, in quoted memoranda and order in council. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

428 Sept. 2 [Rec’d Sept. 15] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Encloses note of August 31, from Foreign Office, in which United States is requested to inquire if Germany and Austria-Hungary have specified the articles which they intend to treat as contraband. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

206 Sept. 2 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany. Transmits memorandum of August 27 relative to the application of the Declaration of London in the present war. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Sept. 26 To the Ambassador Great Britain. United States wishes belligerents to accept Declaration of London as definite naval code, in order to prevent misunderstandings. The changes proposed by Great Britain deny the rights of and impose greater hardships upon neutrals. Action of Great Britain inconsistent with policy of her statesmen in former wars. As changed by order in council, Declaration of London can not be accepted by United States, as it would fail to safeguard interests of her citizens and those of other nations. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

218 Sept. 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructs Ambassador to protest against changes in Declaration of London as they are certain to arouse resentment in America. The Declaration represents the limit of restrictions to which our people will submit. 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

758 Sept. 29 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British wish to avoid any action which will give offense to United States. Purpose is to prevent enemy from receiving food and material for military use. Discussion of whole matter proposed. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State. Took up with the British Ambassador modifications of the Declaration of London. Ambassador admitted that the inclusion of foodstuffs in absolute contraband was contrary to British tradition, and that it was better to get the Netherlands to place an embargo thereon. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

763 Sept. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britian (telegram). England agrees to make a new list of absolute contraband and to prepare a new order in council, in which she will endeavor to meet the wishes of United States so far as possible; has accepted Netherland assurance that embargo will prevent exportation of foodstuffs. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits proclamation of September 21 specifying additional articles which are to be treated as contraband of war. This to take the place of any other order in council. 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Sept. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 1] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Declaration of London has not been ratified; doctrine of continuous voyage has been part of international law, upheld by United States courts; proclamation departing from the Declaration of London should be judged by rules of international law accepted by courts and applied in previous wars; British wish to prevent foodstuffs and war material going to Germany; cargoes have been bought not confiscated; willingness to come to an agreement. 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 1] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Has proposed to United States Ambassador that a new British proclamation of contraband be issued to supersede previous ones, with no mention of Declaration of London along the lines suggested by the United States. Cargoes containing copper and petroleum will be detained when consigned to Krupps. Relying upon Netherland embargo, foodstuffs will be considered non-contraband. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

226 Oct. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). A summary of the correspondence between United States and Great Britain on the subject of the Declaration of London. British appreciate consideration shown by President in not making formal protest. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

227 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instruction of September 26 re Declaration of London and order in council is not to be presented to Foreign Office until he is notified; the information is for his own use in informal discussions. 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

228 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Expresses gratification over proposed new order in council, but desires to see text before approving or suggesting changes. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Oct. 2 To the British Ambassador. United States hopes that a naval code will be adopted by all nations. Germany and Austria have agreed to the adoption of the Declaration of London. The order in council prevents this. Under the Declaration a belligerent has the right to add to the list of absolute or conditional contraband. Suggests that Great Britain and France accept Declaration and then modify lists. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Oct. 2 Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State of a conference with the British Ambassador. The Ambassador thought that the British Government did not realize that Germany and Austria had promised to abide by the Declaration of London; great advantage to have uniform code of naval warfare. Will submit the United States proposals to Grey by telegram. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct. 3] From the British Ambassador to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (telegram). Britain urged to accept Declaration of London in order that all belligerents may agree on conditions. Permissible that list of conditional and absolute contraband be added to, also that embargoes be arranged with neutral countries. 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

776 Oct. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britian (telegram.) A new order in council will be drawn up, specifying added articles of conditional and absolute contraband. Special arrangements made with Netherlands concerning embargoes on foodstuffs. Mines laid in English Channel by British makes safe route from America to Holland around Scotland. 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

246 Oct. 4 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Repetition of arguments for adopting Declaration of London. 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

806 Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 10] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Draft of new order in council containing lists of conditional and absolute contraband submitted to United States for approval. 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Oct. 12 From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. British are under false impression that United States has proposed articles to be placed on lists of contraband. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

302 Oct. 13 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Denial that additions of petroleum and motors to contraband list were suggested by United States. Spring Rice made suggestion. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Oct. 15 [Rec’d Oct. 16] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Shipping controversy academic. Life of English-speaking civilization is at stake. Friendly relations with England are in jeopardy; also our usefulness in bringing about peace. 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394]

323 Oct. 16 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Suggests that England, France, and Russia adopt Declaration of London without amendments, thus making effective the German and Austrian acceptance. Later Britain can proclaim additions to list of contraband. If military supplies are discovered en route through a neutral country to Germany, that neutral would be subject to the rules governing trade with the enemy. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

324 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ The United States is bound to recognize the rights of neutrals; proposed order in council does not accept the Declaration of London without change; this unsatisfactory to other belligerents. Objections enumerated. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the President to the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). President Wilson urges Ambassador to use persuasion in effecting an understanding concerning commerce. United States has pointed out a way of accomplishing it with least friction. 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

864 Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Declaration of London forbids addition to contraband list of articles such as rubber and iron ore, now necessary for manufacture of war materials. Therefore Britain cannot accept it. To do so and then issue a proclamation contradicting a part of it would be impossible. Britain will issue an order in council which will disturb neutral commerce as little as possible, reserving right to stop cargoes of contraband evidently destined for enemy. United States can make claim for damages. 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Oct. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Repetition of reasons why Britain will not adopt Declarations of London. Requests United States not to protest against order in council, but to act on merits of each particular case of detained vessels. 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British will accept Declaration of London on general terms, making exceptions in draft proclamation already submitted, solely to prevent contraband reaching enemy. United States asked not to make formal protest. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Oct. 20 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey’s proposal should be accepted as an emergency plan; thus throwing responsibility on British Government. Preferable to a break with Great Britain. United States Government upheld doctrine of continuous voyage during Civil War, which Grey now wishes to establish. Request that House be sent to confer with Grey. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Oct. 21 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey gives reasons why British reject Declaration of London: (1) Parliament considers it unsatisfactory; (2) Article 28 excludes rubber, metallic ores, and hides from treatment as contraband; (3) Holland a base for military supplies for Germany. Britain considers Declaration advantageous to Germany. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

373 Oct. 22 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States withdraws its request that belligerents adopt Declaration of London. Insists that its rights be defined by existing rules of international law. Reserves right to protest in case of violation. 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

893 Oct. 23 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey expresses satisfaction that United States will not offer protest against new order in council but will reserve right to enter protest where rights are considered violated. Promise to consider all cases in friendly spirit. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

894 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Overwhelming military business absorbs Government. Difficult to get information or attention of Foreign Office. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

489 Oct. 24 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same to the Ambassadors in Austria-Hungary, France, Russia, Argentina, and Brazil, and the Minister in Belgium. Inform German Government United States withdraws suggestion for adoption of Declaration of London by belligerents; will insist upon rights and protest if they are violated. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Oct. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 25] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). New order in council to be issued after conference with France; to be published in United States as soon as possible. Urge upon British Government prompt action and publicity of facts in every case of detention of vessels. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

418 Oct. 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States cannot foretell the effect of new order in council, and does not waive the right to protest against the inclusion of any article in list of contraband. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

549 Nov. 3 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits revised British list of articles of contraband; also order in council of October 29 defining attitude of Britain toward Declaration of London together with modification of same. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

234 Oct. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany. Forwards memorial of German Foreign Office of October 10 protesting the attitude of the British and French Governments respecting the Declaration of London. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

280 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Dec. 14] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Encloses two notes from Foreign Office containing notification of additional lists of articles of contraband. 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 411]

239 Nov. 20 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary. Transmits memorandum of Foreign Office concerning attitude of Great Britain and France in regard to the Declaration of London. 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 412]

1099 Dec. 15 [Rec’d Dec. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany. Aluminum and nickel added to German list of conditional contraband. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Ottoman Government proclaims list of absolute and conditional contraband. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

206 Dec. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Ottoman Government communicates additional list of contraband articles. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 24] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Transmits British amended list of absolute and conditional contraband of December 23. 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 416]

428 Jan. 5, 1915 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). British and French lists correspond. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

Correspondence with American Citizens, Firms, and Organizations Whose Interests Were Affected by the Proclamations and Orders of Belligerent Governments Regarding Contraband and Trade with Enemy Countries—Action on Particular Commodities

shipments of grain and foodstuffs—marine insurance

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 31 [Rec’d Aug 1] From the Board of Trade of Kansas City (telegram). Requests Department to take action regarding regulations of trade. 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Aug. 5 To the Vice President of the Board of Trade of Kansas City. Not probable that countries now at war will consent to any modification of the rules of international law regarding the rights of neutrals. 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Aug. 3 From the Insurance Company of North America. Any information which Department can give regarding conditional contraband, rights of belligerents to capture neutral property, etc., will be of great advantage to the public and the Company. 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

Aug. 7 To the Insurance Company of North America. Contraband of war and maritime commerce during a state of war are subject to so many qualifications and exceptions that Department thinks it best for Company to consult private counsel and standard works on international law. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Aug. 6. From Representative Stephens. Transmits telegram from Wichita Mill and Elevator Company, asking if wheat can be moved under American flag from Galveston to England, France, and Holland without violation of neutrality; also asks if Government will furnish escort for fleet of grain-carrying steamers. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Aug. 8 To Representative Stephens (telegram). Grain classed as conditional contraband of war, subject to seizure if consigned to belligerent government, its army or navy. Government could not furnish escort. Foreign boats under foreign registration can not cancel same and register in United States. Foodstuffs sent to Holland not contraband. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

Aug. 15 Public circular issued by the Department of State. Neutrality; contraband; seizure of ships and cargo. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

shipments of copper

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Nov. 6 From the Perth Amboy Board of Trade (telegram). Protests against British detention of neutral vessels bearing copper to neutral countries and the placing of unwrought copper on absolute contraband list, causing thousands of men to be thrown out of work. Asks prompt action by Government to clarify situation. 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Nov. 7 From the Copper Country Commercial Club (telegram). Protests against British restrictions on copper trade, affecting welfare of 60,000 American miners. 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Governor of Montana (telegram). Stopping of copper shipments from United States by belligerents inflicts great losses upon Montana industries. Suffering and privation will result. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

Nov. 13 From the Weber Club, Ogden Publicity Bureau (telegram). Plea for Government to use its best offices to secure shipments of copper in neutral vessels to neutral countries. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

Nov. 17 From the Silver City Chamber of Commerce (telegram). Transmits resolutions protesting against inclusion of copper in list of absolute contraband and urging United States to take some action. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

Nov. 13 From the Chamber of Commerce of the United States. Large part of world’s supply of copper comes from United States. Action of Great Britain and France in making copper absolute contraband not according to Declaration of London as modified by British order in council. Only small part of copper output used for war material. 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

Nov. 25 To the British Ambassador. British proclaim unwrought copper as absolute contraband. List of conditional contraband contains materials for telegraphs, etc. Explanation asked. Manufacturers entitled to know what treatment to expect for shipments of manufactured copper. 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 10] From the American Mining Congress (telegram). Resolution appealing to the United States to use influence to keep open copper market and protect shipments thereof. 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Dec. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Subject of unwrought copper will be studied and decision rendered. 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Shipments of Cotton

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 20 From Senator Owen_ Requests that Government open negotiations with Germany, France, and England to arrange that cotton be shipped to these countries without being regarded as contraband. Probable loss $250,000,000, with markets closed. 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Aug. 25 To Senator Owen_ _ _ Great Britain and Germany have not declared cotton as contraband. France will probably follow Great Britain. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Oct. 19 From the Consul General at London (telegram). British Government said to be ready to declare cotton as conditional contraband. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Oct. 20 From the President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange and Board of Trade to the Solicitor for the Department of State. British suspect that cotton and cottonseed products being shipped to Norway, Denmark, and Sweden are intended for Germany. One vessel held in Scotland. Cotton market declining. South anxious to obtain assurance that cotton shipped in neutral bottoms to neutral countries will not be molested. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Oct. 24 From the President of the New York Chamber of Commerce (telegram). British warn Scandinavia, Holland, and Italy that cotton en route to these countries may be brought to English prize court for proof of neutral ownership. Insurance companies can not assume risk. Government urged to request of Great Britain an authoritative statement of conditions under which cotton may be shipped to neutral countries without interference. 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From Senator Gore_ _ Transmits telegram of October 23 from Harris Irby Cotton Company: English and American companies refuse insurance oh cotton cargoes. All shipments to European countries will cease; those already bought can not be delivered. United States War Risk Insurance restricts to American bottoms, which can not be obtained. Congress urged to find measures for relief. 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

391 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Increasing complaints of Americans against Great Britain for interference with legitimate commerce. Great Britain asked to declare that American-owned cotton in neutral ships be unmolested. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

393 Oct. 24 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British underwriters will not insure unless owner warrants goods free of capture. American companies follow same course. It is hoped British will take steps to relieve situation. Much adverse criticism in this country. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440]

911 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey makes positive declaration that cotton is not contraband. No ship has been detained. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440]

Oct. 26 From the British Ambassador. Grey authorizes assurance that cotton will not be seized; not on contraband list. Copper destined for Krupp detained. No cargo taken without payment; that for neutral countries allowed to proceed. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

514 Oct. 28 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). British state that cotton is not on contraband list; it may be shipped to Germany in neutral vessels. Cotton shipments to Russian ports desired. Is cotton on German free list? 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

581 Nov. 8 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary. Apprehension in America will be greatly relieved if Germany will make public declaration that cotton in neutral vessels will not be detained or molested. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

821 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Cotton will not be declared contraband unless other beligerents declare it so. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Nov. 30 From A. Boden_ _ _ _ _ Succeeded in getting New York firms to finance shipments of cotton, and Netherland shipowners to supply ships. High rate of insurance because of detention of vessels for investigation. American bottoms more expensive than neutrals because smaller. Dutch companies ask lower rate of insurance. United States asked to obtain assurance from French that cotton will be unmolested. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Dec. 1 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the French Ambassador. British do not interfere with shipments of cotton. French have caused undue detentions of cargoes, causing great expense. A statement of French Government regarding immunity is desired. 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Dec. 13 [Rec’d Dec. 14] From the French Ambassador. French give same assurance concerning shipments of cotton as British. 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

351 Dec. 16 [Rec’d Dec. 17] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Cotton non-contraband, conditional upon reciprocity of enemy states. 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Shipments of Illuminating Oil

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Sept. 18 From the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey. “Fuel-lubricants” contained in list of conditional contraband. Government asked to support contention that ordinary illuminating oil should be exempt from contraband. 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 449]

Sept. 22 To William H. Libby. Department will request a more specific declaration by the belligerent powers as to the classification of illuminating oil. 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

Oct. 1 From the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey. Department urged to state that united States does not concede illuminating oil as contraband. Instance cited where cargo of Standard Oil was confiscated and destroyed by Russia in 1905, and protested by British Government. Continual additions to contraband list would potentially result in entire destruction of trade of neutrals. 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

Oct. 26 To William H. Libby. Department is endeavoring to obtain equitable treatment for American commerce; has made the following representations to British against seizure of the John D. Rockefeller: oil is not listed as absolute contraband, and the vessel was apparently of neutral destination. 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

Shipments of Naval Stores

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Oct. 27 From Senator Fletcher. Foreign countries constitute major portion of market for naval stores. Desire of yellow pine district that market be opened up so that naval stores may be shipped with cotton. Encloses letter of October 27 from E. J. L’Engle on subject. 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

Oct. 29 To the British Ambassador. Turpentine and rosin not on list of contraband. Desires a statement from British Government regarding immunity of these products from seizure. 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Nov. 1 [Rec’d. Nov. 2] From the British Ambassador. British Government has no present intention of interfering with turpentine and rosin. Lists of contraband published; may be consulted. Final decision for prize courts. 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

441 Dec. 22 [Rec’d. Dec. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Resinous products, camphor and turpentine, have been added to list of absolute contraband. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

Dec. 29 From the Chamber of Commerce of the United States. Hopes that steps can be taken to rescind the decision of Great Britain in making “naval stores” absolute contraband of war. Gives figures showing extent of industry and decline on account of war. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

Shipments of Tobacco

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Nov. 5 From the Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade. Citizens of western Tennessee and Kentucky beg the Government to effect some arrangement with belligerent powers whereby tobacco may be exported. It is not on contraband list but shipments are seriously interfered with. Principal source of income; 80 per cent of production exported to Europe. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Nov. 6 To the British Ambassador. Request that Great Britain will not interfere with shipments of tobacco. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Nov. 7 From the British Ambassador. British Government has no intention of interfering with shipments of tobacco in neutral bottoms sent to any European country. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Interference by Belligerent Governments with Neutral Ships and Cargoes

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 12 From the North American Export Grain Association (telegram). Vessels carrying foodstuffs diverted to English ports; perishables sold, nonperishables stored. Shippers without protection. Invokes Government aid. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Aug. 13 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Department desires full facts of report re diverted steamers and reasons and basis for British Government’s action. Names of vessels and cargoes specified. Attention called to great loss entailed. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Aug. 17 To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Instructions to report capture of merchant vessels. Consuls to give informal notice of claim of owner and select representative for him. 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 18] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Marshal of prize courts states neutrals can obtain possession of their property not contraband by applying to the procurator general. Proof of ownership required. 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465]

405 Aug. 18 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British will pay claims for loss by diversion, when established. 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From Seth Low_ _ _ _ _ Submits resolution of conference held under auspices of Secretary of the Treasury requesting Department of State to take up with British Government the question of release of funds and shipments held in London and elsewhere resulting from the sale or diversion of shipments. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). American shippers desire release of grain cargoes diverted to England and of the funds resulting from sale of cargoes. Money thus tied up blocks trade. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

Aug. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ This Government considers that all cargoes afloat before the outbreak of hostilities are not subject to adjudication as prize; it is only an act of justice for British to direct release of them. Where should claims be presented for ships taken to British ports not in England proper? 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 27] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Persons seeking cargoes other than enemy cargoes on captured ships may obtain release on submitting proof of ownership to procurator general, if submitted prior to issuance of writ in prize-court action. Subsequent thereto an order by court for release is necessary. When a writ Has been issued, an appearance to such writ should be entered by a solicitor at Admiralty marshal’s office within eight days thereof. 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Aug. 28 To the Consul General at London (telegram). Are ships captured and taken to British ports required to apply to procurator general in London, or will prize courts be held in other British ports outside of London? Owing to interrupted communication and great number of ships seized, impossible to present claims in short time required. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

504 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). A special committee has been appointed to deal with all cases on their merits. It will sit daily at the Board of Trade. No difficulty in regard to release of cargoes when question of prize is not involved. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Immense number shipments were afloat prior to declaration of war. Under principles of international law and justice, neutral cargoes under such circumstances can not be confiscated, and can not rightfully be subject to adjudication and condemnation as prize. United States hopes that British will facilitate release of American-owned cargoes that were afloat before war, and give sufficient time and opportunity for them to establish their rights. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472]

508 Aug. 29 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Conveys text of statement issued by British Government regarding diverted cargoes and dealings with such cargoes. 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

Sept. 3 From the Consul General at London (telegram). President Admiralty division prize courts gives ruling concerning seat of prize courts. Time extended for presentation of claims. List of courts authorized to act as prize courts under Prize Courts Act of 1894. 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

420 Aug. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 9] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits note of August 26 from Foreign Office concerning proceedings in British prize courts and notice of rules governing prize court which appears daily in the Times newspaper. 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

87 Sept. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Quotes telegram from Grey: An executive committee appointed to deal expeditiously with detained cargoes. As many as possible will be freed without reference to prize court. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Procurator general states certain goods will be released upon payment of freight to London. As goods are not landed at ports to which originally consigned, freight to London adds to shipper’s losses. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477]

Sept. 22 To the Consul General at London (telegram). Department considers British Government not entitled to collect freight on cargo on diverted, detained, or seized vessels sailing before the war. Instructions to press for release of American goods, free of charges. 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Procurator general disposed to release cargoes upon payment of freight with protest; final judgment reserved until later, when reimbursement will be made if decided in our favor. 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Sept. 28 To the Consul General at London (telegram). Instructions to appear before Bonar Law’s committee for expeditious settlement of matter of freight, making plain the Department’s attitude. American interests advised to pay with protest, to avoid further delay; all freight collected to be reimbursed if decided in our favor. 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481]

446 Sept. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Forwards note of September 14 from British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, giving British argument re cargoes in custody of prize court. 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481]

Sept. 28 From the Consul General at London (telegram). Two Dutch steamers brought to Plymouth because of copper in cargo. Dutch liners required to give proof that goods are for Dutch consumption. 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Resolution of the Senate of the United States. Secretary of State requested to inform Senate if British are interfering with shipments of copper carried in neutral bottoms to Rotterdam. If so, what reasons are given by British for so doing. 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 30] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Inquiries concerning cargoes captured and taken to French ports should be addressed to Prefect Maritime of district where ship is detained. Cases go to prize court at Bordeaux. 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

39 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 2] From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Branch houses in Rotterdam of American firms and importers of American products protest against measures taken by belligerents regarding shipments. Willing to sign declaration that goods are not for belligerents. 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Oct. 2 From the Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York. Transmits resolution requesting Government to take steps to prevent destruction by belligerent warships of neutral cargoes of coffee. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Oct. 9 To the Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York. Resolution will receive consideration. Practice of nations to seize neutral ships or cargo only when necessary. Germany based action on this. Not to be presumed that she will refuse indemnity. 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Oct. 7 From the Consul General at London (telegram). Re seizure of shipment of wood alcohol. Protests procurator’s claim for freight and incidental expenses while in port. Suggests that American position be restated. 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

66 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Oct. 7] From the Consul General at London. Dutch ships arrested in order to prove that they carried no contraband. Managing director of Holland-America Line hopes for support of United States in efforts of Netherlands to prevent further interference from British Government. Large shipments of cotton expected. Some may find its way to Germany. 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

Oct. 12 From Senator Williams. Encloses telegram of October 9 from President of the Chamber of Commerce, Greenville, Mississippi, stating that British are interfering with shipments of cottonseed oil and cake to neutral countries. This the only revenue cotton planters are deriving from cotton crop. Conditions deplorable. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at London (telegram). Seizure of shipments of cottonseed products has resulted in serious injury to American commerce and produces spirit of antagonism to British Government. Satisfactory understanding respecting our commerce with neutrals should be given. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

300 Oct. 13 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Holland-America Line will not accept goods for shipment unless consigned to Netherland Government. Situation unsatisfactory. Further protests. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 15] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Minister at Stockholm (telegram). Swedish vessels asked to call at British ports and give assurance that cargoes, of which exportation is prohibited, will be landed at port of destination and not exported. This to avoid search at sea. 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

Oct. 21 From the Consul General at London (telegram). Every insurance company in London and Liverpool and member of Lloyd’s agrees to insert clause excluding risk liability from any claim arising from capture or detention of ship by British or Allies. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

362 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The John D. Rockefeller, American ship carrying illuminating oil to Copenhagen, detained by British. Requests release. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Oct. 22 From the British Ambassador. The John D. Rockefeller’s cargo consigned “to order.” Destination has been ascertained and vessel ordered released, with assurance that oil will not be reexported. Necessary that ships carry papers showing destination and names of owner and consignee. Fuel and lubricants declared conditional contraband. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

375 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Steamer Brindilla, owned by Standard Oil Company, carrying oil to Alexandria, Egypt, detained by British at Halifax. Seizure unjustified. Requests release. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

379 Oct. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Requests release of steamer Platuria, owned by Standard Oil Company and carrying oil to Denmark. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

903 Oct. 24 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Release of steamer Brindilla ordered. 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500]

85 Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 26] From the Consul General at London. Transmits procurator general’s letter of October 6 re Great Britain’s contention for freight and other charges on diverted and detained vessels. Advises shippers to accept terms under protest, with view to reimbursment. 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500]

Oct. 25 [Rec’d Oct. 26] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Remarks upon the general question of contraband and the attitude of the British Government. The demand for mineral oils by neutrals in touch with belligerents has greatly increased; evidence is that these are transmitted to belligerents. Neutrals making arrangements to guarantee that these goods will not be reexported. 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]

912 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Detained ship Platuria has on board 1,500,000 gallons oil. Will be released if Denmark gives assurance that oil will not go to Germany. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

370 Oct. 9 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German cruisers have sunk British ships carrying American cargo to United States. Requests information as to whether Germany will hold proceedings of prize adjudication; if so, when and where. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

504 Oct. 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany’s attitude in matter of indemnity for destruction of cargo affects insurance. Speedy reply desired. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

Oct. 28 From four copper exporting companies (telegram). Representatives of 90 per cent of copper export trade lay before Department specific cases of interference with trade to Italy, and refusal of steamship companies to carry copper unless consignee is named and guaranty is given that cargo will not be reexported. Requests relief. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

Oct. 27 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Re undesirability of exhibiting manifests of departing vessels to any person who may desire to examine them. 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]

Oct. 28 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Order issued to collectors of customs to withhold publication of manifests until 30 days after clearance of each vessel. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

948 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British are fearful that order to refrain from giving out information concerning sailing of vessels may assist United States citizens in carrying on contraband trade with belligerents. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

447 Nov. 2 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Order not in unfriendly spirit. Trade, whether contraband or non-contraband, is legitimate, and within neutral rights. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Oct. 31 From two copper exporting companies (telegram). British seized copper on S. S. Kroonland at Gibraltar. Requests protection of interests. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

433 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Protest against detention of American steamer Kroonland laden with copper and rubber consigned to neutrals, and of American shipments of copper on Italian steamers bound for neutral countries. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

964 Nov. 2 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The Kroonland detained, not seized; investigation and report promised. British Government has found evidence that copper on Italian steamers was for belligerents; will buy the cargoes. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. Shipments of military stores to Denmark increase daily, in many cases forwarded directly to Germany, Enclosed copy of telegram of October 31 from Grey to British Minister in Denmark, inquiring how case stands regarding Platuria and Knudsen. These vessels have been released. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]

Nov. 3 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). S. S. Bergensfjord , Norwegian American Line, seized by British ship, taken to Orkney, released after three days. Ships being taken to England for examination of their papers and cargo. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

724 Nov. 4 [Rec’d Nov. 5] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Prize adjudication provided for all vessels and cargoes destroyed. Prize court to be held in Hamburg shortly. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Nov. 4 From Muir and Company (telegram). Wheat on steamer Miramichi destined for Rotterdam, sold to German buyers but not paid for. Sailed before outbreak of war; seized as prize contrary to British promise. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

1000 Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Kroonland allowed to proceed, her copper brought into the the prize court. Giovanni released, copper discharged. Regina d’Italia allowed to proceed, copper, not consigned to Italian firm, placed in prize court. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

495 Nov. 7 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to render all possible assistance to Muir and Company in claim for wheat on Miramichi, held in prize court in London. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Large shipments of copper and rubber passing through Italian ports to Germany. Large purchases also through Rotterdam, Amsterdam, and Copenhagen by houses working on German account. British must stop contraband trade in copper. 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Rome (telegram). Instructions to induce Italian Government to prevent re-export of copper on board Regina d’Italia. Large shipments of copper consigned to Italian bank by German agent. British willing to buy it. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521]

Nov. 7 To the British Ambassador. Protests against fate of Rockefeller, Platuria and Knudsen; requests that visit and search be made at sea with greatest expedition possible. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521]

Nov. 9 [Rec’d Nov. 11] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Forwards copies of telegrams sent by Grey to British Ministers at Christiania, Stockholm, and Copenhagen and to Ambassador at Rome, containing information as to arrangements with neutral governments for putting fewest possible hindrances in way of neutral trade while at same time carrying out necessary measures of restriction. 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522]

1029 Nov. 9 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits statement from Grey: Great scarcity of copper in Germany; their agents bringing it in by carefully organized plan to supply German arms factories; swollen trade in Italy an artificial one. 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Hamburg (telegram). Instruction to keep Department posted as to when prize court proceedings are held. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

608 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instruction to obtain information as to procedure to be followed by those presenting claims before prize court. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

511 Nov. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Repeats protests against seizure and detention of copper and requests release. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527]

822 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Forwards instructions as to how a claimant shall proceed before prize court. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527]

Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Restatement of British attitude as to detained vessels and seized cargoes. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

Undated [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Foreign Office states that cottonseed cake is conditional contraband and will be treated as such, and under order in council will be liable to seizure if consigned to order or to an enemy. 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

562 Nov. 18 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Norwegian steamer Uller, chartered by American corporation, with full cargo cotton detained by British at Kirkwall. Detention not justified; people are persuaded that Great Britain not friendly to American trade. 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

564 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Inquiries concerning the agreement Italy has made with Great Britain to prevent reexportation of goods to Germany. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531]

1104 Nov. 20 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Uller was not detained for cotton. More information later. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

1163 Nov. 30 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ No further decisions can be given by Foreign Office re reexportation of shipments to Italy until new Italian decree has been tested. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

108 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Consul General at Hamburg. No American prize cargo has been brought into port yet. Will keep Department informed. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Dec. 1 To the British Ambassador. Quotes a communication from the British Consul General at Philadelphia to an American firm urging that ships proceeding to Scandinavian ports call at British ports to avoid search at sea. Advantage of this not clear to Department. 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From Armour and Company. Summary of facts concerning cargoes of meat-food products to Copenhagen in vessels sailing under Norwegian flag, detained and held by the British Government. Encloses memorandum of November 19, 1914, on the same subject. 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536]

Dec. 2 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Defends British attitude on seizure of cargo. 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537]

680 Dec. 3 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Denial of justice and the illegality of British policy in continuing to seize cargoes, despite the agreement with Scandinavian countries to forbid reshipment. 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538]

684 Dec. 4 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Copper from steamer Sif for Stockholm detained at Glasgow and from steamer Sigrun held at Newport. Desires to know grounds for seizure. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Dec. 5 From the Consul General at London (telegram). No settlement can be obtained for cargoes of packing companies except through prize court decisions, and they are four months behind time. Re cases of the Alfred Nobel, Björnstjerne Björnson , and Fridland. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

1202 Dec. 6 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Scandinavian Governments have not yet forbidden reexportation of copper. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542]

1199 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits text of proposed working arrangement whereby difficulties of trade and shipping may be removed. Grey asks that United States shippers ship to some definite consignee and not “to order”. British agree to wool, rubber, etc., entering United States provided it is not reshipped to enemy. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542]

153 Nov. 25 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Consul General at London. Attention of procurator general has been called to promise that seized cargo will be disposed of by special committee without reference to prize court. Forwards procurator general’s reply of November 21. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]

1209 Dec. 7 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has been informed that copper shipped to neutrals goes to German concerns in neutral disguise for reshipment to Germany. Copper very high in Germany. Sweden has put copper on prohibited export list. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

37 Nov. 17 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Minister in Sweden. Transmits communication of November 14 from director general of the Foreign Office enclosing note of November 12 from Swedish Minister of Foreign Affairs to the German, French, British and Russian Ministers, protesting vigorously against interference with trade by belligerents. 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 545]

714 Dec. 9 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Hopes soon to make definite response to proposed working arrangement for facilitating trade. 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Dec. 10 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the German Embassy. Makes inquiry concerning United States protest against British practice of seizing American ships. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

1240 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Suggests that if United States accepts proposed working arrangement, it incorporate a stipulation that British Government shall promptly inform us of the detention of every American ship and the reason therefor. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

1255 Dec. 13 [Rec’d Dec. 14] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards statements of Grey re disposition of ships and cargoes consigned to neutral countries, which had been seized by Great Britain. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

386 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Protests capture of Standard Oil steamers by French. Their offer to pay the value of cargo not satisfactory to United States. 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

176 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Consul General at London. Is making representations to procurator general and Foreign Office as to reasons for seizure of certain ships and detention of cargoes. Encloses copies of replies of November 24 and 28 from Foreign Office to American Ambassador; also his own letter of December 4 to the Ambassador at London describing the situation and stating that vessels have been placed in prize court. 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551]

84 Dec. 16 To the Consul General at London. Re seizure of shipments made prior to a knowledge of the latest order in council. In this case the order in council should not apply. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

187 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the Consul General at London. Forwards note of Grey of December 5 on subject of seized shipments; quotes Article 43 of Declaration of London and asks how goods can be detained for adjudication when it is not liable to condemnation. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

1307 Dec. 21 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Forwards reply of Foreign Office to note claiming undue delay in releasing vessels carrying cotton. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ From the President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (telegram). For a vessel to proceed without detention, British require that two British subjects be employed during entire time vessel is in port—one for day inspection and one for night. Requests that these instructions be modified, and that two inspectors for each pier only be employed. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555]

Dec. 22 To the President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (telegram). Cannot enter into arrangements with British Government for vise of cargoes of vessels loading from this country to neutrals. Matter one for private arrangement. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557]

825 Dec. 24 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Objects to seizure of steamers Ellen and Sandefjord and requests release. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Regrets that resinous products have been added to absolute contraband list. Many ships have sailed with this cargo. Case similar to that of copper and other products. 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558]

836 Dec. 26 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Makes a full statement of views of the United States Government on present condition of American foreign trade resulting from seizures and detentions. Maintains an inconsistency and lack of consideration on part of British. 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 559]

841 Dec. 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Embassy reports irritation in Italy against Great Britain for interference with trade. 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

Dec. 28 To the German Embassy. In reply to German note of December 10, regarding seizure by British, cites protests to British Government. Regrets the necessity to interpose objections to acts of belligerents in disregard of the rights of neutrals. 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Swedish Minister. Acknowledges note of December 18 enclosing note from Swedish Government to German, British, French, and Russian Governments protesting against interference with commerce contrary to principles of international law. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

1342 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Acknowledges communication of December 26. Grey will not return to London until December 30. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

1368 Dec. 30 [Rec’d Dec. 31] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ The United States is criticized for protests, which are attributed to German propaganda, and for failure to protest against Belgium’s treatment; is also accused of a desire to make money out of England’s misfortune. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

Dec. 14 [Rec’d Dec. 31] From the Consul General at London. A committee has been appointed by the British Government to receive and consider claims made by British, Allied, or neutral parties against ships or cargoes which have been condemned by prize courts and to provide for them out of prize funds. 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565]

1374 Dec. 31 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey will reply to note [of December 26] “in the same tone.” 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567]

5 Jan. 1, 1915 From the British Ambassador. Upholds British decision that rosin and turpentine are contraband, as being “articles from which ammunition is manufactured.” 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567]

209 Dec. 31 [Rec’d Jan. 12, 1915] From the Consul General at London. Explanations of British action as to goods shipped before declaration of war. Specific case of lumber of George W. Howe & Co. consigned to J. H. Müller & Son of Hamburg. Apparent intention of authorities to weigh minutely every evidence of ownership. 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 568]

730 Jan. 8, 1915 [Rec’d Jan. 23] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits Grey’s reply of January 5 giving ultimate disposition of S. S. Ellen, Tellus , and Sandefjord . 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

79 Oct. 8 [Rec’d Oct. 19] From the Consul General at London. S. S. Sturmfels , from Calcutta to New York, with miscellaneous goods on board, has sought refuge in the Italian Red Sea port of Massaua. Permission asked of Great Britain for ship to continue journey. Necessary to obtain assent of Germany also. 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

37 Oct. 31 To the Consul General at London. Approves action of Consul General in asking permission for safe-conduct of S. S. Sturmfels . This case to set precedent. 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

144 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 14] From the Consul General at London. Permission for Sturmfels to continue journey denied. Letter received by Lloyd’s indicating line of conduct which cargo interests should follow in order to recover property contained in German ships seeking refuge in Italian ports. 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 572]

Nov. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Consul General at Cape Town. Birkenfels with cargo from New York to Australia held up at port in British South Africa. Suggests taking matter up with British Government. 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 573]

1297 Dec. 18 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Forwards memorandum from Foreign Office concerning the Schneefels captured by British while on way to United States. Ship will continue voyage and deliver cargo to owners. Government asked to protect Schneefels, now considered British prize. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

944 Jan. 12, 1915 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The Schneefels will be treated as any other merchant vessel. 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Embargoes and Related Restrictions on Trade by European Neutral States

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

33 Oct. 9 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Information received that Holland-America Line will not accept cargo unless consigned to Netherland Government. Instruction to furnish information concerning Netherland embargo on exportation. 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

44 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 11] From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherlands will receive oil cake consigned to Government. Holland-America Line will receive cargo so consigned. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

45 Oct. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits list of articles of which Netherland Government prohibits exportation. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

39 Oct. 15 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Requests explanation of telegram concerning shipments to Netherland Government; also information as to whether Netherland Government would prevent exportation of cotton shipped to Holland and destined for Germany. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580]

47 Oct. 16 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Every separate shipment must be consigned to Netherland Government with consent given by Netherland Consul General in New York. Exportation of cotton, fodder, and oil cake forbidden. Shipments of cotton in transit to Germany not forbidden but are at shippers’ risk. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Norway (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ministers in Sweden and Denmark and the Ambassador in Italy. Make inquiries as to whether cotton destined for Germany can be shipped to Norway. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Sweden Will not prevent passage through country of cotton shipped to Germany, but will not allow export to Germany of direct shipments from United States to Swedish ports. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 19 From the Minister in Denmark (telegram). Danish have no objection to exportation through Denmark to Germany of cotton from United States if on through bill of lading. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 20 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). Norwegian authorities do not object to cotton being shipped to Norway destined for Germany. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

44 Oct. 21 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Consul General states that consent of Netherland Government for shipments of goods must be obtained at The Hague, Obtain consent of the Government for such shipments. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

51 Oct. 22 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Permits for consignments of goods granted directly by Netherland Government to Holland-America Line. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

47 Oct. 24 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Meat packers have regular trade in Holland. Requests reason why prepared meat products are not on list of goods that may be assigned to Netherland Government. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]

634 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Netherland Government has placed embargo on exportation of cotton; however shipments in transit to Germany are permitted. Denmark has no prohibition against such, exportation, so far as Germany knows. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]

48 Oct. 26 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Instructions to obtain information as to procedure to be followed by shippers to get permission of Netherland Government to consign goods to it. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

54 Oct. 27 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Meat products not among prohibited exports because plentiful in Netherlands. Other articles added to prohibited list. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

55 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Permission to consign goods to Netherland Government obtained from Mr. Bock of Department of Commerce at The Hague. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Nov. 1 From the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Switzerland receives large quantities of goods from United States through Italy. This made difficult by Great Britain at present. Requests that instruction be given American Ambassador to Italy to try to facilitate this trade. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Sweden Will not prevent passage through country of cotton shipped to Germany, but will not allow export to Germany of direct shipments from United States to Swedish ports. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 19 From the Minister in Denmark (telegram). Danish have no objection to exportation through Denmark to Germany of cotton from United States if on through bill of lading. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 20 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). Norwegian authorities do not object to cotton being shipped to Norway destined for Germany. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

44 Oct. 21 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Consul General states that consent of Netherland Government for shipments of goods must be obtained at The Hague, Obtain consent of the Government for such shipments. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

51 Oct. 22 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Permits for consignments of goods granted directly by Netherland Government to Holland-America Line. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

47 Oct. 24 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Meat packers have regular trade in Holland. Requests reason why prepared meat products are not on list of goods that may be assigned to Netherland Government. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]

634 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Netherland Government has placed embargo on exportation of cotton; however shipments in transit to Germany are permitted. Denmark has no prohibition against such, exportation, so far as Germanv knows. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]

48 Oct. 26 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Instructions to obtain information as to procedure to be followed by shippers to get permission of Netherland Government to consign goods to it. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

54 Oct. 27 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Meat products not among prohibited exports because plentiful in Netherlands. Other articles added to prohibited list. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

55 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Permission to consign goods to Netherland Government obtained from Mr. Bock of Department of Commerce at The Hague. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Nov. 1 From the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Switzerland receives large quantities of goods from United States through Italy. This made difficult by Great Britain at present. Requests that instruction be given American Ambassador to Italy to try to facilitate this trade. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

54 Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Foreign Office does not prohibit goods from being shipped through the Kingdom from one foreign country to another, provided it is not placed in warehouses. In latter case agreement must be reached with customs authorities. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]

455 Nov. 3 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ascertain attitude of British Government concerning shipments of goods through Italy to Switzerland. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]

1005 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey negotiating agreement with neutral countries bordering on Germany and Austria for the regulation of neutral commerce with object of preventing contraband from reaching enemy and of giving least possible trouble to neutral trade. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

516 Nov. 12 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has not intended to authorize Ambassador to negotiate with other neutral ministers for agreements, as to shipping. Conversations relating to free movement of American commerce to neutral countries being conducted in Washington. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

1057 Nov. 13 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has not negotiated with other neutral ministers for agreements as to shipping. Encourages neutral ministers to tell of their negotiations with British Government only to keep informed. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

558 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Explanation regarding conferences with other neutral ministers satisfactory. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

52 Nov. 9 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Confusion regarding attitude of Netherlands towards shipments of goods on reexportation of which that Government has placed embargo. Instruction to send definite information after presenting matter to Netherland Government. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

71 Nov. 10 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Transmits information regarding clear and consistent attitude of Netherland Government towards shipping. 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

58 Nov. 17 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Minister in Sweden and the Ambassador in Italy. Instructions to obtain a favorable statement on two points: consignment of cotton for German ports via Netherlands, and shipments of cotton consigned to Netherland concerns for reexportation to Germany. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

78 Nov. 19 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Foreign Office states that there is no objection to consignments of cotton in transit to Germany or to transshipments if consigned to Netherland firms. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

2 Nov. 23 From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Upon assurances that Great Brittain will not interfere with cotton, Swedish Foreign Office will permit cotton consignments to pass through Sweden for Germany, or reexportation to Germany of cotton consigned to Sweden. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

81 Nov. 24 From the Secretary of the Legation in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Government, reserving right to import and distribute flour, will buy from United States. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

Nov. 30 From the Consul General at Genoa (telegram). Goods entering Italy marked “to order” are considered for Italy and not for reshipment. Many bales of raw cotton are tied up in Genoa. Government urged not to hold goods shipped before decree was published. Otherwise American shippers suffer great losses. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

98 Dec. 4 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Cotton non-contraband. Shipments made before publication of decree and tied up in Genoa should be allowed reshipment. Italian Government asked to give favorable consideration. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

687 Dec. 5 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Difficulties have arisen regarding shipments of cotton to Switzerland through Italy. Swiss Government requests British to adjust matter. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

98 Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 6] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Grey informed Swiss Minister in London that instructions will be given immediately to allow cotton to be exported to Switzerland and other neutrals without interdicting its reexportation. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

594 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Forwards copies of lists of articles, the exportation of which is prohibited by Norway, Sweden, and Denmark under agreement with Great Britain. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

1220 Dec. 8 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Re cotton held in Italian ports consigned to shipper or to order and destined for Switzerland. 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

813 Nov. 27 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the Minister in Denmark. Re procuring release of cotton on steamers Hellig Olav, Van Leer , and Frederick held up by Danish Government. Owing to scarcity of cotton in Denmark, certain shipments detained. Cargoes on Frederick and Triton released, to be reexported to Germany. 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

1035 Dec. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German and Austrian buyers anxious for cotton, but want assurance of American Government that it will not be subject to capture en route. 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

737 Dec. 11 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Arrangements for Denmark to adopt same system of trade as used in Holland. 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

110 Dec. 12 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). No difficulty now in shipping cotton through Italy to named final destination. Shipments destined for Switzerland released. Complaint still regarding censorship commercial cable. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

825 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Every encouragement given cotton shippers. Cargoes going through to Germany and transshipments through neutral ports. Mines in North Sea only difficulty. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

1308 Dec. 21 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Would U. S. merchants agree to export only what is needed for consumption in each country? Would United States object to appointment of a trustee to whom goods could be shipped? 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

1319 Dec. 22 [Rec’d Dec. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey denies that American cotton is stopped while Egyptian cotton is allowed to proceed. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

830 Dec. 24 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Restriction of trade to home consumption not practicable nor fair to American commerce. 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618]

141 Dec. 30 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Cotton can be shipped freely; no embargo on reexportation. 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

Embargoes by Germany

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Re possible stock of dyestuffs, etc., available for United States; also possibility of traffic on Rhine. Requests information. 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum for the President by Representative Herman A. Metz. Seventy-five per cent of dyestuffs used in the whole world are manufactured in Germany. United States is dependent upon German dyestuffs. Not practical to attempt manufacture in this country. Suggests arranging for shipments of dye-stuffs to United States through American consuls in Germany. 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 21] From the Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association of America. Number of persons dependent upon dyeing of material greater than in any other one industry. Appeal for assistance in arranging for shipments of dyestuffs from Germany. 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 622]

23 Sept. 4 [Rec’d Sept. 5] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Large quantities of dyestuffs, etc., ready for shipment from Rotterdam under Dutch flag. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

Sept. 15 From the Consul General at Berlin (telegram). Report on minerals and dyestuffs, and their exportation; and on the most available and cheapest routes from Berlin and surrounding country. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

186 Sept. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Unless cyanide can be obtained, mining companies will be forced to shut down. Requests lifting of embargo on shipment to United States, if one exists. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

227 Sept. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 20] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Cyanide may be exported to United States and Mexico, provided none is reexported. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

271 Sept. 22 [Rec’d Sept. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Later decision that cyanide and dyestuffs can be shipped only in United States vessels, to prevent seizure by England. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

33 Sept. 25 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Rumored that England has threatened to declare war on Holland if Dutch ships carry goods beneficial to Germany. Suggests that American ships come direct to Rotterdam. 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

265 Sept. 26 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Asks if potash is in same category with cyanide. Conference called to arrange sending of American ship to Rotterdam. 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

316 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 26] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Foreign Office declared ready to allow shipments to United States on Dutch, American, or Italian vessels for distribution in United States and Mexico only. If any shipments are seized, vigorous protests must be made. 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631]

288 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Divergence of views concerning exports. Fear that goods may be taken by England, or re-shipped. Meantime American ships could be used. 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631]

319 Sept. 26 [Rec’d Sept. 27] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Suggests that, to satisfy Germany, Department obtain assurances from England and France that non-contraband goods consigned to America will not be interfered with. Department of Commerce and Labor to see that goods are used only in United States. 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633]

413 Oct. 5 [Rec’d Oct. 6] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Real reason for prohibition on dyestuffs, etc., to force United States to send shipments of cotton and other goods needed in Germany. Congress could authorize manufacture dyestuffs, etc., under patents. There is a German mining-cyanide factory at Perth Amboy. 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633]

345 Oct. 7 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). American vessel, Matanzas, under ballast to arrive at Rotterdam for cargo destined for New York; guaranteed for home consumption. 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

377 Oct. 10 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Steamer Matanzas chartered by private interests. Plans now on foot to send outgoing cargoes. 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

378 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Matanzas sailed before recommendations as to raw cotton were received. All other boats sent for dyestuffs, etc., will carry cotton. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

399 Oct. 12 _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Steamer Nieuw Amsterdam carrying coal-tar dyes from Switzerland to America is held up by German Government. Ryndam also detained. Suggests that these cargoes be transferred to the Matanzas. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

505 Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 15] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government must have guarantee that goods shipped on Matanzas will not be reexported. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

448 Oct. 19 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). This Government can not make guarantee demanded. Foreign Trade Adviser arranging for shipment of cotton to Germany, in conjunction with German Embassy. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

683 Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 1] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government satisfied about arrangements to ship dyestuffs, etc. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

950 Nov. 29 [Rec’d Nov. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Rumors that German Government, displeased by sale of American war materials to England and France, may place difficulties in way of exportation of dyestuffs. 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

1036 Dec. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 9] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Shipment on Matanzas of full cargo of dyestuffs. Release will be made of amount of dyes damaged on Sun as soon as this amount is established. 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Dec. 24 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Half-month dyestuff supply released for shipment on Berwind. 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Embargoes by the Allied States

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Oct. 2 From Representative Julius Kahn to the Office of Foreign Trade Advisers. States that Australia has placed embargo on shipments of meat to this country. This works hardship on Pacific Coast, and on Army and Navy. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

268 Oct. 6 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Encloses copy of telegram to American Consul General, Sydney, asking if embargo can be lifted so far as United States is concerned. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

887 Oct. 23 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States Steel Products Co. urges Embassy to have British Government raise embargo on shipments of manganese ore from India to United States; also for release of two steamers of ore held in Bombay. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

407 Oct. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Permission given to assist United States Steel Products Co. in effort to lift embargo on ore. 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

Oct. 29 From the Secretary of the National Association of Wool Manufacturers. Embargo has been placed on wool from Australia. Australia principal source of our supply. Urges Department to take steps to remove embargo. 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

Oct. 30 From the Acting Secretary of Commerce. Encloses letter from the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. stating that the British Government has placed an embargo on crude rubber coming from the Far East to any American port; it can only be shipped through British ports. Urges that everything possible be done to lift embargo. 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

439 Oct. 31 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Carnegie Steel Co. wishes embargo lifted on manganese ore from India. 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

220 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Harbison Walker Refractories Co. requests permission for exportation of chrome ore from New Caledonia. Natural Products Refining Co. and E. J. Labino & Co. make same request. Instruction to ascertain views of Foreign Office. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

Undated [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (telegram). Minister is being urged to modify restrictions on exports to United States. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

966 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 3] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Re S. S. Kassala and Waddon . Special licenses will be issued by Government of India for export of ore, if United States will give assurances that it will be used at home. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

454 Nov. 3 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). American interests desire lifting of embargo on wool and rubber. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (telegram). Instructions to inquire whether shipments of wool might be allowed to United States with guarantee against reexport. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Singapore (telegram). Inquire as to grounds of embargo on rubber and whether shipments would be allowed to United States with guarantee against reexport. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Nov. 6 From the Consul General at London (telegram). Exports of wool permitted only when shown that such wool is for manufacture of goods for Allied Governments. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

1006 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Reasons for imposing embargo to insure abundant supply for Great Britain and Allies, and to prevent war material from reaching enemy through neutral countries. Neutrals must give guarantee that such goods will not be reexported. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

513 Nov. 11 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Rosenthal Brothers of Columbus purchased wool skins prior to embargo. English and O’Brien of Boston purchased 600 bales of wool prior to embargo. Both give assurance of home use. Instruction to ask if goods can be shipped. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

518 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Wool urgently needed by United States. If it can not be obtained, prices of American Woolen goods, which British may desire, will be excessively high. Instructions to press for definite statement regarding supply of wool. 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660]

526 Nov. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ It seems not to the interests of British to cripple American manufacturers and depress British interests in colonies. Hopes that permits will be allowed for excess over needs of Great Britain. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

277 Nov. 14 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). As chrome ore in New Caledonia is for use of Army and Navy, it can not be exported to United States. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

1078 Nov. 17 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Arrangement being drawn up by which rubber, hides, ore, and wool can be sent to United States upon satisfactory guarantee against reexportation. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

1079 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey states all meat, wool, and skins are required by British on account of war; preembargo contracts can not be filled. 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

1092 Nov. 19 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Government regrets that it can not raise embargo on meats from Australia. 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

303 Nov. 25 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Natural Products Refining Co. needs 2,000 tons chrome ore; quantity so small, it can not affect supply for Army or Navy. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

640 Nov. 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Plumbago supply in Ceylon greater than English demand. Inquire attitude of British Government concerning shipments to America. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

660 Dec. 2 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Request for lifting of embargo to be repeated. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

681 Dec. 4 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Authorities in Ceylon willing to release plumbago under proper guaranty. Ascertain whether bond filed with British Embassy here against exportation from United States will be acceptable. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

349 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Secretary of the Embassy in France (telegram). French Government may grant request to ship chrome ore if assurance is given for home consumption only. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

1201 Undated [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Re telegrams regarding “working arrangement,” embargoes, and interference with ships and cargoes. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

360 Dec. 9 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). American importers will give any bond required to secure chrome ore. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

1259 Dec. 14 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey states that certain companies have sold their supply of manganese to the German Government. Their shortage will not be supplied by Great Britain. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

806 Dec. 22 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Permission asked for Aryan to sail with wool; both wool and ship owned by American citizens; reasonable assurances against reexportation will be given. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

815 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Hides from Melbourne guaranteed against reexportation; instructions to secure export. 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

819 Dec. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Hopes that British Government will modify existing embargo to permit shipments of crude rubber from British colonies. Form of guaranty given. American-owned rubber now held in London and Liverpool. 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

1325 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). No wool allowed to be exported from Great Britain or colonies. 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

1326 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re hides from Melbourne. British Government awaits our answer to proposed arrangement. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

403 Dec. 24 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government authorizes export of chrome ore from New Caledonia under certain conditions. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

1351 Dec. 28 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). No hope that Great Britain will grant requests until answer received to the proposed working arrangement. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Projects of Cooperation with Other American States For The Protection Of Neutral Trade

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

490 Nov. 8 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Argentina is desirous of knowing course pursued by United States regarding detained cargoes. Instructions to confer unofficially with Argentine Minister at London. 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]

Nov. 9 To the Argentine Minister. Statement of policy pursued by Government regarding detentions by British of vessels carrying alleged contraband. 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]

Nov. 9 [Rec’d Nov. 10] From the Argentine Minister. The attitude of Argentina identical with that of the United States. Proposal to adopt uniform interpretations and methods of procedure. 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683]

Nov. 10 From the Minister in Peru (telegram). Memorandum deploring interruption of commerce between peaceful nations and proposing joint action to guarantee inviolability of trade routes. Sent also by Peru to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684]

Nov. 13 To the Argentine Minister. Attitude of two Governments is identical but interests in same vessels may not be identical; therefore can not make joint representations to British Government in particular cases. Government of United States will cooperate with Argentina in these matters. 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Minister at Washington (telegram). Chancellor Müller has requested of British Minister the establishment of a neutral zone from American coast to Cape Verde to safeguard American commerce. Chilean Government has already been seeking means to diminish disturbances; under existing regulations, belligerent vessels can be supplied with coal from American ports. Proposes adoption of new rules by American countries whereby this would be impossible and which would incidentally clear American waters of belligerent ships. 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Nov. 18 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (telegram). Minister for Foreign Affairs considers it important that Argentine Minister’s suggestion concerning mediation of Pan American Union re neutral shipping in South American waters be adopted. 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687]

371 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 18] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. To prevent the suspension of navigation in South Atlantic it is proposed that Pan American Union effect the closing of these waters to naval warfare, arranging with belligerents for protection of neutral shipping. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

Nov. 18 To the Argentine Legation. Memorandum giving a detailed account of detentions and seizures of American vessels by British, of the protests raised, and of the claims presented. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

100 Nov. 10 [Rec’d Nov. 28] From the Minister in Peru. Encloses note of November 6 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs transmitting a memorandum protesting against intolerable conditions caused by the war and proposing that all American countries unite in effort to limit the war area and to free neutral waters of belligerents. Copy of the memorandum has been sent to Argentine, Brazilian, and Chilean Republics for cooperation. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]

Nov. 30 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the Peruvian Minister. Encloses memorandum from the Foreign Office, which is to be laid before the Pan American Union, suggesting that action be taken to safeguard the interests of neutrals of America. 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691]

Dec. 8 Resolution of the Governing Board of the Pan American Union. Magnitude of European war redounds to injury of neutrals. Rights of belligerents and neutrals not clearly defined. Special commission to be appointed to study problem; plans being submitted by each government. 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

Dec. 12 [Rec’d Dec. 14] From the Peruvian Minister. Memorandum of November 17 prepared by the Peruvian Government in reference to the protection of the foreign commerce of the neutral countries of America from damages caused by the war. 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

300 Dec. 14 [Rec’d Dec. 16] From the Venezuelan Minister. European conflict affects interests of all nations. Task of defining neutral rights should be entrusted to a congress of neutrals. United States, on account of her exceptional relations with other nations, should take initiative in calling the meeting. Memorandum regarding rights of neutrals transmitted from the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 694]

40 Dec. 18 To the Minister in Peru. Acknowledges receipt of correspondence and memorandum re urgency Of agreement amongst neutrals tending to reduce injury to commerce in the war. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Peruvian Minister. Acknowledges receipt of correspondence and memorandum on subject of injury to neutral commerce in the war. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

Dec. 22 To the Chilean Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of communication re establishment of neutral zone in Atlantic from American coast to meridian of Cape Verde. Pan-American Neutrality Commission will consider the suggestion. 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698]

Dec. 29 To the Peruvian Minister. Acknowledges receipt of note transmitting copy of memorandum of Foreign Office. 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698]

380 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Jan. 7, 1915] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. Government officials jubilant over fact that Pan American Union accepts suggestion of Naón. Business men anticipate no more trouble, as German ships in South Atlantic have been destroyed. 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

5 Jan. 13, 1915 To the Venezuelan Minister. Acknowledges receipt of note enclosing memorandum suggesting a congress of neutrals. It will receive the consideration of the Government. 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Mine Laying and the Establishment of Maritime Danger Zones

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 1 From the Netherland Chargé d’Affaires. North Sea and certain passes have been obstructed with submarine mines. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]

Aug. 6 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Danish Minister. Notification that waters around Denmark have been mined. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Swedish Minister. Notification that mines have been planted in Swedish territorial waters. Navigators notified not to visit Sweden without pilot. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Foreign Office announces that German ports are strewn with mines. [The exact terms of this note, not received until 1920, state that ports of departure of fleets hostile to Germany have been mined.] 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

Aug. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has received information that belligerent powers are scattering contact mines in Channel. Inquire whether there is any foundation for this statement. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

333 Aug. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Admiralty gives assurance that mines will not be laid in navigable waters except at entrance to ports to be defended. German mine-laying ship, destroyed by Amphion, was laying a line of contact mines to extend across North Sea. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Communicates telegram from Foreign Office warning shippers that Germans are scattering mines indiscriminately about the North Sea. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708]

Aug. 13 To the British Chargé d’Affaires. States that if Germans are scattering mines indiscriminately in the North Sea, as reported, he hopes that England will not retaliate in like manner. Is loath to believe that a signatory of the Hague convention will disregard its treaty obligation in such manner. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708]

Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Danish Minister. Notification that Danish waters have been more extensively mined. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709]

Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 15] From the British Embassy. Encloses telegram from British Government stating that British will endeavor to keep a channel open for trade subject to naval exigencies. 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711]

Aug. 19 [Rec’d Aug. 20] From the British Chargé d’Affairs. Grey’s reply to protest of United States against indiscriminate mine laying: Not breach of Hague convention. Unless England adopts the methods of Germany, British commerce will be impeded while Germany receives immunity. 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711]

Aug. 20 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey seemed puzzled and surprised at our wish to exact from him a pledge which would give Germans license to use mines and bind English not to use them. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]

Aug. 23 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the British Ambassador. Telegram from Foreign Office stages Admiralty has not yet laid any mines but is endeavoring to keep sea routes open for peaceful commerce. S. S. Maryland and Broberg have been destroyed in North Sea by mines scattered by Germans. These contact mines do not become harmless after a certain number of hours. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]

Aug. 30 [Rec’d Aug. 31] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Communicates telegram from Grey: Iceland trawler struck by mine 25 miles off the Tyne. Numbers of German trawlers appear to have been engaged in laying these mines. 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

Sept. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 12] From the German Ambassador. No blockade of German ports. Assertions that North Sea is infested with German mines incorrect. Directions given for safe route; pilots supplied for certain ports. 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct. 3] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). German mine laying and submarine activity forces England to adopt countermeasures. Mine laying has been ordered in certain specified areas, and shipping warned. 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

476 Sept. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 12] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Encloses protest of September 26 of the British Government against methods of German Navy in laying mines in North Sea. 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

704 Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Ambassador in France. Encloses note of October 6 from Minister of Foreign Affairs with notification published in the Journal officiel that, automatic mines having been laid by Austria—Hungary in the Adriatic, France is obliged to take similar measures. Danger zone is explicitly pointed out for benefit of neutral shipping. 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

Oct. 28 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Announcement that mine field has been discovered off north coast of Ireland. Shipping warned. British ship bound for Montreal sunk; also Dutch ship. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]

961 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 3] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germans laid mine fields north of Ireland from ships flying neutral flags, directly in path of transatlantic liners. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]

375 Nov. 3 [Rec’d Nov. 4] From the British Ambassador. Communicates recommendation of Grey that certain routes be followed for ships trading with Norway, Denmark, and Holland. North Sea must be considered a military area Shipping should take English Channel according to explicit directions laid down. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]

Nov. 4 [Rec’d Nov. 5] From the Minister in Norway (telegram). Norwegian-American Line can not take English Channel, owing to low water. Norwegian Government has requested British to change route. 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]

Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Russia (telegram). Russian Government has notified Embassy of closing of ports and waters around Russia by placing of mines. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Nov. 6 From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Swedish Government protests against closing of North Sea. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Nov. 6 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). Norwegian Government protests against closing of North Sea. Norway depends upon trade with United States. Requests United States to protest. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Nov. 9 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Government has consented to allow steamers of Norwegian-American Line to take northern route. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

1 Nov. 10 To the Minister in Norway (telegram). United States will not protest to Great Britain against closing of North Sea. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

30 Nov. 10 [Rec’d Nov. 25] From the Minister in Sweden. Encloses circular issued by Swedish insurance war-risk insurance commissioners, permitting insured vessels to take either route. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

628 Nov. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to report whether British Government has mined River Tyne and Firth of Forth. 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730]

261 Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Ambassador in Germany. Transmits, copy of German reply of November 7 to protest of the British against laying of mines. Germany denies violation of Hague conventions. German mines laid by German warships. Neutral trade routes not blockaded. Counter-protests against blockading of North Sea to neutral trade by British. 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730]

667 Dec. 2 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). War Risk Bureau anxious for reply. Steamers delayed, awaiting information as to whether River Tyne and Firth of Forth have been mined. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

1194 Dec. 4 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits British instructions of November 21 regarding safe trade routes and the supplying of pilots in English waters. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

271 Nov. 17 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Germany. Transmits communication of November 14 from the Foreign Office relative to regulations for navigation in the German bay of the North Sea. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the Consul General at London. Transmits Admiralty circular of November 30 regarding navigation on the North Sea and English Channel, with instructions concerning mines, general and particular passages, pilots, blockaded ports, etc. 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734]

Undated [Rec’d Jan. 15, 1915] From the Swedish Minister. Swedish Government has issued a proclamation refusing to recognize the right of belligerents to restrict navigation of neutrals on high seas by mining commercial routes, and by compelling them to call at certain ports. Notes sent to England, France, Russia, and Germany. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Jan. 22, 1915 To the Swedish Minister. United States awaits text of Swedish proclamation; will give matter earnest consideration. 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]

The Transfer of Merchant Ships from Belligerent Flags to the American Flag for the Repatriation of Americans Abroad

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 1 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Thousands of Americans unable to secure passage home. Suggests that foreign-built ships owned by Americans be allowed to fly American flag to transport these citizens to United States. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Aug. _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits statement from Judge Gary: 30,000 Americans desirous of returning home. Lack of food, etc., make it imperative that they leave. American Government urged to secure facilities for immediate transportation. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

283 Aug. 6 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits resolutions from the American relief committee requesting European Governments to refrain from interference with vessels transporting American citizens to United States. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ascertain if British Government is willing to agree not to molest vessels bringing American citizens home. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Germany, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and the Minister in Belgium. Instructions to ascertain if French Government will agree not to molest vessels bringing American citizens home. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

296 Aug. 7 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits telegram from G. H. Adhere asking that Embassy be authorized to pass S. S. Viking under United States flag to carry 400 Americans to New York. Requests explicit instructions. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

Aug. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Under United States law Viking can not be registered as American ship. Department considering asking belligerent governments to permit unmolested voyage for Americans returning home. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 10] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Belgian Government sees no occasion for making agreement with other powers to refrain from interference with Americans returning home. This covered in Hague convention. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

Aug. 9 [Rec’d Aug. 10] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Government agrees to exemption from military law of vessels conveying Americans home, provided other belligerents also exempt than. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Aug. 10 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Government will not interfere with neutral vessels chartered by citizens’ committee. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 13] From the Consul General at Genoa (telegram). German liners Moltke and König Albert in Italian port. Suggests Department arrange with England for them to carry stranded Americans home. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Aug. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis nudandis Ambassador in France. Instructions to ascertain if Americans stranded in Genoa can be transported home on Moltke and König Albert unmolested. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government agrees to refrain from interfering with American transports on condition that other belligerents do likewise. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

Aug. 15 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram).
The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in France. Department considering chartering German vessels now in American ports for transporting stranded Americans home. Instructions to ascertain if British are Willing to extend every facility to such ships. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and the Minister in Belgium (telegram). United States regards vessels chartered for the purpose of returning stranded Americans home as neutralized under the Hague convention. Instructions to ask Government for declaration to this effect. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Hamburg-American Line and German Government have agreed that vessel in New York port may sail around north of Scotland for Germany to take Americans home. Department requested to secure consent of other belligerent powers. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to ascertain if German Government is willing that other German vessels transport Americans from other European ports. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754]

Aug. 15 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Instructions to ascertain if German ships, chartered for the sole purpose of transporting Americans to the United States, may enter Italian ports for this purpose. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754]

Aug. 16 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French suspicious of German ships and prefer to wait until England takes the lead regarding repatriation of Americans. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re neutralization of German vessels in New York Harbor, France would oppose it. In Declaration of London Germany refused to accept the principle. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]

404 Aug. 18 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Declaration of London forbids sale of belligerent ship in neutral port for use under neutral flag. Grey saw no objection to the trip to repatriate Americans, provided ships were manned by American officers and returned to former place and condition. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary. British see no objections to German vessels in American ports being used to bring back stranded Americans. Instructions to ask if French are willing to agree with British view. 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 21] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government objects to using German ships to repatriate American citizens; does not interpret “philanthropic mission” according to Hague convention to include such an act. French, English, or any neutral ships suggested instead. French Government offers to transport Americans. 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 22] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ French do not approve of using German ships to transport Americans. Advice to Department to avoid use of German ships if possible. 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 759 and Doc. 760]

Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government will recognize as neutralized the ships chartered to repatriate Americans, provided other belligerents do the same, and provided ships return to same status. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

Aug. 25 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Department considering chartering of German ships for return of stranded Americans. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

503 Aug. 28 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government will consent to use of German ships for repatriation of Americans, provided these ships carry no cargo from Italy and that they be interned for the remainder of the war. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

The Transfer of Merchant Ships from Belligerent Flags to the American Flag for General Commercial Purposes

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 4 From the French Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). French Government refuses to recognize the legality of a bill pending before Congress to Facilitate the acquisition by American nationals of foreign-owned vessels. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Aug. 7 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Placing of American-owned but foreign-built vessels under American flag regarded in France as likely to assist Germany. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Aug. 8 To the Ambassador in France. The bill before Congress does not cover the subject of transfer of ships of belligerents to citizens of United States. This will be governed by principles of international law. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Aug. 18. From William H. Libby. The transfer of an enemy merchant vessel to a neutral flag in time of war is valid, provided that the sale is made in good faith. Assent of belligerents desired to exemption from seizure of vessels transferred to American flag which were actually owned in this country before the war. Entire capital stock of the D. A. P. G. owned by Standard Oil Company. 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 766 and Doc. 767]

Aug. 28 To William H. Libby. Re transfer of American-owned ships to the American flag. 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 768]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Government informed that Austro-Hungarian shipowners are trying to get certificates of Federal nationality for vessels sold to American citizens. Such flag transfers could not be recognized by French Government. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771]

Sept. 2 To the French Ambassador. Acknowledges letter of August 20, 1914, re certificates of ownership of American vessels. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771]

442 Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey has discussed question of purchase of German ships in American ports. Money paid for them would aid Germans in building new ships. If purchased and set afloat they might lend aid to Germany. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771]

Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the French Ambassador. Purchase of German ships by United States during war contrary to Declaration of London. Command of sea has enabled English and French to make these vessels worse than useless to Germany. This disadvantage United States would turn to advantage and profit for Germany. 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

12 Sept. 11 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Re American purchase of German ships. Russians believe Americans have pro-German sympathies. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

Sept. 14 To the Ambassador in Brazil (telegram). Steamer Robert Dollar given provisional certificate of registration as American vessel, by American Consul General at Rio de Janeiro. Reported that vessel denied clearance by Brazilian authorities. Instructions to investigate and request release. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

Sept. 16 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Action of Brazilian authorities sets aside that of American authorities and assumes position of a belligerent captor toward steamer Robert Dollar . 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Consul General at Rio de Janeiro. (telegram). British Legation awaiting instructions from London before closing register of steamer Robert Dollar . 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778]

Sept. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Provisional register delivered to steamer Robert Dollar , and order to sail given. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778]

Sept. 26 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. British Consuls instructed not to raise difficulties in case of transfer of ships to American flag if already owned by Americans. Understanding is that ships will not trade with Germany. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778]

Oct. 2 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. Re transfer to American flag of vessels already owned by Americans. Objections taken to instructions not to trade with Germany. This an interference with legitimate rights of neutrals. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the French Ambassador. Acknowledges note of protest against purchase by United States of German ships. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780]

Oct. 5 To the Ambassador in Great Britian (telegram). Instructions to direct attention of proper authorities to subject of release of Robert Dollar , as suggested by British Ambassador at Washington in message to his Government. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782]

Oct. 6 [Rec’d Oct. 7] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Expression “instructions not to trade with Germany” misconstrued; explanations given. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782]

461 Sept. 23 Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Brazil. Delay in sailing of steamer Robert Dollar due to misunderstanding of instructions caused by delayed telegram. Full explanation given. 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783]

Oct. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 19] From the British Ambassador. Memorandum concerning German oil steamships Chatham and Standard sold to Standard Oil Company. British Government entitled to seize these ships. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Oct. 22 To the British Ambassador. Memorandum re Chatham and Standard. These ships owned and controlled by American capital, a question of change of registry, not of ownership. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the French Ambassador. French Government protests against transfer of German ships Chatham and Standard to American flag as being contrary to Declaration of London. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

362 Oct. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the British Ambassador. Encloses letter of October 10 from British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador, placing blame for detention of Robert Dollar upon Brazilian authorities. 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

Nov. 7 To the French Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of note relative to transfer to American registry of German vessels Standard and Chatham. 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

1000 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Employment of British vessels transferred to American registry in trade between Germany and America not valid per se, but Government ready to waive invalidity, of such change in case of trade exclusively between Germany and United States. 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Censorship of the Cables by Belligerent Governments

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 5 From the Consul at St. Pierre (telegram). Requests authorization to protest Western Union telegraph cables as neutral property. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

Aug. 11 To the Consul at St Pierre (telegram). Submarine telegraphic cables outside territorial waters of neutrals may be cut by belligerents. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

Aug. 5 From the Kirby Lumber Company (telegram). Re code telegraph messages between the United States and Porto Rico. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

Aug. 7 To the Kirby Lumber Company. Re code telegraph messages between the United States and Porto Rico. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

Aug. 11 From the Western Union Telegraph Company. Department asked to request of British Government a more reasonable attitude with respect to censorship of cable messages. Unnecessary requirements cause double the work at a time when the demands upon cables exceed their capacity. 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 794]

Sept. 1 To the Kirby Lumber Company. Code and other telegraph messages accepted for Porto Rico. 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

Aug. 15 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to request of British Government a more reasonable attitude with respect to censorship of cable messages. Capacity of company cut 50 per cent by unreasonable demands as to signatures and addresses, and cost to sender increased. 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

Aug. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to make representations to British Government looking to removal of embargo on repetition requests in international telegraph service. 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798]

493 Aug. 27 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Department asked to inform all foreign missions that British censorship regulations require all telegraph messages to go open unless sent by diplomatic missions to Government at Washington, which messages may be in code. 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798]

25 Sept. 2 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to bring to attention of Foreign Office the repeated request of Western Union Telegraph Company to still further modify censorship regulations With reference to code addresses and signatures. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800]

558 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Difficulties in telegraphic service now adjusted. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800]

419 Aug. 24 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Encloses note of August 23 from the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs stating that the Government is unable to modify censorship regulations of telegraph messages to the extent desired. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802]

66 Sept. 5 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ask if restrictions on cipher messages between business firms would be removed if copy of the code is deposited with British censor. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802]

701 Sept. 19 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Foreign Office regrets delay of telegrams. Instructions given to interfere as little as possible with genuine business. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

210 Sept. 26 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Protests against hardships endured by many commercial houses on account of suppression of cable messages between the United States and neutral countries. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

450 Sept. 16 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. In a note of September 15, Foreign Office acknowledges appeal of Western Union Telegraph Company and promises to give it attention. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

229 Oct. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Are full address and signature still necessary on Department’s telegrams to London and beyond? 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807]

Oct. 2 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). No change in censorship regulations. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807]

Oct. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey and chief censor agree to avoid undue interference with telegrams between the United States and neutral countries. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

269 Oct. 6 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Telegram from American Minister in Peking states that United States commander of China expedition reports that official telegrams are held up. Requests that orders be given Hongkong authorities to avoid repetition of this. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

826 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Commercial telegrams passed unless delivery entails some transaction detrimental to Great Britain. To notify sender of non-delivery would be to defeat object of censorship. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

313 Oct. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to insist upon notification to sender of non-delivery of message. Failure to do this inflicts great hardship and unnecessary expense. 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

892 Oct. 23 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey states that code messages from Tilson and Rowell to Philippines detained at Hongkong. These took unusual route. British Government expresses regret and promises to facilitate transmissions of such messages. 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

405 Oct. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Confirmation desired of advices that cable addresses and short signatures may be used 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

945 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Foreign Office states that private individuals telegraphing to England are allowed to use registered cable addresses. Signatures may be abbreviated. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

944 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey states that as a rule senders are not informed of stoppage of messages. Same rule applies to British and American senders. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

Nov. 5 From the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Director Swiss People’s Bank complains that all telegrams relating to money transfers and grain orders are stopped. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

50 Nov. 6 To the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Interference with cable messages should be taken up with belligerents. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

Nov. 9 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Harry S. Cavanaugh, representing American Trade Agency, Rome, protests stoppage of cable communication with American firms. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

81 Nov. 10 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Grey has promised to facilitate transmission of commercial messages sent in plain language and agrees that code addresses may be used where registered. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

Nov. 11 From the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Business telegrams between Switzerland and United States still held up. Banks find it impossible to transact financial and commercial business with United States. Joint representations to London and Paris proposed by Switzerland. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

523 Nov. 12 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to present to Foreign Office protests of Danish firms conducting business with American houses, as English censorship of commercial cables is ruining business. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 18] From the President of the Swiss Confederation to the Swiss Legation in Washington (telegram). Protests against suppression of telegrams. Proposal that United States and Switzerland take common steps in England and France to secure redress. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

Nov. 20 To the Swiss Legation. Re censorship of commercial cable messages between United States and Switzerland. Department has instructed American Ambassadors in London and Paris to cooperate with Swiss Ministers in those capitals in every way possible. 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, and Doc. 824]

582 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Daily increase in number of protests against British suppression of commercial telegrams, both in United States and neutral countries in Europe. Instructions to cooperate with Swiss Minister in protesting rigors of censorship. 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, and Doc. 824]

286 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to cooperate with Swiss Minister in protesting rigors of censorship of commercial telegrams. 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

299 Nov. 22 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Reports that French Government authorizes telegrams in code over certain lines. Specific directions given. 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

1138 Nov. 25 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Joint protests to Grey regarding suppression of commercial telegrams between United States and Switzerland; also between United States and Denmark. Protests referred to Prime Minister. 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827]

Nov. 27 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Continued complaints that commercial telegrams to American companies are undelivered. Business much disturbed. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

95 Dec. 2 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Ambassador in Italy states that his Government and French Government are taking up matter of censoring commercial telegrams. American cooperation requested. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

664 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmission of telegram from Madrid Embassy, requesting relief from censorship interference with messages regarding importations of cotton to Spain. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

1183 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey asks for special instances of difficulties in censorship of cable messages; assures us that messages are stopped only for good reasons. 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]

678 Dec. 3 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Specific instances useless in settling general question of censorship of cables; however, protest; forwarded from Western Union stating that French had made arrangements for facilitating communications, and claiming that British seem to discriminate against American cables. Instructions to make further representations to Foreign Office. 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]

679 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Galveston Cotton, Exchange claims interference of cables is hampering cotton trade. Instructions to bring this to attention of Foreign Office. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

995 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Messages sent from neutral countries to New Orleans and Memphis concerning shipments of cotton not delivered. Government urged to take steps to secure unhampered transmission of messages. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

688 Dec. 5 To, the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits a specific instance of cable interference for attention of British authorities: Undelivered messages to Galveston Cotton Exchange. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

356 Dec. 7 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to bring to atten of Foreign Office that commercial and official messages to Rome are intercepted by French. Italians make similar complaint. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Certain telegrams have been stopped because thought to have concealed cipher messages. Discussion of subject promised. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

Dec. 10 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Continued complaints received of delay in cable messages: One from Royal Servian Commission, regarding supplies from New York amounting to $5,000,000; another from American Vice Consul, Rome, about 10,000 tons wheat. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]

361 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to bring to attention of Foreign Office that telegrams to Italy via French cables have not been delivered. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]

Dec. 11 From the Chamber of Commerce of the United States. Re cable messages. In view of uncertainty of service, Department is requested to propose to British Government that sender be notified when message is stopped. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]

739 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Confusion and expense caused by interruption of cable service. Influence on financial conditions in cotton States disastrous. Asks permission to use cotton codes. 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 840 and Doc. 841]

1245 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 12] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram) Has had a conference with Grey and the head censor, who deny alleged discrimination against America, and disclaim knowledge of interference with certain telegraph messages. Telegraphic route must be known before specific messages can be investigated. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]

114 Dec. l4 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy asks our, aid to obtain assurances from England that commercial telegraph messages to America will not be held up. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

116 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Complaints received regarding delivery of telegraph messages; investigate. If Italian censors are detaining messages, protest to Foreign Office. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

763 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Burdens of nations not at war growing greater. Aggrieved firms presenting their claims to members of Congress. Instructions to bring matter to attention of Foreign Office. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

771 Dec. 16 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Quotes telegram from Threefoot Bros. & Co., of Meridian, Miss., regarding messages in advance of large shipments of cotton. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Dec. 17 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government announces that cotton code may be used. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Dec. 17 [Rec’d Dec. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Subject of censored telegrams taken up with Danish and Swiss ministers and Italian and Spanish Ambassadors. Censor refuses to notify sender of interrupted messages, saying it would defeat the object of censorship. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

1291 Dec. 18 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits memorandum from the British Government showing regulations regarding the use of codes in foreign telegrams. 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849]

1309 Dec. 21 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Chief censor sending daily report of stopped telegrams. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

804 Dec. 22 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Business firms in Manila suffering serious loss owing to delayed telegrams. Compañia General de Tobacos Filipinos desires to use code signature. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

808 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Hopes there will be good results from discussion of censorship of telegraph messages. Suggests that British arrange with French for better facilities for cabled communications. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

1318 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Messages from United States stopped because they said that a British ship had been sunk, which was untrue. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

1330 Dec. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Government prefers that subject of delayed telegrams in France be taken up direct with French, and not through British authorities. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 24] From the British Ambassador. Fifty thousand commercial telegrams pass through censor’s hands per day, a few of which are delayed or stopped. Reasons for stopping messages will be given. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

1394 Jan. 4, 1915 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). With regard to request of Compañia General de Tabacos Filipinos for permission to use code signature in telegrams exchange with Barcelona, British Government can not grant request. 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Censorship of the Mails by Belligerent Governments: Ordinary Mail

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 7 From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. No cabling nor direct mail shipping possible between United States on one side and Austria-Hungary and Germany on other. Request that postmaster address mail “via Rotterdam” and intrust to Dutch ships. 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Aug. 10 To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Postmaster General informs Department that mail is dispatched by the steamship line which will most expeditiously deliver it at its destination. 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, and Doc. 859]

Aug. 14 From the Postmaster General. Mail to foreign countries has been going forward by most expeditious steamers and routes available. Mail for Germany and Austria-Hungary going three or four times a week. No mail left on hand in New York. 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, and Doc. 859]

162 Sept. 21 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to investigate report that mail on Noordam was seized or held up by British. 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861]

Sept. 25 To the British Ambassador. The same to the French Ambassador. American citizens claim letters to friends in Germany have not reached their destination. Request that some course be taken to prevent this delay or loss of mail. 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861]

Sept. 28 [Rec’d Sept. 30] From the French Ambassador. Regrets that American letters have not reached Germany. Such mail should be sent on Dutch steamers. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

Oct. 4 [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Mail for Germany returned as undeliverable; postal communication suspended. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

821 Oct. 12 From the Ambassador in Great Britain. (telegram). United States mail on board Noordam not interfered with by British officials. Request for specimen of envelope opened. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

Dec. 5 To the Editor of The Fatherland. Mail sent on neutral vessels unsealed should reach its destination. Mail sent to Germany via England or France liable to delay. 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866]

Censorship of the Mails by Belligerent Governments: Diplomatic and Consular Mail

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

467 Sept. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits note from the American Minister in the Netherlands requesting information regarding the regulations and authorization under which British officials are opening the mail of the American Consular Service, some under official seal. 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866]

470 Sept. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Sealed letter from Germany to Hull, England, opened and found to contain directions for sending mail to Germany through United States consular mail. Announcement in American Bulletin to this effect. British object to forwarding mail “under cover of United States representatives.” Enclosure 1: Protest of September 18 from United States Minister in the Netherlands against opening official mail. Enclosure 2: Protest of September 19 from Consul at Sheffield against opening consular mail. 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 867]

866 Oct. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey has learned that arrangements are in progress by which general correspondence with Germany shall pass through American Consulate General at Rotterdam. Requests that this be stopped. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

378 Oct. 22 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to report any opening of United States official mail in pouches under seal. This not approved by our Government. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Oct. 23 To the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Instructions to report upon nature and number of telegrams passing office and upon arrangements being made to send commercial correspondence to and from Germany. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 24] From the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Requests instructions regarding transmission of commercial correspondence of belligerent countries through consular offices. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

Oct. 29 To the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Consulate should not be used in transmission of commercial telegrams between belligerent countries. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

938 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Requests Department to instruct Ambassadors at Berlin and Vienna to discontinue sending private mail through official channels. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

Nov. 1 From the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Permission asked to transmit commercial correspondence from belligerent countries to America. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

Nov. 2 To the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Instructions not to forward commercial mail. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

15 Nov. 10 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Quotes telegram from Athens stating Turkish post office refused official mail under seal and demanded that it be opened for inspection. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

22 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Arrangements made with Minister of War for forwarding official correspondence in sealed envelopes. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

837 Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 15] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany requires consular officers of neutral states to leave correspondence to foreign countries unsealed. Official correspondence may be sent in Embassy pouches. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

281 Nov. 14 [Rec’d Nov. 15] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram) Austro-Hungarian Government desires that no unofficial correspondence leave Austria-Hungary without passing censor and no private correspondence be sent through diplomatic or consular channels. The Consul General at Budapest protests opening of his official correspondence. Suggests issuance of instructions on the subject. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

656 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Approves his action in calling attention of consular officers to service regulations. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

305 Nov. 25 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, Germany, France, Japan, Turkey, and the Minister in Servia; on December 4, to the Ambassador in Russia. Suggestions for establishing uniform regulations for transmission of American official correspondence in belligerent countries. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

334 Dec. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 9] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary agrees to inviolability of diplomatic and consular correspondence. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

146 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Russia (telegram). Exemption from censure of diplomatic and consular correspondence guaranteed by Foreign Office. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

Dec. 24 From the Minister in Servia (telegram). Servian Government agrees to Regulations respecting sealed official correspondence. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

PART III: NEUTRAL DUTIES

Proclamations of Neutrality—The President’s Appeal to The People of the United States

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

1271 Aug. 4 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Austria-Hungary and Servia, between Germany and Russia, and between Germany and France. 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

Aug. 19 From the President of the United States. An appeal to citizens of the United States, requesting their assistance in maintaining neutrality during the European war. 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886]

1287 Nov. 13 By the President of the United States. Proclamation setting forth rules and regulations for the use of the Panama Canal by vessels of belligerents and the maintenance of neutrality in the Canal Zone. Annex: Text of an agreement between the United States and Panama of October 10, 1914. 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886]

Enlistments in Belligerent Forces—The Problem of Reservists

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Acting Secretary of Commerce. Transmits copy of telegram sent to collector of customs, New York, re vessels carrying supposed reservists. 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Protests against reported decision of United States Government that all that could be utilized for the army, either men or supplies, will be considered as contraband. Such policy would be in violation of neutrality and would result in economic dangers. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890]

1367 Aug. 13 To the French Chargé d’Affaires. This country will not unnecessarily restrict commerce of its citizens with countries at war. Transmits instructions to collectors of customs; also President’s proclamation, in which it is shown that there is no resistance to reservists in army of any belligerent wishing to leave this country for military service. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890]

Aug. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 23] From the Ambassador in Japan. Transmits letter from the General Agent of the Great Northern Steamship Company asking if it would be an unneutral act to carry Austrian reservists from Shanghai to the United States, and reply thereto. 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891]

Sept. 24 To the Ambassador in Japan. Approves advice given steamship companies against transporting reservists of belligerent armies. 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892]

Sept. 23 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the German Ambassador. Riley E. Scott, an ex-Lieutenant in United States Army, has offered his services to France or her allies for the purpose of dropping bombs from aeroplanes. 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 893]

17-X Sept. 28 [Rec’d Sept. 30] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Servian Sokols of United States belong to Austro–Hungarian Monarchy. These have been invited by Servian Consul Austro–Hungarian Army, a violation of neutrality. United States Government is asked to take steps to prevent it. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895]

Oct. 6 To the German Ambassador. The bomb dropper who tendered his services to France would be acting contrary to the wishes of the President but would not be violating the neutrality laws. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (telegram). British authorities in Jamaica ask that vessels under the American flag carry no Germans or Austrians liable to military duty, thus avoiding need for search. 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896]

Oct. 7 To the Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (telegram). American vessels are under no duty to refuse to ship belligerent seamen or citizens of belligerent countries. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

The Transit of Reservists from Canada Across United States Territory

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 12] From the Consul General at Vancouver (telegram). Requests instructions as to whether military reservists are permitted transit through United States. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

Aug. 13 To the Consul General at Vancouver (telegram). Passage through United States of individual reservists is not prohibited; organized and armed forces not entitled to such transit. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Requests that authorization be given Commissioner of Immigration at Montreal to permit French reservists to proceed individually to New York to take ship abroad. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Aug. 18 To the Belgian Minister (telegram). Large number Belgian reservists desire to return to their country through the United States. Asks if Minister wishes the Department to make arrangements for their passage. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Aug. 27 From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Requests permission for Russians to enter New York in transit to Archangel. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Aug. 28 To the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Instructions given immigration authorities on Canadian border to allow admission of Russians to New York in transit to Archangel. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

1376 Sept. 4 To the French Ambassador. Announces removal of restrictions preventing French reservists in Canada from entering United States in transit to mother country. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

Sept. 18 To the Belgian Minister. Arrangements made for Belgian reservists to pass from Montreal through United States to take steamer. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

334 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sep t. 26] From the British Ambassador. Requests permission for British Army reservists in Canada to pass through United States in order to embark for Great Britain. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

Oct. 3 To the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States. Has granted permission for passage through United States of reservists who are returning to their respective countries, provided this does not amount to military enterprise on United States territory. Each Government must give assurance that its citizens will not become public charges in this country. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907]

Oct. 10 [Rec’d Oct. 12] From the French Ambassador. French Government accepts conditions imposed for passage of its citizens through United States. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910]

Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 15] From the Austro–Hungarian Ambassador. Canadian Government takes precautions to prevent Austrians and Hungarians from leaving Canada; therefore facilities for passage through United States unnecessary. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910]

Oct. 27 [Rec’d Oct. 28] From the British Ambassador. Gives assurances that any British reservists who may become public charges in United States will be permitted to return to Canada. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910]

Nov. 17 [Rec’d Nov. 18] From the German Ambassador. Germany cannot avail itself of America’s offer to permit reservists to pass through ports, as Britain has withdrawn promise not to seize persons on neutral vessels who are liable to military service. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

551 Nov. 19 To the British Ambassador. British Government required to furnish guarantee that reservists en route through United States will depart without expense to the country. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Dec. 4 To the British Ambassador. Instructions have been sent to the Commissioner of Immigration at Montreal permitting reservists of Great Britain to pass through United States en route to the United Kingdom. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

The Sale and Transportation of Contraband Goods

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 6 From the Acting Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Requests instructions as to duties of customs and other officers to prevent exportation of contraband. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

Aug. 7 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). It is not unlawful to export contraband of war, but shippers take the risk of its seizure on high seas. 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916]

Sept. 3 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Transmits telegrams requesting shipment of guns with ammunition through Alaska to Vancouver, unaccompanied by troops. Requests instructions. 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916]

Sept. 5 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Permission to ship war munitions and equipment through Alaska refused. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]

Sept. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the German Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Attention called to purchase in the United States of horses by England, and munitions of war by Japan and Russia. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]

Sept. 16 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador. Nothing can be done to prevent traffic in contraband of war under neutrality laws or treaties. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920]

Oct. 15 From the Secretary of State. Public circular regarding neutrality and trade in contraband. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920]

Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the German Ambassador. French and Russian armies are arranging to purchase rifles in the United States. Requests that Government intervene. 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 920 and Doc. 921]

J. No. A2116 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 12] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Calls attention to an announcement in the Daily Consular and Trade Reports of the Department of Commerce, of opportunities to deliver war material to the English Government. Inquires as to whether activities of go-betweens also include delivery of war materials. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923]

1121 Nov. 12 To the German Ambassador. In view of situation in Mexico and of European war, Secretary of War has absolutely discontinued sale of rifles to any one. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923]

Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System. Requests information as to whether railroad can handle contraband goods back and forth through Canada and United States. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925]

Nov. 16 To the General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System. No objection to shipments passing through United States if in ordinary course of trade and not under military or Government escort. 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925]

Dec. 1 From the Counselor for the Department of State to James H. Hayden. Certain American companies are alleged to have entered into contracts with a belligerent government to furnish submarines or component parts. Government will take legal means to prevent exportation, as an unneutral act. 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926]

1005 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram) The sale by Americans of munitions of war to Allies is the cause of bitter feeling in Germany. Boycotting of American goods already beginning. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

708 Dec. 7 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Fore River Company planned to build, submarines for one of Allies. Mr. Schwab laid plans of company before Department. President declared it a violation of the spirit of neutrality. Company, then announced it would not build submarines for any belligerent. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

1247 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey denounces bill introduced in Senate to prohibit exportation of munitions of war to belligerents, and calls this unneutral act. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

Dec. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Mr. Hitchcock did not consult the President nor the Department in regard to the resolution to prohibit sale of munitions of war to belligerents. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931]

1184 Jan. 15, 1915 To the German Ambassador. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce is not at the disposal of agents of foreign governments; object of Consular and Trade Reports is to advise Americans of trade opportunities. The Government is not assisting in sale of contraband, but observing strict neutrality. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931]

Loans to Belligerent Governments

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 15 To J. P. Morgan & Co. (telegram). No reason why loans should not be made to neutral nations, but loan to a nation at war is inconsistent with true spirit of neutrality. 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Sept. 9 From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Servian Sokol in Chicago invites collections for Servian war fund. Request that authorities prevent this breach of neutrality. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934]

X—13/xiv Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 29] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Attention is again called to Servian appeals in Chicago for contributions to Servian war fund. Requests that propaganda be stopped and money refunded. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934]

118 Oct. 13 To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Re appeals in Chicago for contributions to Servian war fund. Department of Justice, after careful consideration, finds nothing which constitutes violation of neutrality. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

124 Nov. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re Servian propaganda in Chicago. Decision rendered by Attorney General in which he finds no violation of penal laws in general nor of neutrality laws. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

Treatment of Belligerent Warships, Their Crews and Tenders, in American Ports—Internment of the “Geier” and “Locksun”

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Oct. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 29] From the Japanese Ambassador. Transmits telegram of October 27 from Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs, stating German man-of-war Geier, lingering in Honolulu port, ostensibly for repairs, is constant menace to Japanese merchant vessels. Requests information regarding intended disposition of Geier. 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937]

369 Oct. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the British Ambassador. Protests against continued presence of Geier in a United States harbor. Locksun alleged to be supplying German warships with coal in Honolulu harbor. Grounds for detaining her under charges of false declaration of destination: 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939]

Oct. 30 To the German Ambassador. United States naval constructor reports Geier in bad condition and further time necessary to make her seaworthy. Government allows three weeks for repairs, at end of which, if still in port, she will be interned. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Japanese Ambassador. Notification that Geier will be interned on a certain fixed date if repairs are not completed by that: time. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, and Doc. 941]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Notification of Government’s intention to fix definite period for repairs to Geier, after which time, if unable to leave, she will be interned. Locksun detained for investigation. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, and Doc. 941]

Oct. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 31] From the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Embassy at Washington (telegram). Several members of Geier complement are suspected of having left Honolulu for San Francisco. The United States as neutral is under obligation to prevent their leaving the vessel for distant point. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 941 and Doc. 942]

Nov. 7 To the German Ambassador. Investigation shows Locksun to be a tender for the Geier. She will be interned in Honolulu if she does not leave immediately. 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944]

Nov. 11 To the Japanese Ambassador. Four members of Geier complement paroled in San Francisco. 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944]

Nov. 12 To the German, British, and Japanese Ambassadors. Reports interning of the Geier and Locksun in Honolulu. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

J. No. A2171 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 12] From the German Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Protests the internment of Locksun in Honolulu. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

A2190 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 12] From the German Ambassador. Protests the internment of officers of Geier. Cites instance of different treatment of British Major Robertson. Charges discrimination against Germany. Requests that officers and their orderlies be permitted to travel freely. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

Nov. 16 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador. Defense of action of United States in internment of Locksun. 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948]

A2453 Nov. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 23] From the German Ambassador. Protests internment of Locksun as a “part of warship” Geier. Case cited in which English warship was provisioned by the tug F. B. Dalzell. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950]

Nov. 27 To the German Ambassador. Gives basis for retention of Geier officers interned in San Francisco. This case not analogous to that of British Major Robertson. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950]

Dec. 1 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Further discussion of subject of internment of Locksun. Cites award of the Alabama Claims Commission, which seems to establish the principle for the treatment of tenders. Tug Dalzell American vessel and not subject to internment. 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 951]

Treatment of Armed Merchant Ships-The Problem of Conversion

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

252 Aug. 4 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. According to the treaty of Washington and Hague Convention No. XIII, a neutral government is bound to prohibit its citizens from fitting out a belligerent vessel for purposes of war, and to prevent departure of such vessel from its jurisdiction. Probable that Germany will attempt to use United States ports in this manner. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952]

254 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Kronprinz Wilhelm sailed from New York without passengers, having made preparations for war in United States waters. Similar preparations are being made by other German vessels. This is a breach of the laws of neutrality; asks Department to take steps to prevent it. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953]

Aug. 6 From the Acting Secretary of Commerce. Transmits copy of instructions sent to principal collectors of customs regarding permits for the clearance of foreign vessels. Special directions for New York office requiring careful inspection to prevent preparations for war on part of vessels while in that port. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

287 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain. German ships leaving American ports constantly, provisioned and armed to prey upon British commerce. British Government will make claims for full value of goods destroyed. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957]

Aug. 7 To the Ambassador in Great Britain(telegram). No German vessels have left American ports since declaration of war, so far as known to United States Government. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957]

304 Aug. 8 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government has been informed by Embassy at Washington that the United States observes efficient and complete neutrality in every respect. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957]

Aug. 10 From the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Commerce to Collectors of Customs. Explicit instructions for most rigid inspection and examination of vessels before clearance is given. 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958]

259 Aug. 9 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. British merchant vessels are armed for defense only. British merchant vessels can not be converted into men-of-war in foreign ports. Germans claim right of conversion on high seas; their vessels adapted for conversion should be interned in absence of binding assurances. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960]

264 Aug. 12 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Notice regarding armed merchantmen sent to other neutral countries. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960]

267 Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Calls attention to fact that Austria_Hungary is probably equipping merchantmen in United States waters for conversion into warships at sea. Similar notice sent to other neutral 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

Aug. 19 To the British Chargé d’Affaires. No precedent and no general practice of nations on point of conversion at sea. United States is not bound to assume attitude of insurer, and does not hold herself responsible for damage to British shipping. United States is as solicitous of its neutral duties as of its neutral rights. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

Aug. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Reply to the British claim of United States breach of neutrality: Affair of Kronprinz Wilhelm occurred before British declaration of war with Germany; other vessels mentioned have been under surveillance of authorities to prevent their leaving American waters. 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Acknowledges receipt of communication of August 9 re armed merchantmen.

289 Aug. 25 [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the British Ambassador. British armed merchantmen will frequently visit United States. Assurances given that they are armed solely for self-defense and will under no circumstances attack any vessel. 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966]

Aug. 29 To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of note of British Ambassador of August 25, giving assurances that armed merchantmen will not be used for offensive purposes. 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966]

Aug. 31 From the German Ambassador (telegram). Calls attention to the, fact that White Star liner remained in New York. Harbor 24 hours. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969]

Sept. 1 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Calls attention to fact that the British steamer Merion, armed with six cannons, stayed several days at Philadelphia, taking freight for Liverpool. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969]

Sept. 2 From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Denial that Adriatic carries troops. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969]

Sept. 3 To the German Ambassador (telegram). Department, satisfied that Adriatic is merchantman, has allowed clearance. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Sept. 4 To the German Ambassador (telegram). Department, satisfied that Merion is a merchant vessel, has advised clearance. Ammunition taken off and guns dismounted. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

302 Sept. 4 [Rec’d Sept. 51] From the British Ambassador. British Government protests United States policy of detaining armed merchantmen. Merion will land her guns; Adriatic sailed carrying passengers. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 10] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Data concerning passenger list and cargo of Adriatic give assurance of peaceful commercial voyage. 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974]

Sept. 9 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum citing precedents for arming of merchantmen for defense only; entitled to status of peaceful trading vessels. 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German merchant vessels with offensive armament continue to obtain supplies of coal from United States and to prey upon British shipping in Atlantic. British trade with United States thus jeopardized. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975]

315 Sept. 16 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Attention called to the fact that the Vaterland is ready to sail from New York with 17,000 tons coal on board, probably to be converted into an armed cruiser on the high seas. Requests investigation. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977]

Sept. 17 To the British Ambassador. Vaterland has 5,000 tons of coal and no cargo; has no intention of sailing soon. Attention of United States officers has been called to this vessel. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. Ships of Hamburg-American Line might be able to effect their departure from neutral ports unless there is a United States naval force on hand to prevent. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Ships in New York stationed for patrol duty. No German vessels are leaving the United States with enough cargo to excite suspicion. The Pisa has a large cargo coal and provisions, but apparently has no intention of sailing. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979]

Sept. 19 To the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States Encloses a statement of the general rules to be followed by this Government in dealing with cases involving the status of armed merchant vessels visiting American ports and with cases of merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent warships from American ports. 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 979 and Doc. 980]

500 Sept. 26 To the British Ambassador. Re the status of armed merchant vessels in neutral ports. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Oct. 8 From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury to Collectors of Customs. Re change in status of merchant vessel. Mere change of color to render her less visible will not change her status. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

515 Oct. 15 [Rec’d Oct. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Transmits protest of the Foreign Office against the American policy regarding armed merchantmen. No guarantee that arms carried for defense will not be used for offensive purposes. Armed merchantmen should be treated as warships. 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

Nov. 7 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Reply to German protest against policy regarding armed merchantmen. Belligerents asked to prevent their armed merchant vessels from entering United States ports. 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

Nov. 11 From the British Embassy. German liners in American ports are ready to sail; are to operate with fast German cruisers in Pacific against Allied forces. Charges that the United States is responsible for losses to shipping and trade which may ensue. 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 984 and Doc. 985]

Nov. 16 To the British Embassy. Regarding sailing of German liners from American ports, United States is maintaining customary vigilance. 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Treatment of Merchant Ships Supplying Belligerent Warships

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 11 From the Acting Secretary of the Treasury. Barbarossa is taking on board large quantities coal, and utensils apparently for transferring the coal at sea. Large quantity of fuel oil on lighters alongside. Requests instructions for customs officers. 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Aug. 17 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Assuming that Barbarossa is a private ship, Department has no grounds on facts stated for refusing clearance. 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Aug. 20 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Transmits telegram from the collector of Customs at San Francisco, stating that the plan of John Rothschild & Co. to deliver coal to cruiser Leipzig at sea fell through. The coal was delivered to German ship Mazatlan, which has applied for change to Mexican registry. Information received that Mazatlan will deliver coal to German cruiser. Requests instructions. 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Aug. 21 From the Collector of Customs at San Francisco to the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Acting German Consul offered written statement that coal on Mazatlan will be delivered in Guaymas. He denied that United States had jurisdiction thereafter. Large cargo of perishables on board. Clearance to be given unless otherwise instructed. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991]

Aug. 22 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Case of Mazatlan submitted to the Neutrality Board. It is required that German Consul give written assurances that coal is not to be delivered to any German warship that has received coal within last three months; any ship receiving this coal will be debarred from coaling in United States within next three months. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991]

Sept: 15 [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the French Ambassador. Calls attention to fact that three German steamers are loading large quantities coal in Manila. That port a center of indirect, replenishment for German warships. Requests United States to take measures to prevent this. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Sept. 19 Memorandum issued by the Secretary of State. Sets forth policy of United States regarding merchant vessels in her ports. Defines “base of operations for belligerent warships.” This Government is not under obligations to prevent shipments to other neutral ports which may be bases of supplies to belligerents. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Sept. 21 [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Vice Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (telegram) American steamer Berwind sailed from New York with coal cargo; master told to follow instructions of supercargo. Coal transferred to Cap Trafalgar and Eleanore Wörmann at sea. Arrived in Rio de Janeiro reporting engagement between the former and a British ship. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994]

Sept. 21 [Rec’d Sept. 23] From the French Ambassador. American steamer Riopasig sailed from Manila to Guam with cargo of coal. Thought to have resupplied a German warship. Such acts are contrary to neutrality. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

1388 Sept. 29 To the French Ambassador. American steamer Riopasig was seized while approaching the Philippines and held at Sandakan as prize of war. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Oct. 1 [Rec’d Oct. 2] From the British Embassy. The Alexandria, belonging to Kosmos Line and flying German flag, has been bought by the Northern and Southern Steamship Corporation, whose local manager is manager of the Kosmos Line, which operates steamers between Hamburg and San Francisco via South American ports. Thought Alexandria, changed to American registry, engaged in supplying coal to German cruisers. 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997]

1389 Oct. 5 To the French Ambassador. Elmshorn and Bechum have taken coal at Manila for first time during war. Officers specially vigilant so that Philippines will not be “center of indirect replenishment for German warships.” 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999]

Oct. 13 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Cargo of coal on the Mazatlan ultimately reached the Leipzig. Encloses telegram from Collector of Customs in San Francisco quoting written agreement of German acting Consul General that the coal would not be delivered to any German war vessel. Requests instructions. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999]

Oct. 17 To the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. Collector of Customs believes that contract of German Consul. General, re coal taken by Mazatlan, has been violated. 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000]

A1638/14 Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 15] From the German Ambassador. Steamer Alexandria, sold to American company, has applied for American registration and clearance. Neither has been granted. A guard has been placed on board to prevent ship’s leaving. Requests an investigation of action of authorities. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 1000 and Doc. 1001]

Oct. 15 From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. British Vice Consul at Newport News asks that clearance not be given Italian S. S. Amistà loaded with coal. Requests instructions. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003]

Oct. 22 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Approves the instructions of the Treasury Department to clear the Amistà unless satisfactory evidence that proposed clearance is not bona fide. Matter has been taken up with the British Embassy. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003]

Oct. 20 [Rec’d Oct. 22] From the British Ambassador. Transmits communication of the British Consul General at San Francisco concerning the Alexandria, changed to United States registry under name of Sacramento. Has loaded cargo of coal and potatoes consigned to a German company in Valparaiso. A high price was paid for the coal, yet there is no market in Valparaiso. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005]

Oct. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Moore, San Francisco, supplying coal to German cruisers at Guaymas by means of steamers chartered by him and consigned to his agent at Guaymas. Railroad plant used for storing coal. Has already coaled the Leipzig in this way. Desires that this be brought to attention of the proper Government Department. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005]

Oct. 27 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. United States Government is not under obligations to prevent shipments of naval supplies to a neutral port, although this port may be used as a base for naval operations. Attention called to the report that a British ship with cargo of coal for Southern Pacific Railroad of Mexico was seized by the British and part of its coal removed. The ship was then sent to British Columbia, causing a loss to the company of $30,000. 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 1005 and Doc. 1006]

371 Oct. 31 From the British Ambassador. Representations have been made to customs officials that the Berwind-White Coal Mining Company is under suspicion of chartering neutral ships to supply German cruisers. The Amistà was allowed clearance for Montevideo via Barbados, but never arrived there. Systematic way in which neutral ships have left American ports to supply German cruisers is a source of grave anxiety to the British Government. Requests that preventive measures be taken. 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007]

Nov. 1 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Cites case of Italian S. S. Amistà . Necessary to take precaution to ascertain by investigation of each vessel the name of the owner or charterer and the firm supplying cargo, as well as the name and address of consignee. 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 1008]

Nov. 2 To the British Ambassador. Investigations into case of the Amistà will be made. Department will ascertain whether consignee expected such shipments. United States resents suggestions that vigilance in neutral duties has been relaxed. 631.

Nov. 14 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Requests that collectors of customs be instructed to ascertain of an incoming vessel when she last left an American port and whether she has transferred any cargo to cruisers at sea. 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

Nov. 15 From the British Ambassador. Communicates rules issued by the Brazilian Government relative to the treatment of merchant vessels in Brazilian ports. Grey desires to know if the United States is willing to issue similar rules. 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011]

391 Nov. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Requests that, in event the Berwind prepares to put to sea again with supplies, she be detained according to United States rules. The fact has been established that she coaled the Cap Trafalgar at sea. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012]

Nov. 21 From the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (telegram). The Sacramento reports that the cargo was taken by Germans from the French sailing vessel Valentine, which was sunk. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

Nov. 22 To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Instructions to report complete information regarding vessels arriving from the United States, with view to ascertaining whether portions of cargo have been transferred to belligerents at sea. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

Nov. 23 To the British Ambassador. United States refuses to be governed by rules issued by Brazilian Government regarding treatment of merchant vessels. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

397 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Nov. 24] From the British Ambassador. Continued supplying of German cruisers by United States ships a matter of gravest anxiety to Great Britain. United States cannot repudiate all responsibility. Requests careful investigation of Olson and Mahony. 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

Nov. 24 From the British Embassy. Memorandum stating that the Chilean is about to sail ostensibly for South American port with large quantities of supplies. There are strong suspicions of her intention to assist in belligerent operations against peaceful commerce. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017]

Nov. 25 To the British Ambassador. Re the movements of the Italian S. S. Amistà . 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

Nov. 24 [Rec’d Nov. 25] From the British Ambassador. Regrets inaccuracy of statements regarding the Italian S. S. Amistà . 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

559 Nov. 25 To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges note regarding Olson and Mahony. Cases have been brought to the attention of the Treasury Department. 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

560 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Attention of Attorney General has been called to the case of the Berwind, with view to such action as will prevent owner from again using United States ports in supplying belligerent war vessels at sea. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Re reporting of names of consignors and consignees of cargo in United States ports. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

Nov. 26 From the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (telegram). Reports irregularities aboard the Sacramento. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024]

Nov. 28 To the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (telegram). Instructions to investigate and report amounts and kinds of cargo supplied to German vessels at sea. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024]

Nov. 27 From the British Embassy. Coal was transferred from the Mazatlan to the Leipzig, notwithstanding bond to the contrary. Would like to know, if possible, what action has been taken by United States authorities. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Nov. 28 To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Further instructions regarding vessels arriving from American ports in ballast or with cargo; requests reports on vessels supplied at sea. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Unnecessary for collectors to report on cargoes manifestly of no use to war vessels; also unnecessary to report where consignees are numerous. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Dec. 1 To the British Embassy. Memorandum stating that request has been made of the Treasury Department that the Chilean be refused clearance until it be clearly shown that the cargo will not be transferred to war vessels at sea. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Dec. 2 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Unnecessary to send reports on vessels engaged in passenger traffic or in long-established trade between United States and foreign ports. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Dec. 3 To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Further instructions re reports on shipping. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. There is no objection to clearance of the Gladstone if assurance is given under oath that cargo will be discharged at port to which consigned. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032]

1155 Dec. 10 To the German Ambassador. Full explanation regarding placing of guard on the Alexandria lying in harbor of San Francisco. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032]

Dec. 16 To the British Embassy. Transmits copy of letter from Department of Justice stating failure to find any facts in case of Mazatlan constituting a violation of Federal penal laws. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034]

Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 23] From the British Embassy. Reviews the case of the Mazatlan and inquires whether the United States will take further action in matter. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034]

Dec. 23 To the British Embassy. Case of the Mazatlan still under consideration. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

J. No. A2985 Dec. 15 [Rec’d Dec. 16] From the German Ambassador. The position taken by the United States concerning the occasional coaling of German warships in United States ports is untenable. Encloses memorandum of German Government on the subject claiming a breach of accepted rules of neutrality on the part of United States in detriment to Germany. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

Dec. 24 To the German Ambassador. Defends policy of the United States against charge of unneutrality in treatment of belligerent shipping. Requests specific cases of complaint, with promise of investigation. 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Embassy. The Gladstone (now Chilean) left Newport News bound for Chilean ports, owners taking oath that cargo would be discharged at port of consignment. 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1037 and Doc. 1038]

Dec. 29 [Rec’d Dec. 30] From the Ambassador in Chile (telegram). Notification of the Foreign Office that unless the Sacramento leaves within 24 hours, both ship and crew will be interned. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

Dec. 30 To the Ambassador in Chile (telegram). Re the Sacramento. Instructs Consul to withhold ship’s papers and refuse to discharge crew. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

Jan. 11, 1915. To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Efforts of collectors to report suspicious cases of war vessels in United States ports, is having good effect. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To all Seaport Consuls (circular telegram). Instructions to report upon suspected cases of violation of neutrality. Collectors to continue vigilance. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Maintenance of Neutrality in the Panama Canal Zone

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

432 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] From the British Ambassador. Defense of British ships which have been accused of violation of neutrality in the Canal Zone. Statement by Sir C. Mallet concerning the Mallina. Regulations for enforcing neutrality in the Canal Zone delayed in reaching Great Britain. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

J. No. A3180 Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the German Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. The Mallina and Tremeadow, which served as tenders to British cruisers, are now demanding to be allowed to coal in Panama. Their ease is identical with that of the Locksun. 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045]

Dec. 23 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador. British S. S. Mallina and Tremeadow are accorded the same treatment as that given belligerent war vessels. 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045]

448 Dec. 25 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the British Ambassador. Re British violation of quarantine regulations in the Canal Zone. Time to become familiar with new regulations had not been allowed. The Protesilaus fitted with wireless but was dismantled in port. The Mallina ordered to leave port before receiving clearance papers. British anxious to conform to neutrality regulations in the Canal Zone. 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046]

Jan. 2, 1915 To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges note explaining irregularities in observance of regulations in the Canal Zone. 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Actions of Belligerent Warships outside Territorial Waters—Hovering

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Sept. 1 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the British Ambassador. German warships Leipzig and Nürnberg are lying off the coast of California and are in communication with the German Consul; have received information concerning movements of belligerent men-of-war. Requests United States to investigate. 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Sept. 22 To the British Embassy. Radio messages between German warships and German Consul picked up but not transmitted. Unlicensed stations ordered closed and no other unneutral messages received. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Sept. 24 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Re the fact that a British warship requested supplies from the United States by wireless. British ships have been instructed not to do this. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Oct. 5 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. British cruisers Lancaster and Suffolk in proximity to New York Harbor give impression of interference with American commerce. 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1050 and Doc. 1051]

Oct. 7 From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Re presence of Lancaster and Suffolk in proximity to New York Harbor. Instructions have been issued to British Admiralty to take steps to prevent repetition of such incidents. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

J. No. A1775 Oct. 21 [Rec’d Oct. 22] From the German Ambassador. Tugs F. B. Dalzell and G. H. Dalzell said to have supplied British cruiser Essex with fresh meat off the United States coast. Requests an investigation. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

Oct. 26 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Transmits cablegrams from Collector of Customs at Honolulu concerning capture of German schooner by Japanese battleship Hizen near Honolulu. Requests instructions regarding disposition of crew. 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 1054]

Oct. 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Further cablegrams from Honolulu stating that steam launches from the Hizen have been in neutral waters without lights. Captain of Hizen desires to have sealed communication with Japanese Consul in Honolulu. Requests instructions. 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. Case of the Hizen to be taken up with the Japanese Ambassador. Communication between this vessel and the Japanese Consul in Honolulu not to be permitted. Question of the Chinaman from the Aeolus entering Honolulu must be referred to Department of Labor. 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Japanese Ambassador. Calls attention to Japanese battleship Hizen, cruising in neutral waters around Honolulu without lights. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059]

J. No A1883 Oct. 29 From the German Ambassador. Requests explanations of conduct of Japanese warship off Honolulu port. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059]

1108 Nov. 5 To the German Ambassador. Gives explanations in case of Japanese cruiser Hizen. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059]

1133 Nov. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re tug F. B. Dalzell and G. H. Dalzell. Thorough investigation has failed to prove that these vessels have furnished supplies to British warships. 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

Dec. 22 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. Further protests against the hovering of British warships in vicinity of American ports. 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

Jan. 9, 1915 [Rec’d Jan. 12] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Assurances given that ships will not approach Ambrose Lightship nearer than six miles. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062]

The Question of the Limits of Territorial Waters—The Italian Six-Mile Rule

1267 Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Italian Chargé d’Affaires. By Royal decree of August 6 territorial waters have been fixed at six nautical miles, for purposes of neutrality. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

1426 Sept. 8 [Rec’d Sept. 10] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Quotes text of articles of the Royal decree of August 6 respecting the limits of territorial waters in bays, bights, and gulfs for purposes of neutrality. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

1837 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Italian Ambassador. Requests acceptance of United States Government of the limit set by Royal decree to territorial waters for purposes of neutrality. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066]

Nov. 28 To the Italian Ambassador. The United States does not accept the limit of territorial waters set out in the Royal decree of August 6, 1914. The principal nations generally recognize territorial jurisdiction to extend over three nautical miles. Important that any change should be recognized by principal maritime powers. 665.

Dec. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ The United State, while maintaining its position on the three-mile limit of territorial waters, has notified its vessels of the extent of territorial waters of Italy, as set forth in decree of August 6, 1914. 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 1066 and Doc. 1067]

Control over Wireless Telegraphy

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

253 Aug. 4 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Wireless telegraph stations at Sayville, Long Island, and Tuckerton, New Jersey, have been sold to a German company and are operated as intelligence bureaus for German navy. Suggests that United States take them over and operate them for all belligerents alike or else close them entirely. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068]

265 Aug. 5 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). German merchant vessels, warned by wireless from Sayville, have escaped British war vessels. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070]

2011 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Executive order Prohibits the transmitting or receiving for delivery by means of radio, messages of an unneutral nature, or the rendering of any unneutral service to any belligerent. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070]

Aug. 7 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Communicates the Executive order of August 5, re radio messages. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073]

Aug, 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ An attempt is being made to put all belligerents on same footing as regards cable and wireless messages. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the German Chargé d’Affaires. Submits, for transmission to German Foreign Office in cipher, proposals to United States Government that all belligerents be permitted to send and receive messages via Sayville and Tuckerton, under censor, or that Germany be allowed to use English and French cables. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073]

Aug. 11 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in France. Submits for consideration of British Government alternative suggestions for receiving and transmitting wireless and cable messages by belligerents. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074]

Aug. 15 From the German Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). Suggests that censorship of wireless stations be suspended while question under consideration. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

Aug. 17 To the German Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). It is expected that the question of wireless will be settled tomorrow. No license for operation of Tuckerton has been taken out under act of August 13, 1912. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

Aug. 12 From the French Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). Difference shown between wireless and cable messages, citing advantage of wireless in immediate communication with vessels at sea. Cutting of Germany’s cable an advantage gained by war; not the part of a neutral power to reestablish that condition. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

280 Aug. 14 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. A recapitulation of various points of advantage of wireless over cable messages. Two German wireless stations in United States great danger to British shipping. 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 1077 and Doc. 1078]

Aug. 9 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany asks permission to send telegrams in cipher via Tuckerton. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to inquire whether German Government has any connection with wireless stations at Sayville or Tuckerton. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

Aug. 21 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits proposition of Haniel, for consideration of German Government, for transmission of plain messages of neutral character and cipher messages if they are made known to an American official. This to be a temporary arrangement pending final decision. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1081 and Doc. 1082]

Aug. 20 From the Secretary of the Treasury to Collectors of Customs (telegram). Supplemental instructions regarding the prevention of violation of the neutrality laws. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1081 and Doc. 1082]

Aug. 22 From the Secretary of the Navy. Forwards copies of telegrams received and sent by Navy Department relative to enforcement of the President’s neutrality proclamation. 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 1082 and Doc. 1083]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 29] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Transmits message for the German Chargé d’Affaires: German Government willing to accept terms of telegraphic communication, provided censorship applies equally to all belligerents. Certain codes recommended. Use of French and English cables out of question as German messages would be held up. 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085]

514 Aug. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Re alternative proposals for the transmission of telegraphic communications. British Government prefers wireless station at Sayville to be under strict censorship of United States, censor to paraphrase all messages. 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085]

Aug. 30 [Rec’d Aug. 31] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government is not connected with wireless stations at Tuckerton or Sayville. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1085 and Doc. 1086]

2042 Sept. 5 Executive order One or more high-powered radio stations to be taken over by the United States Government in communication with stations in Europe, including code and cipher messages. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Sept. 22 To the Diplomatic Representatives of Foreign Governments. Transmits copy of instructions and regulations issued by Navy Department for the operation of the radio station at Tuckerton New Jersey. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Nov. 7 From the Secretary of the Navy. Regulations and instructions for operation of radio stations prepared by Navy Department and sent to Department of State for approval; to be substituted for previous regulations. 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 1089]

Nov. 19 To the Secretary of the Navy. No objections to proposed new regulations governing radio service. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091]

Observance of Neutrality by Other American States

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Oct. 3 [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Consul at Barranquilla. Grant [Gaunt?], Captain in British Navy, recently visited Barranquilla and Santa Marta, in search of evidence of breach of neutrality at wireless stations. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091]

356 Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. Relates incidents which have occurred and have increased anti-German spirit: Alleged execution of honorary Vice Consul of Argentine Republic by German troops in Belgium; violent action of survivors of Cap Trafalgar when interned; and dispute with commander of British fleet over the limit of the territorial waters of River Plate. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092]

466 Oct. 7 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Brazil. Brazilian Government has difficulty in maintaining neutrality, sentiment favoring France except in the south, which is pro-German. Merchant vessels occasion considerable embarrassment; secret wireless stations transmit much information. 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Nov. 13 From the Colombian Legation. Quotes decrees to prove that Government has tried to prevent unneutral acts. Possible that belligerents have built concealed stations for wireless on uninhabited coasts. 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Nov. 14 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). British and French complain that neutrality is not enforced in Colombia. Charge use of wireless stations by Germans. Requests facts. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). British and French Governments complain that neutrality proclamation is not enforced in Ecuador. Charge that Galápagos Islands are German base for naval supplies. Requests facts. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 15 From the Ecuadorian Minister (telegram). Inquires whether British and French Ambassadors have complained against violation of neutrality of Ecuador. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 15 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Colombian Government to the Colombian Legation at Washington (telegram). Cartagena radio station has been put in charge of expert Government operator and foreign employees dismissed. Great Britain asks that station be closed. Asks if United States stations are closed. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 16 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Minister in Ecuador. United States is not trying to control action of other governments. French and British only asked United States to use moral influence to bring about neutrality. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099]

Nov. 17 To the Ecuadorian Minister (telegram). Newspapers have misrepresented the intention of the United States in matter of neutrality. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102]

Nov. 19 [Rec’d Nov. 20] From the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). Ecuador weak from revolution, but doing all in its power to preserve neutrality. If charges are true concerning Galápagos Islands, will protest to Germany. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102]

Nov. 19 [Rec’d Nov. 20] From the Ecuadorian Minister. Requests exact copy of complaint made by France and Great Britain against Ecuador. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102]

Nov. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 22] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). Correspondence of the United States, disclaiming any interference to enforce neutrality in South America, has been published in Colombia and received with satisfaction. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104]

Nov. 25 From the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). Minister for Foreign Affairs proposes that all American Republics promulgate a statement declaring that in respect to the neutrality of each one of the American nations, all are interested. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104]

Nov. 25 [Rec’d Nov. 27] From the Secretary of the Colombian Legation. Encloses cable messages of November 19 and 24 in which Ministry of Foreign Affairs claims that Colombia follows the same neutrality regulations as the United States. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

362 Oct. 24 [Rec’d Nov. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. The manner in which neutrality measures are being carried out in Argentina is causing dissatisfaction amongst belligerents. All merchant vessels are allowed to depart with bunkers full of coal; vessels embark with arms, ammunition and supplies, some having been converted into auxiliary cruisers; wireless stations are in full operation by Germans. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

757 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Nov. 28] From the Minister in Uruguay. Asserts that there is a chain of secret radiograph stations along South Atlantic coast. Many stations discovered and dismantled on the River Plate. 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 1106 and Doc. 1107]

761 Oct. 28 [Rec’d Nov. 28] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits Executive decree forbidding the establishment and operation of wireless stations on land or on vessels in territorial waters. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Dec. 1 [Rec’d Dec. 2] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). Newspapers publish statements that United States will permit European nations to enforce compliance with neutrality regulations in South America. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Dec. 2 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the British Ambassador. Transmits substance of a memorandum of November 29 addressed by British Foreign Office to the Chilean Minister in London on the subject of new neutrality rules which the Chilean Government proposes for all American Governments. These rules are supplemented by a fourth suggestion by the British. 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 1110]

Dec. 3 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ecuadorian Minister. Ecuador proposes that belligerents be induced to declare the seas that wash coasts of America a neutral zone, in order to exclude warlike operations. Quotes cablegram from the Ecuadorian Minister of Foreign Affairs of November 30, declaring that Ecuadorian Government did not know that Germans were using Galápagos Islands for a naval base. 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

Dec. 8 To the Ecuadorian Minister. It is not customary to give copies of communications. Restates that British and French allege infraction of rules of neutrality by Colombia and Ecuador and request that the United States use moral influence to prevent this. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

Dec. 9 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the British Ambassador. Re further revision of neutrality rules proposed by Chilean Government for general adoption on the American continent. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

550 Nov. 7 [Rec’d Dec. 12] From the Ambassador in Chile. German squadron, composed of Scharnhorst, Gneisenau, and Nürnberg, engaged British squadron near island of Santa Maria. Good Hope and Monmouth destroyed; Glasgow and Otranto escaped. London press has charged Chile with unneutrality. British Government satisfied with explanation of the Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs. German transport Prince Eitel was ordered to leave Valparaiso. 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114]

116 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 12] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia. Reports that Colombian Government is enforcing neutrality. British inspector of wireless stations satisfied. 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1114 and Doc. 1115]

117 Nov. 27 [Rec’d Dec. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Columbia. Encloses newspaper clippings on subject of Colombia’s failure to observe neutrality, Washington represented as about to enforce observance; also copy of a note addressed to Colombian Minister on November 19 explaining the attitude of United States, which had quieting effect. 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 1116]

Dec. 19 From the Ambassador in Chile (telegram). New neutrality regulations have been issued. Protests have been made to Germany against violation of Chilean neutrality. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118]

Dec. 22 [Rec’d Dec. 23] From the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). Investigations of the charges of the use of Galápagos Islands by Germans for naval base have disclosed the fact that German, English, and Japanese vessels have been at the islands and have bought cotton and provisions but no coal. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118]

84 Nov. 26 [Rec’d Dec. 26] From the Minister in Ecuador. Thorough investigation has been made of reports of Ecuador’s failure to enforce neutrality. Wireless station at Guayaquil used by German Consul in person. Newspaper misrepresentations aroused excitement but publishing of note from the Department soon quieted this feeling. Encloses his statement published in El Dia on November 19. 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 1119]

377 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. Report concerning Argentine neutrality. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120]

Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Embassy at Washington (telegram). Transmits text of the decree of Chilean Government containing regulations for the coaling of vessels in Chilean ports. 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121]

Dec. 25 [Rec’d Jan. 2, 1915] From the Ecuadorian Minister. Reports that no violation of neutrality has been committed on Ecuadorian islands. 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

120 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Jan. 4, 1915] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia. Captain Gaunt reports that wireless station at Cartagena is in operation under German influence, and wireless outfits on German interned ships are used with mufflers. German Minister has closed the station. Encloses note from Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs of December 1, and his reply December 5, both bearing upon this subject. 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

610 Jan. 13, 1915 To the British Ambassador. The same to the French Ambassador. In reply to complaint against Ecuador for non-observance of neutrality, the enclosed notes of December 1 and 25 from the Ecuadorian Minister will furnish an explanation. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1123 and Doc. 1124]

16 Jan. 13, 1915 To the Ecuadorian Minister. Department has communicated substance of note re neutrality of Ecuador to the French and British Embassies. 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125]

383 Dec. 22 [Rec’d Jan. 18, 1915] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. Re Argentine neutrality; execution of Argentine official in Belgium; battle of Falkland Islands and sovereignty of those islands; escape of officers and men interned on the Cap Trafalgar. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126]

Observance of Neutrality by Liberia

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

394 July 28 [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Liberian Minister anticipates trouble for Liberia because both French and Germans own cable stations on Liberian soil. Encloses copy of a letter of July 27 from the Minister on the subject. 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Aug. 7 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in in France and Germany. Instructions to secure assurance of Liberian neutrality. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ To the Minister in Liberia (telegram). Instructions to recommend that Liberia proclaim neutrality at once. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government will observe neutrality of Liberia. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government will respect neutrality of Liberia. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Aug. 14 From the Minister in Liberia (telegram). French demand that German wireless be closed. French wireless still open. Requests advice. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

387 Aug. 17 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Liberian Minister transmits letter from President of Liberia setting forth the situation concerncerning cable lines. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Aug. 18 To the Minister in Liberia (telegram). For the information of President Howard in taking such measures as he may deem necessary to preserve neutrality, transmits text of President Wilson’s proclamation on radio communication. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to ask French Government upon what grounds demands upon Liberia are based. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136]

Aug. 21 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States has not proclaimed Liberian neutrality. French Government asks Liberia to close German wireless station. Wilson’s proclamation sent Howard as guide in taking necessary measures for preserving Liberian neutrality. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136]

446 Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British give assurance respecting neutrality of Liberia. They rely upon Liberia to take steps to protect her neutrality. 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Aug. 24 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French request Liberia to exercise censorship over operations of German wireless station. Willing that same treatment be accorded French station if Germans request it. 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

471 Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Great Britain supports French request that Liberia close German wireless station or prohibit cipher and unneutral messages. Liberian citizens caught in Germany by war unable to secure money to return home. Loan of $2,000 asked of United States. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Aug. 29 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Liberia should not discriminate in favor of either French or German station. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. British and French consider that nothing less than the presence of a United States warship in Liberian waters would enable Liberia to fulfil its obligations of neutrality. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Oct. 8 To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges note suggesting presence of United States warship to preserve neutrality of Liberia. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

59 Sept. 4 [Rec’d Oct. 9] From the Minister in Liberia. Liberia has closed both French and German wireless stations. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Dec. 30 To the Minister in Liberia (telegram). Instructions to warn Liberian. Government to preserve utmost impartiality between belligerents. 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 1144]

PART IV: OTHER PROBLEMS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

New Regulations Governing the Issuance of Passports—Emergency Passports

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 1 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Europe (telegram). Instructions re emergency passports; advice and financial assistance to American citizens abroad. 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 1145 and Doc. 1146]

Aug. 10 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the other Ambassadors and Ministers in Europe. Consular registration certificates. 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 1145 and Doc. 1146]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Requests instructions concerning the granting to individuals holding first papers a certificate of identity to secure a permis de sejour pending opportunity to return home. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148]

Aug. 12 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Certificates of identity may be issued to persons holding first papers, if seven years have not elapsed and permanent residence abroad has not been acquired. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148]

Sept. 12 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries (telegram). Explicit directions for persons applying for American passports and consular registration certificates. Warning against issuance to persons not Americans, who are seeking to evade military service in their own country. Special certificates to be granted to wives of persons declaring intention of becoming American citizens. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148]

310 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 27] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Re issuance of passports to persons who have lived in the United States three years and declared intention of becoming American citizens, and who have sojourned abroad less than six months. 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 1148 and Doc. 1149]

338 Oct. 6 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions not to issue passports to declarants. They may register and request permission of German Government to depart. 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

Nov. 13 Executive order_ _ _ _ Rules governing the granting and issuing of passports in the United States. 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

305 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Nov. 26] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Requests instructions regarding issuance of passports to minor children of naturalized parents or of declarants. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151]

327 Dec. 3 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Passports and financial assistance may be extended to minor children of American-born parents not naturalized or of declarants. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Dec. 21 To American Diplomatic and Consular Officers. New instructions, in pursuance of the passport regulations of November 13, 1914, concerning the preparation of applications for Departmental and emergency passports and the issuance of the latter. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Representation of Belligerent Governments in Enemy Countries—Protection of Their Interests

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 1 To the German Embassy (telegram). United States will extend diplomatic and consular protection to German interests in Russia with understanding that same services will be rendered to other governments if requested. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). United States has consented to take over German Embassy in Russia in case of war, with understanding that similar assistance may be given any other country that may request it. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Inquires whether United States is disposed to assume protection of Austrian and Hungarian interests in Russia, France, Great Britain, and Montenegro. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Accepts charge of Austrian and Hungarian interests in Russia, France, Great Britain, and Montenegro. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the German Chargé d’Affaires. United States is urged to protect interests of Germany in Russia and other countries. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Aug. 5 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Because the Russian Embassy at Berlin is said to have been destroyed by a mob, Russians have wrecked the German Embassy in St. Petersburg. Has registered a protest at the Foreign Office. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 6] _ _ _do_ _ _ _ Request has been made in the name of the United States for a formal apology to Germany for the destruction of Embassy and for reparation for loss of life and property. Authorities promise reparation and strict precautions against repetition in the future. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1157 and Doc. 1158]

Aug. 4 [Rec’d Aug. 5] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Has promised to keep keys and seal of German Minister, who has been handed his passports. Duties at Legation heavy, will Department arrange that some other power protect interests of Germany in Belgium? 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 1159]

Aug. 5 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Cannot refuse to take charge of German interests if requested. Sufficient help will be supplied. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Aug. 7 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Asks permission to raise American flag over Austrian Embassy, if necessary to save life. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Re destruction of German Embassy. Department unable to take up matter with Russian Ambassador. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Aug. 8 _ _ _do_ _ _ _ Instructions to inform Foreign Office that United States will take over Austrian interests in Russia. Asks if there would be any objections to raising American flag over Austrian Embassy. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russian officers and soldiers entered Austrian Embassy with intention of taking automobiles. Protest made in name of United States, and they withdrew. Situation is grave. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Aug. 9 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Course approved. If Government insists on taking automobiles, the matter should be settled by diplomatic correspondence, not by force. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 13] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Foreign Office thinks that the raising of an American flag over the Austrian Embassy might complicate matters. Building is not in danger. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] _ _ _do_ _ _ _ German and Austrian Consuls being arrested and imprisoned. Strong protests of no avail. Requests instructions. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Aug. 15 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Instructions to do nothing more after protesting. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

403 Aug. 18 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits cipher telegram from Gerard advising British Government not to allow any German subjects to leave British domain until arrangements have been made for British to leave Germany. 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 1167]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). To comply with Gerard’s suggestion would be an unneutral act. 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 1167]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Message concerning detention of German subjects by Great Britain should not be made through good offices of United States. 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 1167]

Aug. 23 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Telegram sent to Ambassador in Great Britain on grounds of common humanity. Action brought about consent of Germany to release English, if England takes reciprocal measures. 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169]

Aug. 17 To diplomatic and consular officers of the United States of America entrusted with the interests of foreign governments at war. Instructions regarding the handling of foreign interests. Attitude should be that of impartial amity; friendly offices should be performed in accordance with wishes of both parties. 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169]

Aug. 27 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries (telegram). Messages relating to military or naval operations received by American diplomatic officials for transmission from one belligerent to another should be transmitted through the Department. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Sept. 3 To the Speaker of the House of Representatives. Transmits request that Congress appropriate sum of one million, dollars for expenses of diplomatic and consular officers and for relief of nationals of those countries. When banking facilities are restored amounts are expected to be reimbursed. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

753 Sept. 28 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Foreign Office wishes to be informed about arrangements for repatriation of British subjects in Germany. Request that Gerard be instructed to make all arrangements through American Embassy, not through any private agency. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 1171 and Doc. 1172]

297 Sept. 30 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). No communication of any information should be made to another country except through American Ambassador or Minister accredited to that country. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

Oct. 5 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries (telegram). Correspondence re lists of prisoners or the affairs of subjects entrusted to your care may be transmitted direct to American Ambassador or Minister. All other communications must be sent through the Department. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

800 Oct. 8 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Requests to know if unimportant communications of details and routine work must also go through Department, thus causing delay. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

284 Oct. 9 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Foreign officers may send by any route feasible unimportant communications of detail work, etc. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

Undated [Rec’d Nov. 3] From the Minister in Persia (telegram). Russian officers have seized Turkish and Austrian consuls and archives. Germans threatened and Consul assaulted. Requests instructions. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

Nov. 5 To the Minister in Persia (telegram). United States has not yet been requested to protect German and Austrian interests. Discretion must be used in extending protection to nations other than Americans. Attitude of strict neutrality to be maintained. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

785 Nov. 9 [Rec’d Nov. 10] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Re treatment and exchange of English and German prisoners. Asks permission to communicate direct to London, message to be repeated later to Department. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1177 and Doc. 1178]

624 Nov. 12 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to observe circular instructions of October 5 in transmission of lists of prisoners. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1177 and Doc. 1178]

21 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish authorities insist on searching all consulates. They have requested United States representatives to be present; This was refused. Awaits instructions. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1177 and Doc. 1178]

18 _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ Turkish authorities are seeking wireless apparatus used clandestinely to furnish information to Russia. British, French, and Servian offices entered in search. His protests have elicited apologies and the offices have been sealed. Horses and carriages were seized from British and French Embassies, and arms and ammunition found in the British Embassy. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180]

37 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Instructions to protest against the search of consulates under American protection. American consular representatives may be present unofficially to give testimony later. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180]

Nov. 21 _ _ _do_ _ _ _ His action re British, French, and Russian Embassies approved. Instruction to keep Department informed. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

108 Dec. 3 [Rec’d Dec. 4] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). American Consul at Aleppo has telegraphed that American consular seals on British and French archives have been broken and the papers removed. Turkish officials becoming bolder. Requests instructions. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

110 Dec. 5 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Instructions to request an immediate return of British and French archives, with an explanation and assurances that violation of seal of United States will not be repeated. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

155 Dec. 13 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Ottoman authorities at Hodeida arrested a French Consul and attempted to arrest a British Vice Consul, who took refuge in the Italian Consulate. Police forced Consulate, British Vice Consul surrendered. Italian war vessel arrived, took Italian Consul on board and demanded reparation. Italian Ambassador requests United States help in securing release of British Vice Consul. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Dec. 16 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Department approves cooperation with Italian Ambassador for release of British Vice Consul. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Dec. 19 To the Minister in Persia (telegram). Permission to act for Germany in Persia. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Dec. 15 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). British Vice Consul reinstated. Sublime Porte will give satisfaction to Italy. French consuls will leave for France. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1185 and Doc. 1186]

Activities of the United States in Regard to Prisoners of War and Interned Civilians

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

11 Sept. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 11] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Condition of German and Austrian war prisoners is very bad. Government has done nothing to house and feed them. Suggests that matter be taken up with Russian Ambassador at Washington. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1185 and Doc. 1186]

11 Sept. 16 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Protests must discontinue until instructed otherwise. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188]

22 Undated [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Explanations re protests to Russian authorities concerning prisoners. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188]

498 Oct. 26 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to discuss with German authorities proposal that Anderson go to Germany to study condition of British prisoners there, and make report to Berlin concerning German prisoners in England. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188]

689 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 3] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany is willing that British representative inspect camps in Germany and would like for some one from Embassy to inspect German camps in England. Anderson’s report on three camps received. Requested report on Newcastle not received. Schwarzschild doing volunteer work in England. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190]

718 Nov. 3 [Rec’d Nov. 4] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Suggestion that there should be international agreement as to supplying food and clothes for prisoners. Great difference exists in treatment in different countries. Suffering reported in French and German camps. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190]

572 Nov. 5 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Department will be glad to submit any proposals to other belligerents looking to an arrangement for supplying prisoners. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

Nov. 16 [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Bitterness exists between British and German Governments concerning treatment of prisoners. German Government expects him to visit camps in person and furnish from German funds necessities for prisoners. Requests instructions. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

577 Nov. 20 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Further investigations inadvisable. Grants permission to lend personal aid and to expend money furnished for amelioration of distress in every way possible. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

1148 Dec. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany willing for Anderson to visit German camps on condition that some one from American Embassy visit German prisoners in England. Of utmost importance that same privilege be accorded to Germany, to prevent neutrality of United States being questioned in Germany. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

851 Dec. 29 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to request British Government to permit examination of condition of German prisoners in England in return for German permission. 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 1192]

Dec. 30 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Department will inquire whether England has any objections to Germany’s appointing some one to visit German detention camps in England. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

1386 Jan. 2, 1915 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Permission will be given to an impartial person from the American Embassy in Berlin to visit British camps where German prisoners are kept. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

Protection of American Interests and Institutions in Turkey

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 7] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Request for an American vessel on the Black Sea for protection of Beirut and Smyrna. Scorpion necessary for Constantinople. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

Aug. 8 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Cannot send ships to Beirut, Smyrna, and Black Sea. Scorpion to remain in Turkey. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). American ships should be sent to Syrian ports for the safety of American lives and interests. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Americans at Jaffa request a war vessel. Authorities threaten to requisition cargoes on foreign vessels. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Smyrna has also requested presence of war vessels. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199]

Aug. 19 [Rec’d Aug. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Quotes telegrams from Smyrna and Jerusalem: Massacre of foreigners threatened if city is bombarded; Christians and Europeans in danger; reign of military terrorism. Ambassador making arrangements for financial aid through private sources. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). United States wishes to sound European powers as to advisability of sending ships to Turkish waters. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201]

_ _ _do_ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram).
The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Germany. Statement of conditions in Turkish waters and inquiry as to advisability of sending American battleships to protect Christians. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201]

Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Communicates plans for protection of foreigners in Turkey if emergency arises. 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Aug. 22 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany refuses to comment on proposal of United States to send warships to Turkish waters. 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia thinks American warships in Turkish waters an excellent plan, but wishes to confer with England and France before recommending it. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Aug. 25 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Requests full explanation of attitude of Foreign Office on subject of American ships in Turkish waters. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Aug. 26 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government replies that conditions in Orient are due to German agitation which tends to provoke Mussulman fanaticism. French warships would aggravate situation. Suggestion of America favorably received. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Aug. 28 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). North Carolina ordered to Turkish waters with gold relief fund. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208]

Aug. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Vice Consul at Smyrna. Encloses copy of letter of August 8 to the Ambassador in Turkey concerning the political situation in Smyrna: Banks closed; exportations stopped; unemployed joining army; foreigners in state of hysteria; Americans asking for warship; tendency of Turks to disregard capitulations; spirit of antagonism; private property seized; etc. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208]

774 Aug. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Consul General at Beirut. French Consul General threatened with hanging for protest against seizure of French merchandise. Turks planning to attack Egypt. Requisitioning of jute grain bags, to be filled with sand to form causeway across Suez. Archives of towns being sent to the interior, towns to be abandoned if attacked. The only thing that will save the situation is the presence of American warships. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209]

601 Sept. 5 [Rec’d Sept. 6] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British reports from Turkey confirm fear of anti-Christian uprisings. British would welcome presence of American warships in Turkish waters. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 14] From the Consul at Mersina. Business of all kinds at a standstill; supplies requisitioned for army; crops unharvested. Americans warned not to go to remote places, but missionaries prefer to remain in mountains. Need for American warship. 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 1211]

148 Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 15] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Ambassador in Turkey now thinks it would be well for a neutral warship to be sent to protect foreigners on Turkish coast. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Sept. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 21] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Presents protests against abrogation of capitulations. Grand Vizier and Minister of War give assurance that American schools and missionaries will not be molested. German cruiser Breslau enters Black Sea. Others to follow. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Oct. 1 [Rec’d Oct. 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ New law intending to abrogate capitulations has gone into effect. Case of citizen Brewster defended. Minister of War enters brother, two sons, et al., at Robert College. Recommends that North Carolina visit Smyrna. Not advisable to have warship stay there after Sublime Porte’s request to the contrary. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215]

Oct. 16 From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). No foreigners are to be arrested without the approval of the Minister of Justice. Sublime Porte is preparing regulations for foreign religious, charitable, and educational institutions. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215]

Oct. 27 To the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. North Carolina and Tennessee are in Turkish waters. American Ambassador reports conditions improving there. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

Nov. 9 To G. T. W. Patrick (telegram). Telegrams from Turkey state that American Ambassador, with cooperation of Turkish officials, has situation in hand. Missionaries fully safeguarded. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

857 Oct. 8 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Consul General at Beirut. Transmits letter of October 1 from American missionary at Latakia, telling of plot to massacre the Christians; troops have taken steps to preserve order. The North Carolina will call at this port on way to Mersina. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

39 Nov. 18 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Inquires as to the truth of the statement that a launch of the Tennessee was fired on by Turkish forts at Smyrna. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

53 Nov. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To avoid misunderstanding, permission of Ottoman Government should be secured for American ship to visit ports, so local authorities may be notified. Instructions to urge upon Ottoman Government necessity of preventing loss of life of missionaries. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

47 Nov. 17 [Rec’d Nov. 21] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish Ministers of Interior and War state that blank shots were fired at commander of Tennessee when he attempted to visit Smyrna in a steam launch. Commander threatened to bombard fort. Authorities insist that Tennessee remove wireless and leave. Encloses several telegrams on the subject. Battleship has left for Chios. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

58 Nov. 24 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits letter of November 24 from Minister of War explaining that shots were fired to prevent launch from encountering mines laid at entrance to port. Regrets expressed. 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 1221 and Doc. 1222]

63 Nov. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 25] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). It was unfortunate that Decker Should have tried to enter closed Port, and that they should have threatened to bombard port. Suggests that Tennessee patrol Mediterranean. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224]

70 Nov. 22 [Rec’d Nov. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Permission has been secured for the Tennessee to visit Vourla and await wireless. Bombarding Smyrna would have brought evil results to Christians. His friendliness with officials has a restraining effect. Solemn assurances of protection of missionaries have been given. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224]

82 Nov. 30 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Department considers the Tennessee incident closed. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226]

90 Dec. 1 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Navy Department suggests that one of the battleships in Turkish waters be withdrawn. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226]

123 Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Re treatment of foreign institutions. 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

112 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Recommends leaving both ships in Turkish waters. Schools being closed; monks, nuns, and teachers expelled and grave danger threatening; no foreign schools wanted in Turkey. Dardanelles frequently bombarded. 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

148 Dec. 12 [Rec’d Dec. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Djemal, Minister of Marine, antagonistic to Hollis; differences related. Turkish Government fast drifting into semianarchy. Difference of opinion as to whether two American ships are a help or a danger. Recommends that one ship be recalled and the other commander instructed that cruiser is there only for refuge and moral influence. It is time for Americans to leave. 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

151 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Instructions to protest against disregard of capitulations. United States cannot accept modifications without previous agreement. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

182 Dec. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ President approves suggestion that Americans leave Turkey. Instructions to advise inland missions quietly and privately. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

197 Dec. 22 [Rec’d Dec. 25] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Message recalling missionaries sent by Peet. Interior mission schools functioning normally. Missionaries prefer to share the danger with those for whom they have worked so long. Some schools have been turned into hospitals. English women connected with schools are urged to leave. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 1231 and Doc. 1232]

152 Dec. 16 [Rec’d Jan. 13, 1915] From the Ambassador in Turkey. Transmits note verbale of December 6 from Sublime Porte concerning the Tennessee incident. 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Special Efforts in Behalf of British and French Nationals in Turkey

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Nov. 5 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). German Ambassador who controls German-Turkish Army officers, promises to grant free departure to English and French unless Turkish towns are bombarded. Americans safe. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 1233 and Doc. 1234]

4 Nov. 8 [Rec’d Nov. 9] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Commander of Army Corps at Damascus states that in case of bombardment of towns in Syria, French and British will be detained. For every Mussulman killed, three French or English subjects will be shot and property seized. No responsibility assumed in case of massacre of Christians. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236]

16 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Unless British and French Governments give assurance that unfortified towns in Turkey will not be bombarded, British and French consuls and subjects will be held as hostages. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236]

Nov. 14 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the British Ambassador. Requests transmission of enclosed message through United States Consul General at Beirut stating that it is not the habit of the British to fire on open towns unless attacking an armed force of the enemy. Great Britain will hold responsible any officer who orders killing of British subjects in cold blood. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1237 and Doc. 1238]

76 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Nov. 26] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). If British will give assurances not to bombard unfortified ports unless attacked by armed Ottoman forces, then Turkish Government will allow all British subjects to leave Turkey. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1237 and Doc. 1238]

Dec. 5 From the American community at Beirut to the President (telegram). Danger that French and British subjects will be sent to the interior to be held as hostages. Appeal to the President. Proclamation of holy war would arouse fanaticism which Ottoman Government may not be able to control. 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

Nov. 30 From the Special Agent in France (telegram). Transmits note from French Minister for Foreign Affairs for information of the Ottoman Government: Ottoman warships bombarded two unprotected towns before war was declared. If any French subject is molested in Ottoman Empire, France will hold officials personally responsible. Case of Eyoub Sabri and Fuaddibra explained. 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

1209 Dec. 7 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Forwards copy of note received from Grey for transmission to Constantinople: British Government surprised at Turkish threat since Turkish warship bombarded two unprotected towns before declaring war; will hold Ottoman Ministers responsible for any molestation of British subjects. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]

1222 Dec. 8 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits telegram from Bliss at Beirut stating that British non-combatants including women have been ordered to interior as hostages, pending release of detained Ottomans. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

134 Dec. 10 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Grave dangers are involved in policy of holding non-combatant French and British subjects as hostages. Situation is aggravated by declaration of holy war. Urge Sublime Porte to release all non-combatants. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

143 Dec. 10 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). The Minister of Interior is indifferent to being held personally responsible for molestation of British subjects. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

141 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Wholesale deportation of French and English from Beirut to Damascus. Minister of Interior promises to stop it Assurance given United States that those in American, institutions will be unmolested. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246]

806 Dec. 12 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to request German Government to use its influence with Turkish Government to modify its attitude toward British and French non-combatants within Turkish borders. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246]

149 Dec. 12 [Rec’d Dec. 13] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Positive promises of British and French not to bombard unfortified towns and to release Ayour Sabri and Zenun, Prince Omar, and Turkish Consuls at Bombay, Johannesburg, and Manchester and at Malta may secure the consent of the Turkish Government for repatriation of belligerents in Turkey. Armenians reported massacred near Erzerum. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1247 and Doc. 1248]

183 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Hollis telegraphs that deportation of French, British, and Russian male subjects from Lebanon to Damascus, and from Beirut, has begun. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1247 and Doc. 1248]

178 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador in Turkey considers deportation of French and English justified by military needs. Military commander at Damascus has issued order allowing belligerent males up to eighteen years of age and all females to leave Beirut. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1249 and Doc. 1250]

187 Dec. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany has absolute control of Turkish Navy and practically controls the Army. German officers suggested the deportation of English and French. Suggests warning German Empire of its responsibility of massacres in Turkey occur. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1249 and Doc. 1250]

867 Dec. 22 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Statement of situation in Turkey. Instructions to say to German Foreign Office that in view of control which Germany exercises in Turkey, it will be difficult for her to disclaim responsibility if massacres occur. Hopes that Germany will send instructions to prevent them. 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1251 and Doc. 1252]

191 Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 24] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Payas bombarded. Commandant of Syrian army threatens to shoot Englishmen if Alexandretta is bombarded. British Commander demands release of French and British, otherwise he will bombard Government buildings. Minister of Interior will release French and British subjects as soon as promise is given to release Ottoman subjects and not to bombard towns. 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1251 and Doc. 1252]

227 Jan. 5, 1915 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Grey expresses gratitude to Ambassador. Omar Tousson and others will be released under certain conditions. 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 1252 and Doc. 1253]

273 Jan. 9, 1915 [Rec’d Jan. 10] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Statement of British Foreign Office construed as promise not to bombard unprotected towns. British subjects to receive full protection. Release of Omar Tousson and others expected. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

Methods of Warfare: Charges of Illegal and Inhumane Conduct on the Part of Belligerent Forces—Attitude of the United States

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 18 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Forwards notes from German Minister in Sweden for transmission to French and Belgian. Governments: Germany protests the hostile acts of French and Belgian populace; those not belonging to recognized armed forces will be shot if found taking part in war. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

Aug. 26 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Communications from the German Minister have been read to the Counselor of the French Embassy and to the Belgian Minister. 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 1255 and Doc. 1256]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Antwerp calm. Communication cut off. German women and children expelled but no bodily harm done to them. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259]

Sept. 4 To the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Diplomatic and consular officers should confine communications to statements of facts and not express opinions. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259]

Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the German Ambassador. Has been informed that a Belgian delegation will lay before the President the documentary evidence of alleged German atrocities. Germany protests against them as groundless. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259]

53 Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Transmits telegram from the Emperor to President Wilson, protesting against use of dumdum bullets by French and English and against the guerrilla warfare of the Belgian populace. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Sept. 10 From the President of France to the President of the United States (telegram). Denounces German charges that French and British have used dumdum bullets; Germany her-self has used them since beginning of war and has committed other atrocities already complained of. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

644 Sept. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Enumeration of German atrocities in France and Belgium. 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 1262 and Doc. 1263]

675 Sept. 15 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Suggests that a committee of inquiry be appointed by the Carnegie Peace Foundation to investigate alleged atrocities. 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 1262 and Doc. 1263]

141 Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Specimens of dumdum bullets have been sent to the United States at the request of the German Government. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265]

Sept. 16 Remarks of President Wilson to the Belgian Commission. Welcomes representatives of the King of Belgium with pleasure; expresses warm sympathy and friendship for Belgian people; predicts a day of reckoning when the opinion of mankind will pass final judgment upon wrongs committed. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265]

173 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Transmits reply of the President to the note of the Emperor re dumdum bullets. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, and Doc. 1267]

191 Sept. 18 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Government will take no action in the matter of dumdum bullets. Ambassador’s refusal to be drawn into discussion is approved. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, and Doc. 1267]

Sept. 19 From the President to the President of France (telegram). Expresses appreciation of confidence placed in the United States and declares that the time will come when those responsible for the war will bear the burden of the judgment of the world. 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Sept. 24 From the President of the American Institute of Architects to the President of the United States. Urges that precautions be taken against the destruction of architectural monuments situated in field of war. 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 29] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Reports of excesses are in spirit true. Will make a comprehensive report later. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272]

Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 1] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German authorities in Brussels are willing to spare monuments at Antwerp if Belgians agree not to use them for military purposes. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272]

820 Sept. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 3] From the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle. Enclosed joint statement of American newspaper men who have investigated reported atrocities of the German army. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272]

Oct. 4 From the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Whitlock reports that Belgium accepts German proposition relative to protection of historical, monuments. 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Oct. 6 To the President of the American Institute of Architects. Acknowledges receipt of letter protesting against alleged destruction of architectural monuments in Europe. 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 7] From the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Bombardment has been announced. Suggests intercession of United States to prevent carnage and destruction. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277]

Oct. 8 To the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Regrets that there is no opportunity for the United States to intercede in matter of bombardment of Antwerp. Information about monuments communicated to the Minister at Brussels. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277]

41 Oct. 10 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Germans request Spanish and American Ministers to notify Antwerp of intended bombardment of city. Germans have been furnished with list of buildings containing art treasures. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277]

34 Oct. 12 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Approves his action regarding bombardment of the city. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

14 Oct. 20 To the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle. Acknowledges communication re atrocities committed by Germans on Belgian-French frontier. Instructions to discontinue all investigations and observe rules of Department. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

167 Oct. 27 To the Ambassador in Germany. Instructions to transmit to German Government enclosed communications from several societies asking that buildings of interest historically and architecturally be respected. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

Nov. 14 To the French Ambassador. Transmits at request of German Government a copy of the White Book regarding alleged breach of the Geneva convention by French troops and irregulars. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

6 Oct. 17 [Rec’d Nov. 23] From the Consul at Roubaix. Had suggested that officials of Roubaix, Tourcoing, and Lille send a delegation to the German army requesting them not to fire on the cities. Idea not considered feasible. Had him-self, upon suggestion of prefect of Lille, called attention of German general to fact that these cities carry on large trade with United States and asked that they be spared. German suggested agreement not acceptable to the French General Staff. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

J. No. 10107 Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 6] From the German Ambassador. Calls attention to violations of the Geneva and Hague conventions by France and Great Britain. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 1282 and Doc. 1283]

8 Dec. 24 To the Consul at Roubaix. Instructions to avoid intervention and observe proclamation of neutrality. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Jan. 6, 1915 To the German Ambassador. Winchester Repeating Arms Co. denies having made any sale of arms or ammunition to belligerents. Remington Arms-Union Metallic Cartridge Company furnishes proof that charges of sales to belligerents are untrue. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Negotiations Relating to the Work of Belgian Relief

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

783 Oct. 6 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Belgian committee formed at Brussels under patronage of Spanish and American Ministers to import foodstuffs for poor of Brussels. Requests Authorization of the United States Government. 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 1285 and Doc. 1286]

435 Oct. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Awaiting reply of Foreign Office to request for information regarding admission of food into Brussels. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, and Doc. 1288]

541 Oct. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 18] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government approves plan to supply Belgium with food. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, and Doc. 1288]

21 Oct. 16 [Rec’d Oct. 19] From the Minister in Belgium to the President (telegram). Civil population of Belgium facing starvation. Plea to President to find some way to help. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 1289 and Doc. 1290]

Oct. 16 [Rec’d Oct. 19] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). It is necessary to extend relief work to the whole of Belgium. Committee has been organized. Assurances of German Government that food will not be taken by military. Also necessary to secure permission of England. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 1289 and Doc. 1290]

341 Oct. 19 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Germany approves plan to supply population of Belgium with food. Authorization to proceed with plan. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293]

39 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Importation of foodstuffs for poor of Belgium has been approved by Germany; Embassy in London so advised. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293]

358 Oct. 20 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Authorization to aid in obtaining permission from British to ship foodstuffs to Belgium. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293]

40 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Relief plan approved. Ambassador at London to render assistance. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

910 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Food sent to Belgium should go to Commission of Belgian Relief, which has guarantee of German military commander not to confiscate it. Money of no use. American committee should consult with Hoover, chairman of the commission. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

221 Oct. 31 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). France requested to give assurante of neutrality of foodstuffs for Belgian relief. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298]

969 Nov. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). French Minister at The Hague threatens to protest against transit of foodstuffs through Netherlands without approval of French Government. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298]

978 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ International Commission for Relief of Belgium, with Hoover as chairman, has completed arrangements to insure that food for starving Belgians will not be diverted. Relief given by various European governments and individuals. Recommends that Hoover be consulted as to amount of food, the kind needed, and how to ship it. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298]

231 Nov. 4 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Inquires whether French Government has given assurance of recognition of neutrality of goods shipped to American Commission for Relief in Belgium. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301]

248 Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Question of neutrality of foodstuffs for Belgium is under consideration. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301]

590 Nov. 7 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Belgian Commission requests of Germany unmolested passage of ships to Holland carrying food and clothing for Belgium. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301]

1027 Nov. 9 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Urges that French Government send as soon as possible permit for transshipment of foodstuffs for Belgium through Holland. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304]

267 Nov. 11 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions have been sent to the French Minister at The Hague to offer no objection to the transit of foodstuffs through Netherlands from United States. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304]

1060 Nov. 14 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The report that Germans have been stopping food for needy Belgians is untrue. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304]

540 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The President does not think it wise to appoint a Government committee for the management of Belgian relief. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307]

155 Oct. 20 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the Minister in the Netherlands. Encloses extract from La Gazette de Hollande on subject of provisioning Belgium, quoting notes from the German Legation to the Netherland Minister for Foreign Affairs of August 15, and replies of the Netherland Minister of August 17 and October 3. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307]

275 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The British Government is co-operating with the American Embassy in sending supplies to Belgium. Definite assurance from France on subject desired. 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, and Doc. 1309]

677 Nov. 20 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Requests safe passage for British as well as American ships bound for Rotterdam with food for Belgium; permission of German military asked for Americans to distribute food. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

899 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Nov. 24] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government will not interfere with neutral or unneutral ships bound for Holland with food for Belgium, but unneutral ships should carry an American certificate and a pass from the German Ambassador in Washington. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

345 Dec. 4 From the Chargé d’Affaires in France (telegram). Foreign Office unwilling to give definite answer but thinks no trouble will be encountered in supplying Belgians with food. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

10078 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the German Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of note of 1st instant, and concurs in proposals for provisioning Belgium. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

10106 Dec. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German consuls instructed to issue, upon production of American testimony, safe-conducts to unneutral ships carrying food for Belgium. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

177 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 26] From the Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands. Encloses report by the Rotterdam manager of work done by Commission for Relief in Belgium. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

1195 Dec. 26 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Zimmermann has given assurance that German military authorities will not requisition food supplies in Belgium while Commission is sending in food, and for a reasonable time after last delivery. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

1340 Dec. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 29] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British naval authorities will facilitate voyage of relief ships which carry whole cargoes of food for Belgium: Ships should not contain other cargo. All ships for Belgium must be reported to the British Ambassador in Washington. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

1210 Dec. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 31] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Special certificates required for unneutral ships carrying food and clothing to Belgians. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

Negotiations Relating to the Work of the Red Cross

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 5 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France, Germany, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and the Ministers in Belgium and Servia. American Red Cross offers to British Red Cross a unit consisting of three doctors and twelve nurses, with hospital supplies. Like offer made to all belligerents. 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

Aug. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. American Red Cross has taken over Prinz Joachim for purpose of carrying units and supplies to all countries at war; manned by Americans and flying American and Red Cross flags; to return in thirty days with privilege of similar voyages. Requests assurances that ship will not be molested. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Aug. 29 From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador in Washington (telegram). British Government agrees to arrangement to place any ship under American control for Red Cross use. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 1] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French reply to the request for protection of Red Cross ship: four conditions imposed as precaution. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323]

17 Sept. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ask British authorities to remit port duties of American Red Cross ship: suggests that ship can bring home American citizens on return voyage. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323]

17 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to ask French authorities at Havre to remit port duties on Red Cross ship. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

6 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Instructions to ascertain whether port authorities at Rotterdam will remit port duties on American Red Cross ship. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

25 Sept. 2 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to protest the attitude of France concerning Red Cross ship, and urge that vessel will not be molested during voyage and stay in French ports. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

Sept. 4 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, and Austria-Hungary. Instructions to request again assurances that Red Cross ship will not be molested but assisted on voyage. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

55 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to request Foreign Office to order German Consul at New York to give up the Hamburg’s papers so she may clear. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

13 Sept. 6 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). No port charges will be made for American Red Cross ship at Rotterdam. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Special Agent in France (telegram). French disposed to aid Red Cross 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

47 Sept. 6 [Rec’d Sept. 7] From the Ambassador in Germany. Germany approves plan of American Red Cross; ship will not be molested. Transmits message from Foreign Office to German Consul General at New York authorizing him to issue ship’s papers to Hamburg. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Special Agent in France (telegram). Foreign Office issues safe-conduct papers to Red Cross ship. Ship must come to Brest only and not bring any Germans who were or are officers. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

9 Sept. 10 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Papers report that Red Cross ship Hamburg has been detained at the request of British Ambassador, as most of crew was discovered to be Germans. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Sept. 11 From the Secretary of State to whom it may concern. Statement concerning chartering, manning, and sailing of Red Cross ship, its destination and purpose. Assurances given by British and French that ship will not be molested. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

700 Sept. 18 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British will grant all courtesies requested for Red Cross ship. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Proposal for the Exemption of Hospital Supplies from Seizure as Contraband of War

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Sept. 22 [Rec’d Sept. 23] From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Attention is called to deplorable need of supplies in hospitals of France. Suggests that representatives in the various European courts arrange with belligerent governments as to what constitutes hospital supplies, and requests that they be passed free from seizure as contraband. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Sept. 24 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Japan, and to the Minister in Belgium. King of Spain suggests that American and Spanish representatives in various European courts make joint request that arrangements be made between belligerent countries as to what constitutes hospital supplies and that such supplies in transit be considered neither Contraband nor conditional contraband. Instructions to follow this suggestion. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

789 Oct. 6 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey assents to the suggestion concerning hospital supplies and asks that Spanish and American Governments define them and submit the definition to all belligerents, together with the proposal that they will not be considered contraband. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

Oct. 8 To the American Red Cross. Requests to be informed as to what constitutes hospital supplies. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chairman of the Central Committee of the American Red. Cross to the Assistant Secretary of State. Encloses list of supplies being shipped to European hospitals. Certain articles used for medical purposes are compounded of materials which in other forms would be contraband of war. 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 1340]

Oct. 9 To the Spanish Ambassador. Conveys list of hospital supplies furnished by the Red Cross. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, and Doc. 1342]

307 Oct. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Spanish Ambassador at Washington has had no instructions re hospital supplies and prefers that Spanish Ambassador at London be conferred with. List of hospital supplies from Red Cross enclosed for submission to British Foreign Office. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, and Doc. 1342]

69 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russian authorities have been ordered to give broadest application to Article 29 of Declaration of London (contraband of war). 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Acknowledges receipt of Department’s circular regarding agreement not to consider hospital supplies as contraband. Belgian Government has not yet replied. 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

662 Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German prize ordinance No. 28 of September 30, 1909, provides that articles for sick shall not be treated as contraband. 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

234 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Reply of French Government to suggestion re hospital supplies: Agreement between belligerents can not be advantageous; likely to be broken at convenience; only peace time convention adequate. Yet suggestions are under consideration. 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 1345 and Doc. 1346]

List of papers by countries, incoming papers chronologically under date of issue List of papers by countries, incoming papers chronologically under date of issue1

CIRCULARS, PROCLAMATIONS, AND EXECUTIVE ORDERS

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 31 To Ambassadors, Ministers, and Principal Consular Officers in European Countries (telegram). Instructions re emergency passports; advice and financial assistance to American citizens abroad. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

Aug. 1 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Europe (telegram). Instructions re emergency passports; advice and financial as-sistance to American citizens abroad. 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 1145 and Doc. 1146]

1271 Aug. 4 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Austria-Hungary and Servia, between Germany and Russia, and between Germany and France. 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

1272 Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Proclamation of neutrality in war between Germany and Great Britain. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

2011 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Executive order_ _ _ _ Prohibits the transmitting or receiving for delivery by means of radio, messages of an unneutral nature, or the rendering of any unneutral service to any belligerent. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070]

1273 Aug. 7 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Austria-Hungary and Russia. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

Aug. 10 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the other Ambassadors and Ministers in Europe. Consular registration certificates 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 1145 and Doc. 1146]

1274 Aug. 13 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Great Britain and Austria-Hungary. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

1275 Aug. 14 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Proclamation of neutrality in war between France and Austria-Hungary. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

Aug. 15 Public circular issued by the Department of State. Neutrality; contraband; seizure of ships and cargo. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

Aug. 17 To the American Consuls at all Seaports (telegram). Instructions to report capture of merchant vessels. Consuls to give informal notice of claim of owner and select representative for him. 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To Diplomatic and Consular Officers of the United States of America entrusted with the interests of foreign governments at war. Instructions regarding the handling of foreign interests. Attitude should be that of impartial amity; friendly offices should be performed in accordance with wishes of both parties. 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169]

1276 Aug. 18 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Belgium and Germany. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

Aug. 19 From the President of the United States. An appeal to citizens of the United States, requesting their assistante in maintaining neutrality during the European war. 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886]

1277 Aug. 24 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Japan and Germany. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

1278 Aug. 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Proclamation of neutrality in war Between Japan and Austria-Hungary. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries (telegram). Messages relating to military or naval operations received by American diplomatic officials for transmission from one belligerent to another should be transmitted through the Department. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

1280 Sept. 1 By the President of United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Belgium and Austria-Hungary. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

2042 Sept. 5 Executive order_ _ _ One or more high-powered radio stations to be taken over by the United States Government in communication with stations in Europe, including code and cipher messages. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Sept. 11 From the Secretary of State to whom it may concern. Statement concerning chartering, manning, and sailing of Red Cross ship, its destination and purpose. Assurances given by British and French that ship will not be molested. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Sept. 12 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries (telegram). Explicit directions for persons applying for American passports and consular registration certificates. Warning against issuance to persons not Americans, who are seeking to evade military service in their own country. Special certificates to be granted to wives of persons declaring intention of becoming American citizens. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148]

Sept. 19 To the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States. Encloses a statement of the general rules to be followed by this Government in dealing with cases involving the status of armed merchant vessels visiting American ports and with cases of merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent warships from American ports. 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 979 and Doc. 980]

Sept. 19 Memorandum issued by the Secretary of State. Sets forth policy of United States regarding merchant vessels in her ports. Defines “base of operations for belligerent warships.” This Government is not under obligations to prevent shipments to other neutral ports which may be bases of supplies to belligerents. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Sept. 22 To the Diplomatic Representatives of Foreign Governments. Transmits copy of instructions and regulations issued by the Navy Department for the operation of the radio station at Tuckerton, New Jersey. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Oct. 3 To the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States. Has granted permission for passage through United States of reservists who are returning to their respective countries, provided this does not amount to military enterprise on United States territory. Each Government must give assurance that its citizens will not become public charges in this country. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907]

Oct. 5 To the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries (telegram). Correspondence re lists of prisoners or the affairs of subjects entrusted to your care may be transmitted direct to American Ambassador or Minister. All other communications must be sent through the Department. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

Oct. 7 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Pursuant to proclamation of the President, prayer offered in churches for speedy restoration of peace in Europe. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Oct. 13 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Governing board of Pan American Union conveys to belligerent countries, through the Secretary of State of the United States, hope for peace, universal sympathy, and regrets over disturbance of commercial interests of world. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Oct. 15 From the Secretary of State. Public circular regarding neutrality and trade in contraband. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920]

1286 Nov. 6 By the President of the United States. Proclamation of neutrality in war between Great Britain and Turkey. 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885]

1287 Nov. 13 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Proclamation setting forth rules and regulations for the use of the Panama Canal by vessels of belligerents and the maintenance of neutrality in the Canal Zone. Annex: Text of an agreement between the United States and Panama of October 10, 1914. 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886]

Nov. 13 Executive order_ _ Rules governing the granting and issuing of passports in the United States. 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

Nov. 22 To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Instructions to report complete information regarding vessels arriving from the United States, with view to ascertaining whether portions of cargo have been transferred to belligerents at sea. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

Nov. 25 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re reporting of names of consignors and consignees of cargo in United States ports. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

Nov. 28 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Further instructions regarding vessels arriving from American ports in ballast or with cargo; requests reports on vessels supplied at sea. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Dec. 3 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Further instructions re reports on shipping. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Dec. 21 To American Diplomatic and Consular Officers. New instructions, in pursuance of the passport regulations of November 13, 1914, concerning the preparation of applications for Departmental and emergency passports and the issuance of the latter. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Jan. 11, 1915. To all Seaport Consuls (telegram). Instructions to report upon suspected cases of violation of neutrality. Collectors to continue vigilance. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

ARGENTINA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

356 Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. Relates incidents which have occurred and have increased anti-German spirit: Alleged execution of honorary Vice Consul of Argentine Republic by German troops in Belgium, violent action of survivors of Cap Trafalgar when interned; and dispute with commander of British fleet over the limit of the territorial waters of River Plate. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092]

362 Oct. 24 [Rec’d Nov. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. The manner in which neutrality measures are being carried out in Argentina is causing dissatisfaction amongst belligerents. All merchant vessels are allowed to depart with bunkers full of coal; vessels embark with arms, ammunition and supplies, some having been converted into auxiliary cruisers; wireless stations are in full operation by Germans. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

Oct. 29 See Germany, No. 489, Oct. 24_ _ _ 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Nov. 9 To the Argentine Minister. Statement of policy pursued by Government regarding detentions by British of vessels carrying alleged contraband. 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]

Nov. 9 [Rec’d Nov. 10] From the Argentine Minister. The attitude of Argentina identical with that of the United States. Proposal to adopt uniform interpretations and methods of procedure. 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683]

Nov. 13 To the Argentine Minister. Attitude of two Governments is identical but interests in same vessels may not be identical; therefore cannot make joint representations to British Government in particular cases. Government of United States will cooperate with Argentina in these matters. 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Nov. 18 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (telegram). Minister for Foreign Affairs considers it important that Argentine Minister’s suggestion concerning mediation of Pan American Union re neutral shipping in South American waters be adopted. 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687]

371 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 18] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. To prevent the suspension of navigation in South Atlantic it is proposed that Pan American Union effect the closing of these waters to naval warfare, arranging with belligerents for protection of neutral shipping. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

Nov. 18 To the Argentine Legation. Memorandum giving a detailed account of detentions and seizures of American vessels by British, of the protests raised, and of the claims presented. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689]

377 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina. Report concerning Argentine neutrality. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120]

380 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Jan. 7, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Government officials jubilant over fact that Pan American Union accepts suggestion of Naón. Business men anticipate no more trouble, as German ships in South Atlantic have been destroyed. 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

383 Dec. 22 [Rec’d Jan. 18, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re Argentine neutrality; execution of Argentine official in Belgium; battle of Falkland Islands and sovereignty of those islands; escape of officers and men interned on the Cap Trafalgar. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126]

AUSTRIA-HUNGARY

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 13 [Rec’d July 27] From the Vice Consul General at Budapest. War between Austria-Hungary and Servia, unavoidable Servia unavoidable. Army being mobilized. Cordon being drawn around Servian frontier and in Bosnia. News suppressed and sale of horses to foreigners forbidden. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

147 July 13 [Rec’d July 30] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary. Conditions in Austria-Hungary influenced by assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand. Archduke’s death heavy blow; practical head of army with long years of training; moving spirit of navy; closest friend of Kaiser. Conditions unstable, decline of market values, slackening of domestic industries. Emperor’s health affected thereby. New heir, Charles Francis Joseph, adequate to task; well trained in army. 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 43]

171/res. July 24 [Rec’d July 27] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Demands made of Servia as result of assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, and because of the stirring up on the part of the Servian Government of the Slav population in the southern part of the Monarchy. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

178/res. July 26 [Rec’d July 28] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Servia’s answer to ultimatum of Austria-Hungary unsatisfactory. Diplomatic relations broken off. Servia mobilizing. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

July 27 Rec’d July 28] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). War in Balkans certain. Germany gives moral support to Austria. Italy neutral. Montenegro and Roumania aid Servia. Bourse closed. Martial law. War loan of 300 million crowns planned. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

July 28 [Rec’d July 29) _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits Austria-Hungary’s formal declaration of war against Servia. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

July 31 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Extremest military muster of realm, including Landsturm. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

Aug. 1 From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Inquires whether United States is disposed to assume protection of Austrian and Hungarian interests in Russia, France, Great Britain, and Montenegro. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155]

_ _ _do_ _ _ __ To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Accepts charge of Austrian and Hungarian interests in Russia, France, Great Britain, and Montenegro. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Aug. 2 [Rec’d Aug. 3] From the Vice Consul General at Budapest (telegram). Hostilities against Servia extensive. Servia offers stubborn resistance. Prices advance 50 per cent. Situation extremely bad. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

Aug. 3 From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Movement of troops toward Russia. Imperial family and nobility working for Red Cross. Great enthusiasm. 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Aug. 4 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Good offices of President Wilson in interest of European peace. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

The same to Ambassadors in Russia and Germany and on August 5 to Ambassadors in France and Great Britain.

Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 824n [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

Aug. 6 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain [Pg. CCXXIV is part of List of papers by countries, incoming papers chronologically under date of issue] 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See France 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

[Enclosure] Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Emperor of Austria-Hungary to the President (telegram). Will accept with thanks mediation when honor of flag will permit and when objects of war are attained. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Aug. 7 From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. No cabling nor direct mail shipping possible between United States on one side and Austria-Hungary and Germany on other. Request that postmaster address mail “via Rotterdam” and intrust to Dutch ships. 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Aug. 9 [Rec’d Aug. 10] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Government agrees to exemption from military law of vessels conveying Americans home, provided other belligerents also exempt them. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Aug. 10 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austria-Hungary declared war against Montenegro on August 9. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Aug. 10 To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Postmaster General informs Department that mail is dispatched by the steamship line which will most expeditiously deliver it at its destination. 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, and Doc. 859]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the other Ambassadors and Ministers in Europe. Consular registration certificates_ _ 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 1145 and Doc. 1146]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in Austria Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary has given French Ambassador passports. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austro-Hungarian military forces instructed to observe Declaration of London if other nations do so. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Aug. 15 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

Aug. 17 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Germany 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary. Re advisability of sending American warship to Turkey. 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). British see no objections to German vessels in American ports being used to bring back stranded Americans. Instructions to ask if Austria-Hungary is willing to agree with British view. 482n [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759]

Aug. 23 From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary adheres to Declaration of London on condition of reciprocity. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Aug. 26 From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Commander of Empress Elizabeth (Austrian vessel) ordered to join with German Navy in war between Japan and Austria. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Aug. 27 See Great Britain 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Sept. 4 See Germany 828n [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

17 Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary wishes British Government notified that they will treat as absolute or conditional contraband those objects and materials enumerated in Art. 22 and 24 of the Declaration of London. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Sept. 9 From the s Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (telegram). Servian Sokol in Chicago invites collections for Servian war fund. Requests that authorities prevent this breach of neutrality. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934]

Sept. 15 See Belgium 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Sept. 24 See Germany 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

X–13/xiv Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 29] From the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Attention is again called to Servian appeals in Chicago for contributions to Servian war fund. Requests that propaganda be stopped and money refunded. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934]

17—X Sept. 28 [Rec’d Sept. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Servian Sokols of United States belong to Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. These have been invited by Servian Consul to join Servian Army, a violation of neutrality. United States Government is asked to take steps to prevent it. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895]

Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 12] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Copies of peace treaties received and submitted to Government. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Canadian Government takes precautions to prevent Austrians and Hungarians from leaving Canada; therefore facilities for passage through United States unnecessary. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910]

118 Oct. 13 To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Re appeals in Chicago for contributions to Servian war fund. Department of Justice, after careful consideration, finds nothing which constitutes a violation of neutrality. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

Oct. 24 See Germany, No. 489 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

124 Nov. 5 To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador. Re Servian propaganda in Chicago. Decision rendered by Attorney General in which he finds no violation of penal laws in general nor of neutrality laws. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

258 Nov. 8 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Apprehension in America will be greatly relieved if Germany will make public declaration that cotton in neutral vessels will not be detained nor molested. 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

281 Nov. 14 [Rec’d Nov. 15] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austro-Hungarian Government desires that no unofficial correspondence leave Austria-Hungary without passing censor and no private correspondence be sent through diplomatic or consular channels. The Consul General at Budapest protests opening of his official correspondence. Suggests issuance of instructions on the subject. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

239 [Enclosure] Nov. 17(?)[Rec’d Dec. 15] Memorandum of the Austria-Hungarian Foreign Office. Re the attitude of Great Britain and France in regard to the Declaration of London. 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 412]

305 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Nov. 26] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Requests instructions regarding issuance of passports to minor children of naturalized parents or of declarants. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151]

305 Nov. 25 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, Germany, France, Japan, Turkey, and the Minister in Servia; on December 4 to the Ambassador in Russia. Suggestions for establishing uniform regulations for transmission of American official correspondence in belligerent countries. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

327 Dec. 3 To the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Passports and financial assistance may be extended to minor children of American-born parents not naturalized or of declarants. 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

334 Dec. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 9] From the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (telegram). Austria-Hungary agrees to in violability of diplomatic and consular correspondence. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

351 Dec. 16 [Rec’d Dec. 17] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Cotton non-contraband, conditional upon reciprocity of enemy states. 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

353 Dec. 17 [Rec’d Dec. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Since catastrophe to Austro-Hungarian forces in Servia, war has become unpopular. 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

BELGIUM

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 2 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Great uncertainty and timidity in financial circles. 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 3] From the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Germany refused permission to enter Belgium. Martial law declared. Antwerp in state of siege. Thousands of Americans present. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

Aug. 3 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Germany demanded privilege of sending troops through Belgium. Upon refusal, Germany invaded Belgium. Engagement at Visé with many fatalities. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Belgian group Interparliamentary Union requests neutral countries to take steps to safeguard peace and respect for treaties. 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany tries to justify her acts in Belgium by claiming France intended violating Belgian neutrality. German Minister remains in Belgium. Belgium temporizing until England makes known her position. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

Aug. 4 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ King to lead army. German note virtual declaration of war. England to support Belgium. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Regrets telegram from parliamentary group received after war was declared. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

Aug. 4 [Rec’d Aug. 5] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Has promised to keep keys and seal of German Minister, who has been handed his passports. Duties at Legation heavy, will Department arrange that some other power protect interests of Germany in Belgium? 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 1159]

Aug. 5 Memorandum of the office of the Secretary of State. Belgian Government announces that Germans have violated Belgian neutrality and entered her territory. Belgium will resist by force. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Capital may be removed to Antwerp. Diplomatic corps may follow. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Diplomatic Corps to move to Antwerp. Best for legations to remain in Brussels, especially those entrusted with protection of interests of belligerent powers. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

Aug. 5 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Cannot refuse to take charge of German interests if requested. Sufficient help will be supplied. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 824n [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

Aug. 6 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Move Legation if desirable 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Aug. 6 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Legation can render more service by remaining at Brussels. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See France 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Aug. 7 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Minister directed to use own judgment about remaining in Brussels. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

Aug. 9 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Had received from The Hague a telegram, purporting to be from German Government, proposing that Belgium allow Germany to hold Liége as base of operations against France, and requiring Belgium to detach herself from France, offering in return protection from further attack from Germany. The proposal an insult and a repetition refused by Belgium. Had refused to present this to Belgian Government, but confidentially allowed the Minister of foreign Affairs to read it. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Belgian Government would reject Germany’s proposal, if presented. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Aug. 10 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany’s proposal to Belgium authentic. Answer was indignant refusal. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 10] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Belgian Government sees no occasion for making agreement with other powers to refrain from interference with Americans returning home. This covered in Hague convention. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

Aug. 15 See Great Britain 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

Aug. 17 See Germany 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 18] From the Minister in Begium (telegram). Government removed to Antwerp. Legation will remain in Brussels to take care of German and British interests. Spanish Minister remains also, protecting French and Russian interests. Our Consul General in Antwerp recognized in a pseudo-diplomatic capacity. 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

Aug. 18 To the Belgian Minister (telegram). Large number Belgian reservists desire to return to their country through the United States. Asks if Minister wishes the Department to make arrangements for their passage. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Aug. 19 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). His course of action approved. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Belgian Minister. In 1839, Prussia, France, England, Austria, and Russia became guarantors of the treaty which made Belgium an independent and perpetually neutral state. Germany has broken her treaty and invaded Belgium; therefore it is duty of Belgium to resist. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 2] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). German troops have occupied Brussels. Small force in city; troops encamped outside. Opposition by Belgians abandoned to prevent loss of life and destruction of art treasure. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Aug. 21 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). President advises Legation to move to Antwerp in order to be in immediate touch with Belgian Government. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Will make every effort to move Legation to Antwerp as soon as possible. Brussels is surrounded by armies and Antwerp at present inaccessible. Ministers of Spain and 17 other neutral powers still in Brussels. By remaining in Brussels the Embassy and staff have rendered great service to the city and to the Belgian Government. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Aug. 25 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Department accepts judgment of Ambassador concerning moving Legation from Brussels. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Antwerp calm. Communication cut off. German women and children expelled but no bodily harm done to them. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 29] From the Belgian Minister. Austria-Hungary has declared war on Belgium. 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172]

Sept. 4 To the Belgian Minister. Acknowledges receipt of Belgian note protesting against violation of neutrality by Germany. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Diplomatic and consular officers should confine communications to statements of facts and not express opinions. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259]

953 Sept. 5 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Belgian Minister. Communications enclosed in which Germany again offers to spare Belgium as much as will be consistent with her plan of campaign against France, and in which Belgium, with the approval of her allies, reiterates her defiance. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Sept. 15 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). The same to the Ambassadors in Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. United States has just signed peace treaties with Great Britain, France, Spain and China; in all, has treaties with more than two-thirds of population of globe. Desires treaty with Belgium also. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Sept. 16 Remarks of President Wilson to the Belgian Commission. Welcomes representatives of the King of Belgium with pleasure; expresses warm sympathy and friendship for Belgian people; predicts a day of reckoning when the opinion of mankind will pass final judgment upon wrongs committed. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265]

Sept. 18 To the Belgian Minister. Arrangements made for Belgian reservists to pass from Montreal through United States to take steamer. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

Sept. 23 To the Minister in in Belgium (telegram). Forwards communication from the German Government signifying the willingness of Germany to observe the neutrality of African colonies in free-trade zone according to treaties. 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

Sept. 24 -------------------- See Germany ----------------------- 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 29] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Reports of excesses are in spirit true. Will make a comprehensive report later. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272]

Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 1] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German authorities in Brussels are willing to spare monuments at Antwerp if Belgians agree not to use them for military purposes. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272]

Oct. 4 From thy Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Whitlock reports that Belgium accepts German proposition relative to protection of historical monuments. 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 7] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Bombardment has been announced. Suggests intercession of United States to prevent carnage and destruction. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277]

Oct. 8 To the Consul General at Antwerp (telegram). Regrets that there is no opportunity for the United States to intercede in matter of bombardment of Antwerp. Information about monuments communicated to the Minister at Brussels. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277]

41 Oct. 10 From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Germans request Spanish and American Ministers to notify Antwerp of intended bombardment of city. Germans have been furnished with list of buildings containing art treasures. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277]

34 Oct. 12 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Approves his action regarding bombardment of the city. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

21 Oct. 16 [Rec’d Oct. 19]. From the Minister in Belgium to the President (telegram). Civil population of Belgium facing starvation. Plea to President to find some way to help. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 1289 and Doc. 1290]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). It is necessary to extend relief work to the whole of Belgium. Committee has been organized. Assurances of German Government that food will not be taken by military. Also necessary to secure permission of England. 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 1289 and Doc. 1290]

39 Oct. 19 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Importation of foodstuffs for poor of Belgium has been approved by Germany; Embassy in London so advised. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293]

Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Acknowledges receipt of Department’s circular regarding agreement not to consider hospital supplies as contraband. Belgian Government has not yet replied. 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

40 Oct. 20 To the Minister in Belgium (telegram). Relief plan approved. Ambassador at London to render assistance. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

Oct. 24 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Germany, No. 489 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

12 Nov. 16 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Minister in Belgium. Belgium formerly interested in peace treaties but has no time at present for calm and careful consideration. 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

BRAZIL

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Sept. 14 To the Ambassador in Brazil (telegram). Steamer Robert Dollar given provisional certificate of registration as American vessel by American Consul General at Rio de Janeiro. Reported that vessel denied clearance by Brazilian authorities. Instructions to investigate and request release. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

Sept. 16 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ Action of Brazilian authorities sets aside that of American authorities and assumes position of a belligerent captor toward steamer Robert Dollar . 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775]

Sept. 21 [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Vice Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (telegram.) American steamer Berwind sailed from New York with coal cargo; master told to follow instructions of supercargo. Coal transferred to Cap Trafalgar and Eleanore Wörmann at sea. Arrived in Rio de Janeiro reporting engagement between the former and a British ship. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (telegram). British Legation awaiting instructions from London before closing register of steamer Robert Dollar . 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778]

Sept. 23 From the Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (telegram). Provisional register delivered to steamer Robert Dollar , and order to sail given. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778]

461 Sept. 23 [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Brazil. Delay in sailing of steamer Robert Dollar due to misunderstanding of instructions caused by delayed telegram. Full explanation given. 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783]

466 Oct. 7 [Rec’d Oct. 27] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Brazilian Government has difficulty in maintaining neutrality, sentiment favoring France except in the south, which is pro-German. Merchant vessels occasion considerable embarrassment; secret wireless stations transmit much information. 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Oct. 29 -------------------- See Germany, No 489, Oct. 24. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

BULGARIA (See Roumania)

CHILE

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

550 Nov. 7 [Rec’d Dec. 12] From the Ambassador in Chile. German squadron, composed of Scharnhorst, Gneisenau and, Nurnberg, engaged British squadron near island of Santa Maria. Good Hope and Monmouth destroyed; Glasgow and Otranto escaped. London press has charged Chile with unneutrality. British Government satisfied with explanation of Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs. German transport Prince Eitel was ordered to leave Valparaiso. 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114]

Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Minister at Washington (telegram). Chancellor Muller has requested of British Minister the establishment of a neutral zone from American coast to Cape Verde meridian. Forwards Chilean memorandum regarding the adoption by American countries of new rules to insure the protection of their neutrality and commerce. 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Nov. 21 From the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (telegram). The Sacramento reports that the cargo was taken by Germans from the French sailing vessel Valentine, which was sunk. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

Nov. 26 ----do------ Reports irregularities aboard the Sacramento. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024]

Nov. 28 To the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (telegram). Instructions to investigate and report amounts and kinds of cargo supplied to German vessels at sea. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024]

Dec. 19 From the Ambassador in Chile (telegram). New neutrality regulations have been issued. Protests have been made to Germany against violation of Chilean neutrality. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118]

Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Embassy at Washington (telegram). Transmits text of the decree of Chilean Government containing regulations for the coaling of vessels in Chilean ports. 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121]

Dec. 22 To the Chilean Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of communication re establishment of neutral zone in Atlantic from American coast to meridian of Cape Verde. Pan-American Neutrality Commission will consider the suggestion. 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698]

Dec. 29 [Rec’d Dec. 30] From the Ambassador in Chile (telegram). Notification of the Foreign Office that unless the Sacramento leaves within 24 hours, both ship and crew will be interned 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

Dec. 30 To the Ambassador in Chile (telegram). Re the Sacramento. Instructs Consul to withhold ship’s papers and refuse to discharge crew. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

CHINA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 31 [Rec’d July 30] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). British naval vessels in China dismantled and crews sent to Weihaiwei anticipating hostilities with Germany. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

Aug. 3 -----do--------- Withdrawal of British and German naval forces from Yangtze leaves responsibility of protecting foreign interests to Americans and Japanese. Requests that one of the larger United States vessels be left at Shanghai. Proposal to neutralize all foreign settlement concessions in China. 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

----do----- -----do--------- Request for instructions as to whether to encourage Chinese in proposing to belligerent powers not to engage in hostilities on Chinese territory or adjacent leased territory. 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]

Aug. 6 -----do--------- Chinese request United States and Japan to suggest that belligerents maintain neutrality throughout their jurisdiction in China. Wishes that attitude of German Government be made known. 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]

Aug. 7 To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Legation is authorized to participate in arrangements to neutralize foreign settlements in China not including leased areas. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Department asks for report on nationality and number of troops withdrawn from Chinese railways and those remaining. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum received from Chinese Minister here re neutralization of Chinese territory. Matter under consideration. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). German Chargé d’Affaires states that Japan is bound by treaty to assist Russia and Great Britain in case of war with Germany. 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Aug. 8 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Troops in Chinese territory, other than American forces, negligible. Japanese preparing to assist in protecting foreign interests. 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Aug. 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Japanese Chargé states Japan is ready to take Kiaochow. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

Aug. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Chinese are basing hopes upon the rumor that the United States is sending fleet to aid China. Requests authoritative information. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). United States is not sending reinforcements to its Asiatic Fleet. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 12] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). From Chinese sources: Japan seeking to cooperate with Great Britain against Tsingtao and upon some pretext planning to occupy South Manchuria and Fukien as well as Kiaochow. 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Aug. 19 ----do------- German Chargé discusses informally with China the immediate retrocession of Kiaochow. Chinese Government warned against such action. Desires information from Department. 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

-----do------ To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). United States refrains from expressing any opinion upon retrocession of Kiaochow to China. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Japan advises China to remain passive as regards Kiaochow. Chinese propose that United States secure the retrocession of leased territory to China. 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Aug. 20 To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Department unable to comply with Chinese proposal that United States secure retrocession of leased territory to China. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

Sept. 3 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). German, Japanese, and British forces are disregarding neutrality of China. China unable to prevent it. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

362 [Enclosure] Sept. 3 From the Chinese Minister of Foreign Affaires to the American Chargé d’Affaires. Re Chinese neutrality 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 338]

362 Sept. 10 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Chargé d’Affaires in China. China declares herself unable to preserve neutrality in regions necessary for the passage of belligerent troops. Germany protests against Chinese Government’s acquiescence in violations of proclaimed neutrality, thus incurring liability for damage to German interests. China has looked to United States for assistance in vain. United States forces used for police duty should only be brought up to full strength, nothing more. Encloses note of September 3 on this subject from Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs. 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Sept. 12 To the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Directed to ascertain truth as to statement that Japanese will expel Germans from neutral districts in China. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Sept. 15 From the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Press reports untrue; Germans not expelled from Chinese neutral territory. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Sept. 28 [Rec’d Sept. 29] ----do------ Japanese forces have taken mines and occupied Weihsien. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331]

Sept. 29 -----do----- Japan has formally notified China that she is compelled to take possession of Shantung Railway as far west as Tsinan. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331]

-----do----- -----do----- Japanese Minister declares that Shantung Railway, being German property, is subject to seizure. 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331]

Sept. 30 From the Minister in China (telegram). British Legation has urged its Government to restrain Japanese from seizing Shantung Railway. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct. 1] -----do------ China will not oppose Japan, but regrets occupation of Shantung Railway and extension of hostilities; requests “United States to ask Great Britain to restrain Japan in her military operations. 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

406 Oct. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the Minister in China. Forwards extracts from the Peking Gazette: Japanese official reply to China re seizure of Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway; speeches in the National Assembly of Liang Ch’i-ch’iao, General Hsu, Chao Wei-hsi, Wang Yi-tang, and General Tsai Ao stressing need for patriotism and military strength to oppose Japan; editorial comments thereon. 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

192 Nov. 4 To the Minister in China. China could hardly hope to keep leased territory from being involved in war, but open ports with cosmopolitan population should be excluded by general consent from military operations. United States Navy Department will increase number of vessels in Chinese waters. United States anxious to promote welfare of China by peaceful methods but could not be expected to entangle herself in international difficulties. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Dec. 18 From the Minister in China (telegram). Controversy between Japanese and Chinese, each claiming right to appoint officers in Tsingtao. Six regiments of Japanese troops stationed at Mukden. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Dec. 23 ----do---------- Japanese demand appointment to Tsingtao customs of 49 officials taken from Japanese customs administration. This will break up Maritime Customs Service. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Dec. 30 To the Minister in China (telegram). Desires to know if China has informed British Government of Japan’s demand regarding Tsingtao customs officials. 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Jan. 2, 1915 From the Minister in China (telegram). British Legation was informed unofficially of Japan’s demands in China, and has made informal representations to Japanese. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

COLOMBIA

No. Dates From and to whom Subject Page

Oct. 3 [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Consul at Barranquilla. Grant [Gaunt?], Captain in British Navy, recently visited Barranquilla and Santa Marta, in search of evidence of breach of neutrality at wireless stations. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091]

Nov. 13 From the Colombian Legation. Quotes decrees to prove that Government has tried to prevent unneutral acts. Possible that belligerents have built concealed stations for wireless on uninhabited coasts. 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Nov. 14 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). British and French complain that neutrality is not enforced in Colombia. Charge use of wireless stations by Germans. Requests facts. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 15 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Colombian Government to the Colombian Legation at Washington (telegram). Cartagena radio station has been put in charge of expert Government operator and foreign employees dismissed. Great Britain asks that station be closed. Asks if United States stations are closed. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 16 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Minister in Ecuador. United States is not trying to control action of other governments. French and British only asked United States to use moral influence to bring about neutrality. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099]

116 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 12] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia. Reports that Colombian Government is enforcing neutrality. British inspector of wireless stations satisfied. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005]

Nov. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 22] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). Correspondence of the United States, disclaiming any interference to enforce neutrality in South America, has been published in Colombia and received with satisfaction. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104]

Nov. 25 [Rec’d Nov. 27] From the Secretary of the Colombian Legation. Encloses cable messages of November 19 and 24 in which Ministry of Foreign Affairs claims that Colombia follows the same neutrality regulations as the United States. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

117 Nov. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia. Encloses newspaper clippings on subject of Colombia’s failure to observe neutrality, Washington represented as about to enforce observance; also copy of a note addressed to Colombian Minister on November 19 explaining the attitude of United States, which had quieting effect. 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 1116]

Dec. 1 [Rec’d Dec. 2] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (telegram). Newspapers publish statements that United States will permit European nations to enforce compliance with neutrality regulations in South America. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

120 [Enclosure] Dec. 1 [Rec’d Jan. 4, 1915] From the Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs to the American Chargé d’Affaires. Inquiring the policy of United States if European nations should send expedition to South America to enforce neutrality. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1123 and Doc. 1124]

120 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Jan. 4, 1915] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia. Captain Gaunt reports that wireless station at Cartagena is in operation under German influence, and wireless outfits on German interned ships are used with mufflers. German Minister has closed the station. Encloses note from Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs of December 1, and the reply December 5, both bearing upon this subject. 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

DENMARK

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

796 Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark. Copy of Denmark’s declaration of neutrality transmitted. Only partial mobilization for defense of Copenhagen, in order not to antagonize Germany. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

797 Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 19] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Parliament enacted precautionary measures; punishment against violations of neutrality; conserving currency of country; strict harbor regulations. Partial mobilization. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

Aug. 5 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (telegram). Denmark declares neutrality_ _ _ _ 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

Aug. 6 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Danish Minister. Notification that waters around Denmark have been mined. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]

Aug. 7 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (telegram). Denmark has mined her waters and is mobilizing. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Danish Minister. Notification that Danish waters have been more extensively mined. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709]

Oct. 16 See Norway 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 19 From the Minister in Denmark (telegram). Danish have no objection to exportation through Denmark to Germany of cotton from United States if on through bill of lading. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

813 Nov. 27 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the Minister in Denmark. Re procuring release of cotton on steamers Hellig Olav, Van Leer , and Frederick held up by Danish Government. Owing to scarcity of cotton in. Denmark, certain shipments detained. Cargoes on Frederick and Triton released, to be reexported to Germany. 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

Dec. 15 From the Danish Minister. Protests against interference with trade. 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 545]

ECUADOR

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Nov. 14 To the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). British and French Governments complain that neutrality proclamation is not enforced in Ecuador. Charge that Galápagos Islands are German base for naval supplies. Requests facts. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 15 From the Ecuadorian Minister (telegram). Inquires whether British and French Ambassadors have complained against violation of neutrality of Ecuador. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Nov. 16 To the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). United States is not trying to control action of other governments. French and British only asked United States to use moral influence to bring about neutrality. 687n [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099]

Nov. 17 To the Ecuadorian Minister (telegram). Newspapers have misrepresented the intention of the United States in matter of neutrality. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102]

Nov. 19 [Rec’d Nov. 20] From the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). Ecuador weak from revolution, but doing all in its power to preserve neutrality. If charges are true concerning Galápagos Islands, will protest to Germany. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ecuadorian Minister. Requests exact copy of complaint made by France and Great Britain against Ecuador. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102]

Nov. 25 From the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). Minister for Foreign Affairs proposes that all American Republics promulgate a statement declaring that in respect to the neutrality of each one of the American nations, all are interested. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104]

84 Nov. 26 [Rec’d Dec. 26] From the Minister in Ecuador. Thorough investigation has been made of reports of Ecuador’s failure to enforce neutrality. Wireless stations at Guayaquil used by German Consul in person. Newspapers misrepresentations aroused excitement but publishing of note from the Department soon quieted this feeling. Encloses his statement published in El Dia on November 19. 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 1119]

Dec. 3 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ecuadorian Minister. Ecuador proposes that belligerents be induced to declare the seas that wash coasts of America a neutral zone, in order to exclude warlike operations. Quotes cablegram from the Ecuadorian Minister of Foreign Affairs of November 30, declaring that Ecuadorian Government did not know that Germans were using Galápagos Islands for a naval base. 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

Dec. 8 To the Ecuadorian Minister. It is not customary to give copies of communications. Restates that British and French allege infraction of rules of neutrality by Colombia and Ecuador and request that the United States use moral influence to prevent this. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

Dec. 22 [Rec’d Dec. 23] From the Minister in Ecuador (telegram). Investigations of the charges of the use of Galápagos Islands by Germans for naval base have disclosed the fact that German, English, and Japanese vessels have been at the islands and have bought cotton and provisions but no coal. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118]

Dec. 25 [Rec’d Jan. 2, 1915] From the Ecuadorian Minister. Reports that no violation of nutrality has been committed on Ecuadorian islands. 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

16 Jan. 13, 1915 To the Ecuadorian Minister. Department has communicated ’substance of note re neutrality of Ecuador to the French and British Embassies. 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125]

EGYPT

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug, 7 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Vice Consul General at Cairo (telegram). British Army of Occupation renders Egypt liable to attack by enemies of Great Britain; consequently, Egypt claim protection of Great Britain. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

57 Aug. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 1] From the Vice Consul General at Cairo. Forwards Journal officiel announcing neutrality of Egypt. Protection by British Army of Occupation. Theoretically Egypt is vilayet of Ottoman Empire. Egypt rule by Great Britain since 1882 in order to have military control of Suez Canal. Troops from India to guard against Turkish attack. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Aug. 13 From the Vice Consul General at Cairo (telegram). Great Britain has declared war against Austria. Diplomatic relations between Egypt and Germany have ceased; similar action will be taken against Austria. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

Nov. 2 From the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). General commanding British Army of Occupation in Egypt ordered to assume military control and protection of Egypt. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

82 Nov. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Consul General at Cairo. Martial law proclaimed in Egypt in order to hold natives under more rigid control. Many transports have passed through Suez Canal. Camels from India detained. West boundary unprotected. Khedive and notables in Constantinople. 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Nov. 7 From the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). British General in Egypt assumed sole burden of defending Egypt against Turkey; asked no assistance of Mohammedans. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 12] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Prince Hussein, uncle of Khedive, about to be proclaimed by British as Sultan of Egypt. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270]

Dec. 12 To the Consul General at Cairo (telegram). Instructions to deal with Khedive as a de facto official. 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 20] From the Diplomatic Agent at Cairo (telegram). Prince Hussein proclaimed Sultan of Egypt by King George. Capitulations no longer in harmony with development of country. Changes to be made after the war. 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

FRANCE

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 28 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Situation in Europe gravest in history. Civilization threatened. Laboring classes against war. Fear Germany. Suggests strong plea from United States for moderation and delay. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

July 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Stock Exchange action deferring settlements for 30 days has quieting effect upon market. French hopeful of confining hostilities to present belligerents. 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

July 31 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Allard Bank closed, failed to get money from Russia, Germany, or England. Bank of France refused assistance. Other banks suspend payments. Rumors of mobilization. Permission to issue emergency passports requested. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador in France instructed to ask French Government if it will maintain neutrality. German Ambassador in Washington has asked United States to take charge of German Embassy in France in event of negative reply. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Will accede to a German request that United States take over German interests in France, but only with the understanding that we will do the same for other countries. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53]

Aug. 1 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). No hope of avoiding hostilities. Some changes in cabinet. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Orders for mobilization to-night. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Thousands of Americans unable to secure passage home. Suggests that foreign-built ships owned by Americans be allowed to fly American flag to transport these citizens to United States. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Aug. 2 [Rec’d Aug. 3] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Reported hostilities between Germany and France; neither desirous of being first to declare war. German Ambassador still in France. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

Aug. 4 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Martial law proclaimed. German Ambassador has left Paris, turning over Embassy to United States. Raids by French aeronauts in German territory and violation of Belgian neutrality by Germans. 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]

661 [Enclosure] Aug. 4 From the French Minister of Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Official notification of hostilities between France and Germany, and French protest against the violation of neutrality of Belgium and Luxemburg and the attack upon France contrary to existing treaties. 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the French Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). French Government refuses to recognize the legality of a bill pending before Congress to facilitate the acquisition by American nationals of foreign-owned vessels. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Aug. 5 See Austria-Hungary, Aug. 4 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Transmits statement from Judge Gary: 30,000 Americans desirous of returning home. Lack of food, etc., make it imperative that they leave. American Government urged to secure facilities for immediate transportation. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul at St. Pierre (telegram). Requests authorization to protect Western Union telegraph cables as neutral property. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 824n [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

[Enclosure] Aug. 6 [Rec’d Aug. 7] From the President of France to the President (telegram). France appreciates interest of United States in the destiny of France; message proof of mutual love of peace; France not the aggressor, notwithstanding numerous provocations. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Aug. 6 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Germany, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and the Minister in Belgium. Instructions to ascertain if French Government will agree not to molest vessels bringing American citizens home. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Aug. 7 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Placing of American-owned but foreign-built vessels under American flag regarded in France as likely to assist Germany. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France. Instructions to secure assurance of Liberian neutrality. 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Aug. 8 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ The bill before Congress does not cover the subject of transfer of ships of belligerents to citizens of United States. This will be governed by principles of international law. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Protests against reported decision of United States Government that all that could be utilized for the army, either men or supplies, will be considered as contraband. Such policy would be in violation of neutrality and would result in economic dangers. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890]

Aug. 10 [Rec’d Aug. 12] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Statements of Germany as to who started hostilities, challenged by French Chargé. Germans claim French aviators threw bombs over German territory and also violated Belgian territory. French protest to German Government against violations of French territory, violation of Luxemburg, and ultimatum to Belgium. Germany trying to shift responsibility for war. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austrian troops on the French-German frontier constitute an operation against France. Diplomatic relations severed. 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Aug. 11 To the Consul at St. Pierre (telegram). Submarine telegraphic cables outside territorial waters of neutrals may be cut by belligerents. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Submits for consideration of British Government alternative suggestions for receiving and transmitting wireless and cable messages by belligerents. 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government will respect neutrality of Liberia. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Requests instructions concerning the granting to individuals holding first papers a certificate of identity to secure a permis de sejour pending opportunity to return home. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148]

Aug. 12 From the French Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). Difference shown between wireless and cable messages, citing advantage of wireless in immediate communication with vessels at sea. Cutting of Germany’s cable an advantage gained by war; not the part of a neutral power to reestablish that condition. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Certificates of identity may be issued to persons holding first papers, if seven years have not elapsed and permanent residence abroad has not been acquired. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. French Government, through Sir Edward Grey, presented a virtual declaration of war on Austria-Hungary, declaring that the latter had sent troops through Germany to menace the French frontier and had declared war with Russia, the ally of France. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143]

1367 Aug. 13 To the French Chargé d’Affaires. This country will not unnecessarily restrict commerce of its citizens with countries at war. Transmits instructions to collectors of customs; also President’s proclamation, in which it is shown that there is no resistance to reservists in army of any belligerent wishing to leave this country for military service. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890]

Aug. 14 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Inquiry when France will sign peace treaty. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to ascertain if Amber cans stranded in Genoa can be transported home on Moltke and König Albert unmolested. 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Requests that authorization be given Commissioner of Immigration at Montreal to permit French reservists to proceed individually to New York to take ship abroad. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Aug. 15 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Department considering chartering. German vessels now in American ports for transporting stranded Americans home. Instructions to ascertain if British are willing to extend every facility to such ships. 478n [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

Aug. 16 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French suspicious of German ships and prefer to wait until England takes the lead regarding repatriation of Americans. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re neutralization of German vessels in New York Harbor, France would oppose it. In Declaration of London Germany refused to accept the principle. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]

Aug. 19 See Great Britain 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Germany. Statement of conditions in Turkish waters and inquiry as to advisability of sending American battleships to protect Christians. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary. British see no objections to German vessels in American ports being used to bring back stranded Americans. Instructions to ask if French are willing to agree with British view. 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 211 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government objects to 1 using German ships to repatriate American citizens; does not interpret “philanthropic mission” according to Hague convention to include such an act. French, English, or any 1 neutral ships suggested instead. French Government offers to transport Americans. 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the French Chargé d’Affaires. Government informed that Austro-Hungarian shipowners are trying to get certificates of Federal nationality for vessels sold to American citizens. Such flag transfers could not be recognized by French Government. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to ask French Government upon what grounds demands upon Liberia are based. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 221 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French do not approve of using German ships to transport Americans. Advice to Department to avoid use of German ships if possible. 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 759 and Doc. 760]

Aug. 24 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ French request Liberia to exercise censorship over operations of German wireless station. Willing that same treatment be accorded French station if Germans request it. 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Aug. 25 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Department considering chartering of German ships for return of stranded Americans. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

Aug. 26 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government replies that conditions in Orient are due to German agitation which tends to provoke Mussulman fanaticism. French warships would aggravate situation. Suggestion of America favorably received. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Aug. 27 [Rec’d Aug. 28] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germans have broken through lines of the Allies south of Lille and probably at Sedan. French Government contemplating moving to Bordeaux. Request for instructions for Legation. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Aug. 27 See Great Britain 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Aug. 29 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Ambassador to use own judgment about moving Embassy. 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172]

Aug. 30 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). British troops withstood German troops for three days but fell back for lack of French reinforcements. French troops have arrived and conditions are more hopeful. French Government removing gold from Paris. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 1] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ French reply to the request for protection of Red Cross ship: four conditions imposed as precaution. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323]

17 Sept. 1 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to ask French authorities at Havre to remit port duties on Red Cross ship. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

18 Sept. 2 [Rec’d Sept. 3] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Thanked by President of France for decision to remain in Paris; he considers it a restraining influence against destruction of art treasures by enemy. France will not accept any terms of peace. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Sept. 2 To the French Ambassador. Acknowledges letter of August 20, 1914, re certificates of ownership of American vessels. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771]

25 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to protest the attitude of France concerning Red Cross ship, and urge that vessel will not be molested during voyage and stay in French ports. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government will observe Declaration of London with certain reservations, additions, and modifications, text of which is transmitted. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the French Ambassador. Purchase of German ships by United States during war contrary to Declaration of London. Command of sea has enabled English and French to make these vessels worse than useless to Germany. This disadvantage United States would turn to advantage and profit for Germany. 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

47 Sept. 4 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). British Ambassador authorized to sign peace treaty. French treaty ready, United States Government having accepted all changes suggested by France. Spanish Ambassador instructed to sign. Twenty-two treaties already signed. 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

1376 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the French Ambassador. Announces removal of restrictions preventing French reservists in Canada from entering United States in transit to mother country. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Germany 828n [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

Sept. 6 From the Special Agent in France (telegram). French disposed to aid Red Cross. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 8] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office issues safe-conduct papers to Red Cross ship. Ship must come to Brest only and not bring any Germans who were or are officers. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

49 Sept. 8 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). France arranging to sign treaty on same day as Great Britain. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Proposal of mediation sent to Germany. It at least gives nations opportunity to explain their attitude, and fixes responsibility for continuation of war. 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

53 Sept. 8 [Rec’d Sept. 9] From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Telegram from German General Staff advises Americans to leave Paris. Reply: If Germans enter Paris they are expected to protect American property and that of other countries entrusted to her care. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

59 Sept. 9 [Rec’d Sept. 10] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ France’s reply to proposals of mediation: France not the aggressor and cannot accept mediation. Will continue struggle to the end. Agreement of Entente powers not to make separate peace. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Sept. 10 From the President of France to the President of the United States (telegram). Denounces German charges that French and British have used dumdum bullets; Germany herself has used them since beginning of war and has committed other atrocities already complained of. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Sept. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the French Ambassador. Calls attention to fact that three German steamers are loading large quantities coal in Manila. That port a center of indirect replenishment for German warships. Requests United States to take measures to prevent this. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

Sept. 19 From the President to the President of France (telegram). Expresses appreciation of confidence placed in the United States and declares that the time will come when those responsible for the war will bear the burden of the judgment of the world. 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Sept. 21 [Rec’d Sept. 23] From the French Ambassador. American steamer Riopasig sailed from Manila to Guam with cargo of coal. Thought to have resupplied a German warship. Such acts are contrary to neutrality. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Sept. 23 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Forwards communication from the German Government signifying the willingness of Germany to observe the neutrality of African colonies in free-trade zone according to treaties. 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

Sept. 24 See Germany 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Sept. 25 To the French Ambassador. American citizens claim letters to friends in Germany have not reached their destination. Request that some course be taken to prevent this delay or loss of mail. 533n [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861]

163 [Enclosure] Sept. 28 From the French Foreign Office to the American Ambassador in France (telegram). Germany having already started hostilities in the Congo basin against the French and Belgian possessions France can no longer abide by the treaties. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Sept. 28 [Rec’d Sept. 30] From the French Ambassador. Regrets that American letters have not reached Germany. Such mail should be sent on Dutch steamers. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

1388 Sept. 29 To the French Ambassador. American steamer Riopasig was seized while approaching the Philippines and held at Sandakan as prize of war. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Oct. 2 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Acknowledges note of protest against purchase by United States of German ships. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780]

1389 Oct. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Elmshorn and Bechum have taken coal at Manila for first time during war. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999]

704 [Enclosure] Oct. 6 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the French Minister of Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Transmits notification that, automatic mines having been laid by Austria-Hungary in the Adriatic, France is obliged to take similar measures. Danger zone specified. 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

Oct. 10 [Rec’d Oct. 12] From the French Ambassador. French Government accepts conditions imposed for passage of its citizens through United States. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910]

6 Oct. 17 [Rec’d Nov. 23] From the Consul at Roubaix. Had suggested that officials of Roubaix, Tourcoing, and Lille send a delegation to the German army requesting them not to fire on the cities. Idea not considered feasible. Had himself, upon suggestion of prefect of Lille, called attention of German general to fact that these cities carry on large trade with United States and asked that they be spared. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

Oct. 22 From the French Ambassador. French Government protests against transfer of German ships Chatham and Standard to American flag as being contrary to Declaration of London. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Oct. 24 See Germany, No. 489 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

234 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Reply of French Government to suggestion re hospital supplies: Agreement between belligerents cannot be advantageous; likely to be broken at convenience; only peace time convention adequate. 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 1345 and Doc. 1346]

220 Oct. 31 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Harbison Walker Refractories Co. requests permission for exportation of chrome ore from New Caledonia. Natural Products Refining Co. and E. J. Lavino & Co. make same request. Instruction to ascertain views of Foreign Office. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

221 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ France requested to give assurance of neutrality of foodstuffs for Belgian relief. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298]

231 Nov. 4 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Inquires whether French Government has given assurance of recognition of neutrality of goods shipped to American Commission for Relief in Belgium. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301]

248 Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Question of neutrality of food-stuffs for Belgium is under consideration. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301]

Nov. 7 To the French Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of note relative to transfer to American registry of German vessels Standard and Chatham. 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

267 Nov. 11 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions have been sent to the French Minister at The Hague to offer no objection to the transit of foodstuffs through Netherlands from United States. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304]

277 Nov. 14 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ As chrome ore in New Caledonia is for use of Army and Navy, it cannot be exported to United States. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the French Ambassador. Transmits at request of German Government a copy of the White Book regarding alleged breach of the Geneva convention by French troops and irregulars. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

275 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). The British Government is cooperating with the American Embassy in sending supplies to Belgium. Definite assurance from France desired. 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, and Doc. 1309]

286 Nov. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to cooperate with Swiss Minister in protesting rigors of censorship of commercial telegrams. 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in France. Investigation of prison conditions. 754n [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

299 Nov. 22 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). Reports that French Government authorizes telegrams in code over certain lines. Specific directions given. 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826]

303 Nov. 25 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Natural Products Refining Co. needs 2,000 tons chrome ore; quantity so small, it cannot affect supply for Army or Navy. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

310 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ ------------------- See Austria-Hungary, No. 305 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Nov. 30 From the Special Agent in France (telegram). Transmits note from French Minister for Foreign Affairs for information of the Ottoman Government: Ottoman warships bombarded two unprotected towns before war was declared. If any French subject is molested in Ottoman Empire, France will hold officials personally responsible. Case of Eyoub Sabri and Fuaddibra explained. 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

Dec. 1 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the French Ambassador. British do not interfere with shipments of cotton. French have caused undue detentions of cargoes, causing great expense. A statement of French Government regarding immunity is desired. 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

349 Dec. 4 From the Secretary of the Embassy in France (telegram). French Government may grant request to ship chrome ore if assurance is given for home consumption only. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

345 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Chargé d’Affaires in France (telegram). Foreign Office unwilling to give definite answer but thinks no trouble will be encountered in supplying Belgians with food. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

356 Dec. 7 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Instructions to bring to attention of Foreign Office that commercial and official messages to Rome are intercepted by French. Italians make similar complaint. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

360 Dec. 9 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ American importers will give any bond required to secure chrome ore. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

361 Dec. 10 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to bring to attention of Foreign Office that telegrams to Italy via French cables have not been delivered. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]

Dec. 13 [Rec’d Dec. 14] From the French Ambassador. French give same assurance concerning shipments of cotton as British. 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

386 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in France (telegram). Protests capture of Standard Oil steamers by French. Their offer to pay the value of cargo not satisfactory to United States. 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

403 Dec. 24 From the Ambassador in France (telegram). French Government authorizes export of chrome ore from New Caledonia under certain conditions. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

8 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul at Roubaix. Instructions to avoid intervention and observe proclamation of neutrality. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

428 Jan. 5, 1915. From the Ambassador in France (telegram). British and French lists correspond. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

1423 Jan. 13, 1915. To the French Ambassador. In reply to complaint against Ecuador for non-observance of neutrality, the enclosed notes of December 1 and 25 from the Ecuadorian Minister will furnish an explanation. 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1123 and Doc. 1124]

GERMANY

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Feb. 19 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Public opinion is against signing of peace treaty. 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

July 15 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Seventeen peace treaties already signed providing for investigation of all disputes prior to war. Form of British and French treaties agreed upon to be signed after submission to self-governing colonies for ratification. Germany urged to ratify on same day. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

July 18 From the Ambassador in Germany. No chance of Germany’s signing peace treaty. 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

July 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Possibility of matters being arranged without general European war. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

July 30 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany’s efforts for peace fruitless. General European war certain. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

July 30 [Rec’d July 31] From the Consul General at Hamburg (telegram). Imperator will not sail 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45]

July 31 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Russia’s mobilization makes war inevitable. United States asked to take over Russian and French Embassies. Food prices doubled. Requests food, gold, and navy vessel for Americans desiring to leave Germany. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45]

July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the German Chargé d’Affaires. United States is urged to protect interests of Germany in Russia and other countries. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Aug. 1 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Foreign Minister asks if United States will take over German embassies in France, Russia, and any other countries with which Germany may be at war. State Department is asked a second time for instructions and for gold and ships for stranded Americans. Germans think Japan will attack United States.

Aug. 1 To the German Embassy (telegram). United States will extend diplomatic and consular protection to German interests in Russia with understanding that same services will be rendered to other governments if requested. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155]

Aug. 2 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Third request for instructions as to United States taking over German embassies in countries with which Germany is at war. Asks permission to take over any embassies in Germany if requested. 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the German Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). Germany at war with Russia since August 1. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ France has attacked German territory several times since August 1. Germany declares war on France. 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]

Aug. 4 _ _ _ _ See Austria-Hungary 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany proposes that if Great Britain remains neutral, no attack will be made on north coast of France by. German fleet nor on French merchant marine, provided German merchant marine is not molested. Great sums voted for war, amid great enthusiasm. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ See Great Britain_ _ _ _ 824n [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

Aug. 6 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain_ _ _ _ 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See France_ _ _ _ 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Foreign Office announces that German ports are strewn with mines. [The exact terms of this note, not received until 1920, state that ports of departure of fleets hostile to Germany have been mined.] 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

Aug. 7 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to secure assurance of Liberian neutrality. 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Aug. 8[Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government will observe neutrality of Liberia. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Aug. 9 From the German Government. States reasons for invasion of Belgium and offers to sign agreement to spare that country as much as will be consistent with efforts to wage war with France. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Aug. 9 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany asks permission to send telegrams in cipher via Tuckerton. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

Aug. 10 [Rec’d Aug. 11] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards German list of articles of contraband. Inquires attitude of other countries. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

Aug. 11 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to ascertain views German Government as to possibility of circumscribing area of hostilities and maintaining status quo in Far East. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the German Chargé d’Affaires. Submits, for transmission to German Foreign Office in cipher, proposals to United States Government that all belligerents be permitted to send and t receive messages via Sayville I and Tuckerton, under censor, or that Germany be allowed to use English and French cables. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany does not seek war with Japan; proposes that England, Japan, and Germany reciprocally agree that hostilities in the Pacific be circumscribed. 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Government agrees to refrain from interfering with American transports on condition that other belligerents do likewise. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

[Enclosure] Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 15] From the Emperor of Germany to the President (telegram). Claims that Prince Henry extracted promise from King George V that England would remain neutral in a war on the Continent. Later, message from Grey that England would interfere only in case France was likely to be crushed. Because of Russia’s complete mobilization Germany forced to act. Germany would promise not to touch France if England would guarantee French neutrality. Declaration by England that she must protect Belgium’s neutrality. Germany claims France ready to attack Belgium. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Many Japanese leaving Germany 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

Aug. 15 See Great Britain 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Hamburg-American Line and German Government have agreed that vessel in New York port may sail around north of Scotland for Germany to take Americans home. Department requested to secure consent of other belligerent powers. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to ascertain if German Government is willing that other German vessels transport Americans from other European ports. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the German Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). Suggests that censorship of wireless stations be suspended while question under consideration. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

Aug. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary and the Ministers in Belgium, Spain and Greece. Eighteen peace treaties ratified; four more to be ratified soon. Again urging Germany to sign before Congress adjourns. 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Germany Chargé d’Affaires (telegram). It is expected that the question of wireless will be settled tomorrow. No license for operation of Tuckerton has been taken out under act of August 13, 1912. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077]

200 Aug. 18 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Ambassador in Germany. Germany demanded that Russia recall her order of mobilization. Martial law in Germany. Enthusiastic crowds calling for war. United States asked to take charge of German affairs in Russia and France. Germany declares French began war. Russians in Germany insulted and imprisoned. England has declared war. Americans in Germany taken for English, arrested. Violence toward English; friendliness to Americans. Embassy assisting Americans to leave. Hostility toward Italy for declaring neutrality. German victories only published. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184]

Aug. 19 See Great Britain 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to inquire whether German Government has any connection with wireless stations at Sayville or Tuckerton. 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany. Statement of conditions in Turkish waters and inquiry as to advisability of sending American battleships to protect Christians. Requests that communication be forwarded to Austria-Hungary. 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201]

Aug. 20 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Re possible stock of dyestuffs, etc., available for United States; also possibility of traffic on Rhine. Requests information. 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British see no objections to German vessels in American ports being used to bring back stranded Americans. 482n [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Message concerning detention of German subjects by Great Britain should not be made through good offices of United States. 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 1167]

Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). No hope for peace treaty 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Aug. 21 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Transmits proposition of Haniel, for consideration on of German Government, for the transmission of plain messages of neutral character and cipher messages if they are made known to an American official. This to be temporary arrangement pending final decision. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1081 and Doc. 1082]

Aug. 22 [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The German Government invokes the good offices of the United States in securing neutralization of the colonies in free-trade zone, as of Congo Act of 1885; claims that England has committed two hostile acts within free-trade zone. 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Aug. 22 [Rec’d Aug. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austria requests United States to transmit following message to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador in Tokyo: H. M. S. Empress Elizabeth should disarm, crew to proceed to Tientsin. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Aug. 22 [Rec’d Aug. 24] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany will apply Declaration of London if other belligerents will do so. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Aug. 22 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany refuses to comment on proposal of United States to send warships to Turkish waters. 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Aug. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Telegram sent to Ambassador in Great Britain on grounds of common humanity. Action brought about consent of Germany to release English, if England takes reciprocal measures. 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169]

Aug. 24 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Department prefers not to transmit message concerning disarmament of Empress Elizabeth. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government will recognize as neutralized the ships chartered to repatriate Americans, provided other belligerents do the same, and provided ships return to same status. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

Aug. 25 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Requests full explanation of attitude of Foreign Office on subject of American ships in Turkish waters. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

206 [Enclosure] Aug. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the German Foreign Office. Memorandum relative to the application of the Declaration of London in the present war. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Aug. 27 See Great Britain. 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Aug. 28 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). United States not a party to the ratification of Congo Act of 1885, therefore is not in position to take action in the matter of neutralization of colonies of free-trade zone, as requested by German Government. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 29] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany desires to know attitude of England and France toward Declaration of London; also attitude of United States toward detention of neutral vessels by England. 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany cites cases where England and France have not observed Declaration of London, and asks if American Government acquiesces in such violations. 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits message for the German Chargé d’Affaires: German Government willing to accept terms of telegraphic communication, provided censorship applies equally to all belligerents. Certain codes recommended. Use of French and English cables out of question as German messages would be held up. 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085]

Aug. 30 [Rec’d Aug. 31] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Government is not connected with wireless stations at Tuckerton or Sayville. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1085 and Doc. 1086]

Aug. 31 From the German Ambassador (telegram). Calls attention to the fact that White Star liner remained in New York Harbor 24 hours. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969]

Sept. 1 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Calls attention to the fact that the British steamer Merion, armed with six cannons, stayed several days at Philadelphia, taking freight for Liverpool. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969]

206 Sept. 2 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany. Germany is walking through French, English, and Russian armies; will soon be sending Zeppelins to England. United States should consider that Germany will demand French colonies v in West Indies and near Nova Scotia, and possibly French Pacific Islands. One million two hundred thousand volunteers newly enrolled. Emperor at the front. Assistant Secretary Breckenridge arrived. Maj. Ryan now in charge of transportation. 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 197]

A1108/14 Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the German Ambassador. Germany, in case of victory, will not seek expansion in South Africa. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Sept. 3 To the German Ambassador (telegram). Department, satisfied that Adriatic is merchantman, has allowed clearance. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Sept. 3 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the German Ambassador. Has been informed that a Belgian delegation will lay before the President the documentary evidence of alleged German atrocities. Germany protests against them as groundless. 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259]

23 Sept. 4 [Rec’d Sept. 5] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Large quantities of dyestuffs, etc., ready for shipment from Rotterdam under Dutch flag. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

Sept. 4 To the German Ambassador (telegram). Department, satisfied that Merion is a merchant vessel, has advised clearance. Ammunition taken off and guns dismounted. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, and Austria-Hungary. Instructions to request again assurances that the Red Cross ship will not be molested but assisted on voyage. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

55 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to request Foreign Office to order German consul at New York to give up the Hamburg’s papers so she may clear. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

47 Sept. 6 [Rec’d Sept. 7] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany approves plan of American Red Cross; ship will not be molested. Transmits message from Foreign Office to German Consul General at New York authorizing him to issue ship’s papers to Hamburg. 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Sept. 7 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Bernstorff expresses the opinion that the Kaiser will consider mediation if the other nations interested will do so. Make inquiry of Kaiser. If reply favorable, other nations will be approached. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

53 [Enclosure] Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the Emperor of Germany to the President (telegram). Protests against use of dumdum bullets by French and English, and against the guerrilla war-fare of the Belgian populace. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

88 Sept. 8 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). United States is considering violation of Declaration of London by England and France but declines to express an opinion as to legality of their removal of Germans of military age from neutral vessels as prisoners of war. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

87 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British have decided to adhere to the Declaration of London with modifications and additions in quoted memoranda and order in council. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 10] From the Minister in Denmark (telegram). Forwards note from German Foreign Office to the German Ambassador: Japanese reported ready to expel all Germans from Chinese neutral territory; requests United States to protest to Japanese Government. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Sept. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 12] From the German Ambassador. No blockade of German ports. Assertions that North Sea is infested with German mines incorrect. Directions given for safe route; pilots supplied for certain ports. 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

110 Sept. 12 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Proposal of mediation presented to Kaiser informally. No reply. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

130 Sept. 12 [Rec’d Sept. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office states that Great Britain, France, and Russia agree to abolish capitulations if Turkey remains neutral. Turkey proclaims abolition of the capitulations. Germany claims that rumors were spread by Great Britain, France, and Russia, that this was done at the instance of Germany, in order to place the blame on her in the eyes of neutrals. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

149 Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Chancellor of Germany replies to offers of mediation: War was forced upon Germany; after conquering France, Germany will have to face England and Russia; Germany can only accept a peace which will guarantee rest and security. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

148 Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador in Turkey now thinks it would be well for a neutral warship to be sent to protect foreigners on Turkish coast. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

141 Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Specimens of dumdum bullets have been sent to the United States at the request of the German Government. 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265]

Sept. 15 See Belgium 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul General at Berlin (telegram). Report on minerals and dyestuffs, and their exportation; and on the most available and cheapest routes from Berlin and surrounding country. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

Sept. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 16] From the German Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Attention called to purchase in the United States of horses by England, and munitions of war by Japan and Russia. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]

182 Sept. 16 [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government renews its request that United States take action toward neutralization of African colonies within free-trade zone. A refusal will compromise the neutrality of the United States. 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199]

Sept. 16 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Inform Foreign Office that reports of expulsion of Germans from certain districts in China unfounded. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador. Nothing can be done to prevent traffic in contraband of war under neutrality laws or treaties. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920]

173 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Transmits reply of the President to the note of the Emperor re dumdum bullets. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, and Doc. 1267]

186 Sept. 17 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Unless cyanide can be obtained, mining companies will be forced to shut down. Requests lifting of embargo on shipment to United States, if one exists. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

820 Sept. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 3] From the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle. Enclosed joint statement of American newspaper men who have investigated reported atrocities of the German army. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272]

192 Sept. 18 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Inquiry into request for neutralization of African colonies. Difference between a proposal of the United States on behalf of Germany and one made on her own initiative as a neutral. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

191 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Government will take no action in the matter of dumdum bullets. Ambassador’s refusal to be drawn into discussion is approved. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, and Doc. 1267]

228 Sept. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 20] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Turkish fleet being manned by Germans. Soon to join war. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

227 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Cyanide may be exported to United States and Mexico, provided none is re-exported. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

236 Sept. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 22] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany wishes United States to act as messenger merely to convey proposal to other powers concerning neutralization of African colonies. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

271 Sept. 22 [Rec’d Sept. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Later decision that cyanide and dyestuffs can be shipped only in United States vessels to prevent seizure by England. 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627]

Sept. 23 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the German Ambassador. Riley E. Scott, an ex-Lieutenant in United States Army, has offered his services to France or her allies for the purpose of dropping bombs from aeroplanes. 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 893]

Sept. 24 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Japan, and to the Minister in Belgium. King of Spain suggests that American and Spanish representatives in various European courts make joint request that arrangements be made between belligerent countries as to what constitutes hospital supplies and that such supplies in transit be considered neither contra-band nor conditional contraband. Instructions to follow this suggestion. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

33 Sept. 25 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Rumored that England has threatened to declare war on Holland if Dutch ships carry goods beneficial to Germany. Suggests that American ships come direct to Rotterdam. 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

316 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office declares itself ready to allow shipments to United States on Dutch, American, or Italian vessels for distribution in United States and Mexico only If any shipments are seized, vigorous protests must be made. 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631]

288 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Divergence of views concerning exports. Fear that goods may be taken by England, or reshipped. Meantime American ships could be used. 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631]

310 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 27] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re issuance of passports to persons who have lived in the United States three years and declared intention of becoming American citizens, and who have sojourned abroad less than six months. 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 1148 and Doc. 1149]

Sept. 26 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the German Ambassador. Russian Minister of War assured German Military Attaché that Russia had not given orders for mobilization, although orders had gone forth two days before. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

265 Sept. 26 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Asks if potash is in same category with cyanide. Conference called to arrange sending of American ship to Rotterdam. 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

319 Sept. 26 [Rec’d Sept. 27] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Suggests that, to satisfy Germany, Department obtain assurances from England and France that non-contraband goods consigned to America will not be interfered with. Departments of Commerce and Labor to see that goods are used only in United States. 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633]

272 Sept. 27 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Peace treaties with Great Britain, France, and Spain ratified. Treaties with Russia, Sweden, and Greece to be signed in few days. If Germany and Austria will agree to similar treaties success of plan will be complete. Will be gratified to make treaty with them. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Sept. 29 To the German Ambassador. Great Britain, France, and Spain just ratified treaties of peace. Preparing treaties with Russia, Sweden, and Greece. Austria and Germany have already approved principle. United States will consider any change in detail. Desires early signature. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

297 Sept. 30 To the Ambassador in Germany. No communication of any information should be made to another country except through American Ambassador or Minister accredited to that country. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

Oct. 1 From the German Ambassador (telegram). Requests copy of last treaties to send to Germany. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

Oct. 5 Memorandum by the Secretary of State. German Ambassador expressed interest in peace treaties; will endeavor to induce German Government to sign one.

413 Oct. 5 [Rec’d Oct. 6] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Real reason for prohibition on dyestuffs, etc., to force United States to send shipments of cotton and other goods needed in Germany. Congress could authorize manufacture dyestuffs, etc., under patents. There is a German mining-cyanide factory at Perth Amboy. 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633]

Oct. 6 To the German Ambassador. The bomb dropper who tendered his services to France would be acting contrary to the wishes of the President but would not be violating the neutrality laws. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895]

338 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions not to issue passports to declarants. They may register and request permission of German Government to depart. 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

345 Oct. 7 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ American vessel, Matanzas, under, ballast to arrive at Rotterdam for cargo destined for New York; guaranteed for home consumption. 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

370 Oct. 9 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German cruisers have sunk British ships carrying American cargo to United States. Requests information as to whether Germany will hold proceedings of prize adjudication; if so, when and where. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

234 [Enclosure] Oct. 10 Memorial of the German Foreign Office. Re position of England and France with respect to the Declaration of London. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

377 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Steamer Matanzas chartered by private interests. Plans now on foot to send outgoing cargoes. 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

378 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Matanzas sailed before recommendations as to raw cotton were received. All other boats sent for dyestuffs, etc., will carry cotton. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

478 Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Hostilities between Turkey and Russia to begin soon. Turkish Fleet to attack Russian Fleet in Black Sea. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

399 Oct. 12 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Steamer Nieuw Amsterdam from Switzerland for America carrying coal-tar dyes held by German Government. Ryndam also detained. Suggests that these cargoes be transferred to the Matanzas. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

505 Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government must have guarantee that goods shipped on Matanzas will not be reexported. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

A. 1638/14 Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 15] From the German Ambassador. Steamer Alexandria, sold to American company, has applied for American registration and clearance. Neither has been granted. A guard has been placed on board to prevent ship’s leaving. Requests an investigation of action of authorities. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 1000 and Doc. 1001]

515 Oct. 15(?)[Rec’d Oct. 16] From the German Foreign Office (telegram). Memorandum protesting against American policy regarding armed merchantmen. No guarantee that arms carried for defense will not be used for offensive purposes. Armed merchantmen should be treated as warships. 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

435 Oct. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Awaiting reply of Foreign Office to request for information regarding admission of food into Brussels. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, and Doc. 1288]

541 Oct. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 18] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government approves plan to supply Belgium with food. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, and Doc. 1288]

448 Oct. 19 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). This Government cannot make guarantee demanded. Foreign Trade Adviser arranging for shipment of cotton to Germany, in conjunction with German Embassy. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

14 Oct. 20 To the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle. Acknowledges communication re atrocities committed by Germans on Belgian-French frontier. Instructions to discontinue all investigations. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

234 Oct. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany. Forwards memorial of German Foreign Office of October 10 protesting the attitude of the British and French Governments respecting the Declaration of London. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

J. No. A 1775 Oct. 21 [Rec’d Oct. 22] From the German Ambassador. Tugs F. B. Dalzell and G. I. Dalzell said to have supplied British cruiser Essex with fresh meat off the United States coast. Requests investigation. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

280 [Enclosure] Oct. 22 From the German Foreign Office. Notification of additional contraband list. 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 411]

Oct. 23 From the German Embassy. _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 411]

489 Oct. 24 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same to the Ambassadors in Austria-Hungary, France, Russia, Argentina, and Brazil, and the Minister in Belgium. Inform German Government United States withdraws suggestion for adoption of Declaration of London by belligerents; but will insist upon rights. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

634 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Netherland Government has placed embargo on exportation of cotton; however shipments in transit to Germany are permitted. Denmark has no prohibition against such exportation, so far as Germany knows. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]

498 Oct. 26 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to discuss with German authorities proposal that Anderson go to Germany to study condition of British prisoners there, and make report to Berlin concerning German prisoners in England. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188]

504 Oct. 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany’s attitude in matter of indemnity for destruction of cargo affects insurance. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

167 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany. Instructions to transmit to German Government enclosed communications re historic buildings. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

514 Oct. 28 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). British state that cotton is not on contraband list; it may be shipped to Germany in neutral vessels. Cotton shipments to Russian ports desired. Is cotton on German free list? 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

J. No. A 1883 Oct. 29 From the German Ambassador. Requests explanations of conduct of Japanese warship off Honolulu port. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059]

662 Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German prize ordinance No 28 of September 30, 1909, provides that articles for sick shall not be treated as contraband. 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Oct. 30 To the German Ambassador. United States naval constructor reports Geier in bad condition and further time necessary to make her seaworthy. Government allows three weeks for repairs, at end of which, if still in port, she will be interned. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939]

683 Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 1] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government satisfied about arrangements to ship dyestuffs, etc. 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the German Ambassador. French and Russian armies are arranging to purchase rifles in the United States. Requests that Government intervene. 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 920 and Doc. 921]

689 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 3] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany is willing that British representative inspect camps in Germany and would like for some one from Embassy to inspect German camps in England. Anderson’s report on three camps received. Requested report on Newcastle not received. Schwarzschild doing volunteer work in England. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190]

718 Nov. 3 [Rec’d Nov. 4] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Suggestion that there should be international agreement as to supplying food and clothes for prisoners. Great difference exists in treatment in different countries. Suffering reported in French and German camps. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190]

724 Nov. 4 [Rec’d Nov. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Prize adjudication provided for all vessels and cargoes destroyed. Prize court to be held in Hamburg shortly. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

1108 Nov. 5 To the German Ambassador. Gives explanations in case of Japanese cruiser Hizen. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059]

572 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Department will be glad to submit any proposals to other belligerents looking to an arrangement for supplying prisoners. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

Nov. 7 To the German Ambassador. Investigation shows Locksun to be a tender for the Geier. She will be interned in Honolulu if she does not leave immediately. 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Reply to German protest against policy regarding armed merchantmen. Belligerents asked to prevent their armed merchant vessels from entering United States ports. 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

590 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Belgian Commission requests of Germany umolested passage of ships to Holland carrying food and clothing for Belgium. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301]

581 Nov. 8 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). The same to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary. Apprehension in America will be greatly relieved if Germany will make public declaration that cotton in neutral vessels will not be detained or molested. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Nov. 9 To the Consul General at Hamburg (telegram). Instruction to keep Department posted as to when prize court proceedings are held. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

608 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instruction to obtain information as to procedure to be followed by those presenting claims before prize court. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]

785 Nov. 9 [Rec’d Nov. 10] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Re treatment and exchange of English and German prisoners. Asks permission to communicate direct to London, message to be repeated later to Department. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1177 and Doc. 1178]

821 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Cotton will not be declared con-contraband unless other belligerents declare it so. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

108 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Consul General at Hamburg. No American prize cargo has been brought into port yet. Will keep Department informed. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

J No A 2116 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 12] From the German Ambassador. Calls attention to an announcement in the Daily Consular and Trade Reports of the Department of Commerce, of opportunities to deliver war material to the English Government. Inquires as to whether activities of go-betweens also include delivery of war materials. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923]

J. No. A 2171 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the German Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Protests the internment of Locksun in Honolulu. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

A 2190 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the German Ambassador. Protests the internment of officers of Geier. Cites instance of different treatment of British Major Robertson. Charges Discrimination against Germany. Requests that officers and their orderlies be permitted to travel freely. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

822 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 13] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Forwards instructions as to how a claimant shall proceed before prize court. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527]

1121 Nov. 12 To the German Ambassador. In view of situation in Mexico and of European war, Secretary of War has absolutely discontinued sale of rifles to any one. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the German, British and Japanese Ambassadors. Reports interning of the Geier and Locksun in Honolulu. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

624 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to observe circular instructions of October 5 in transmission of lists of prisoners. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1177 and Doc. 1178]

261 Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Ambassador in Germany. Transmits copy of German reply of November 7 to protest of the British against laying of mines. Germany denies violation of Hague conventions. 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730]

Counter-protests against blockading of North Sea to neutral trade by British.

837 Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 15] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany requires consular officers of neutral states to leave correspondence to foreign countries unsealed. Official correspondence may be sent in Embassy pouches. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

271 [Enclosure] Nov. 14 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the German Foreign Office to the American Embassy. Relative to regulations for navigation in the German bay of the North Sea. 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734]

Nov. 16 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador. Defense of action of United States in internment of Locksun. 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948]

656 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Approves his action in calling attention of consular officers to service regulations. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Nov. 17 [Rec’d Nov. 18] From the German Ambassador. Germany cannot avail itself of America’s offer to permit reservists to pass through ports, as Britain has withdrawn promise not to seize persons on neutral vessels who are liable to military service. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

677 Nov. 20 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Requests safe passage for British as well as American ships bound for Rotterdam with food for Belgium; permission of German military asked for Americans to distribute food. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Investigation of prison conditions. 754n [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

A 2453 Nov. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 23] From the German Ambassador. Protests internment of Locksun as a “part of warship” Geier. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950]

1133 Nov. 23 To the German Ambassador. Re tugs F. B. Dalzell and G. H. Dalzell. Thorough investigation has failed to prove that these vessels have furnished supplies to British warships. 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

899 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Nov. 24] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German Government will not interfere with neutral or unneutral ships bound for Holland with food for Belgium, but unneutral ships should carry an American certificate and a pass from the German Ambassador in Washington. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

280 [Enclosure] Nov. 23 [Rec’d Dec. 14] From the German Foreign Office. Notification of additional list of articles of contraband. 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 411]

709 Nov. 27 -------------------- See Austria-Hungary, No. 305 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Nov. 25 To the German Ambassador. Gives basis for retention of Geier officers interned in San Francisco. This case not analogous to that of British Major Robertson. 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950]

950 Nov. 29 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Rumors that German Government, displeased by sale of American war materials to England and France, may place difficulties in way of exportation of dyestuffs. 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

1000 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Employment of British vessels transferred to American registry in trade between Germany and America not valid per se, but Government ready to waive invalidity of such change in case of trade exclusively between Germany and United States. 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

995 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Messages sent from neutral countries to New Orleans and Memphis concerning shipments of cotton not delivered. Government urged to take steps to secure unhampered transmission of messages. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

1005 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ The sale by Americans of munitions of war to Allies is the cause of bitter feeling in Germany. Boycotting of American goods already beginning. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

10078 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the German Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of note of 1st instant, and concurs in proposals for provisioning Belgium. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

J. No. 10107 Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 6] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Calls attention to violations of the Geneva and Hague conventions by France and Great Britain. 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 1282 and Doc. 1283]

10106 Dec. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German consuls instructed to issue, upon production of American testimony, safe-conducts to unneutral ships carrying food for Belgium. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

1035 Dec. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 9] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). German and Austrian buyers anxious for cotton, but want assurance of American Government that it will not be subject to capture en route. 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

1036 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Shipment on Matanzas of full cargo of dyestuffs. Release will be made of amount of dyes damaged on Sun as soon as this amount is established. 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Dec. 10 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the German Embassy. Makes inquiry concerning United States protest against British practice of seizing American ships. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

1155 Dec. 10 To the German Ambassador. Full explanation regarding placing of guard on the Alexandria lying in harbor of San Francisco. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032]

Dec. 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Further discussion of subject of Internment of Locksun. Cites award of the Alabama Claims Commission, which seems to establish the principle for the treatment of tenders. Tug Dalzell American vessel and not subject to internment. 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 951]

806 Dec. 12 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Instructions to request German Government to use its influence with Turkish Government to modify its attitude toward British and French non-combatants within Turkish borders. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246]

1099 Dec. 15 [Rec’d Dec. 16] From the Ambassador in Germany. Aluminum and nickel added to German list of conditional contraband. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

825 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Every encouragement given cotton shippers. Cargoes going through to Germany and transshipments through neutral ports. Mines in North Sea only difficulty. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

J. No. A 2985 Dec. 15 [Rec’d Dec. 16] From the German Ambassador. The position taken by the United States concerning the occasional coaling of German warships in United States ports is untenable. Encloses memorandum of German Government on the subject claiming a breach of accepted rules of neutrality on the part of United States in detriment to Germany. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

1148 Dec. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Germany willing for Anderson to visit German camps on condition that some one from American Embassy visit German prisoners in England. Of utmost importance that same privilege be accorded to Germany, to prevent neutrality of United States being questioned in Germany. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

J. No. A3180 Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the German Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. The Mallina and Tremeadow, which served as tenders to British cruisers, are now demanding to be allowed to coal in Panama. Their case is identical with that of the Locksun. 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045]

867 Dec. 22 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Statement of situation in Turkey. Instructions to say to German Foreign Office that in view of control which Germany exercises in Turkey, it will be difficult for her to disclaim responsibility if massacres occur. Hopes that Germany will send instructions to prevent them. 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1251 and Doc. 1252]

Dec. 23 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador. British S. S. Mallina and Tremeadow are accorded the same treatment as that given belligerent war, vessels. 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045]

Dec. 24 From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Half-month dyestuff supply released for shipment on Berwind. 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the German Ambassador. Defends policy of the United States against charge of unneutrality in treatment of belligerent shipping. Requests specific cases of complaint with promise of investigation. 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037]

1195 Dec. 26 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Zimmermann has given assurance that German military authorities will not requisition food supplies in Belgium while Commission is sending in food, and for a reasonable time after last delivery. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

Dec. 28 To the German Embassy. In reply to German note of December 10, regarding seizure by British, cites protests to British Government. Regrets the necessity to interpose objections to acts of belligerents in disregard of the rights of neutrals. 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

1210 Dec. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 31] From the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Special certificates required for unneutral ships carrying food and clothing to Belgians. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

Dec. 30 To the Ambassador in Germany (telegram). Department will inquire whether England has any objections to Germany’s appointing some one to visit German detention camps in England. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

Jan. 6, 1915 To the German Ambassador. Winchester Repeating Arms Co. denies having made any sale of arms or ammunition to belligerents. Remington Arms-Union Metallic Cartridge Company furnishes proof that charges of sales to belligerents are untrue. 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

1184 Jan. 15, 1915 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce is not at the disposal of agents of foreign governments; object of Consular and Trade Reports is to advise Americans of trade opportunities. The Government is not assisting in sale of contraband, but observing strict neutrality. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931]

GREAT BRITAIN

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

394 [Enclosure] July 27 [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Liberian Minister in Great Britain to the American Ambassador. Requests protection of United States in preserving the neutrality of Liberia. 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

July 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Inquiries whether offer of good offices of United States would be acceptable in Europe under Article 3 of Hague convention. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

394 July 28 [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Liberian Minister anticipates trouble for Liberia because both French and Germans own cable stations on Liberian soil. Encloses copy of a letter of July 27 from the Minister on the subject. 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

250 July 29 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Good offices of United States offered to Sir Edward Grey. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]

Undated [Rec’d July 30] From the Consul at Gibraltar (telegram). Garrison mobilized 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

July 30 From the Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (telegram). Jamaica forts manned, regiments sent to Kingston. German cruiser near. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

13 July 30 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Consul at Georgetown, British Guiana. Forwards copy of Official Gazette containing proclamation of the Governor ordering instant mobilization. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

138 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul at Cardiff. British Admiralty has taken over coal for use of navy. Shippers indemnified. News of its destination censored. 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

July 31 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Great Britain has proposed in vain an ambassadorial conference in Europe to avoid war; desires to know if United States has offered good offices at Vienna, St. Petersburg, or Berlin. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

13 July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Consul at Cork. Report of military and naval activity in the south of Ireland; Queenstown Harbor transferred to military authority. The harbor had been guarded by England against “gun-running” by the Irish for purposes of insurrection. International situation engulfed this issue. Troops hurried to harbor; ships placed on guard; supervision of traffic tightened up; and searchlights used as precautionary measure. 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Aug. 1 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Anticipates war between Germany and Russia. Crowds flocking from Continent, detained because of canceling of transatlantic ships. British troops concentrating in North Sea. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

Aug. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States anxious to avert war. President asks if British can suggest any way for mediation. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

258 Aug. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). In opinion of British Foreign Office, no chance for mediation in European affairs. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

259 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Czar gave assurances that Russia would not fight unless attacked. Germany’s answer was declaration of war. British believe Germany and Austria planned war long ago and now deliberately carrying it out. Germany the aggressor. Thousands of Americans besiege the Embassy seeking to return home. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Complete mobilization of forces, including territories. Expeditionary force to be sent to Continent. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

263 Aug. 4 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany’s answer to England’s ultimatum expected hourly. German and Austrian Ambassadors preparing to leave, turning over their interests to United States. 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

265 Aug. 4 [Rec’d Aug. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Ultimatum to German Government: Germany must withdraw her demands on Belgium and respect treaty insuring her neutrality. Designs of Germany to acquire Belgium, Holland and Denmark. Germany has already asked Sweden to join German side. 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

252 Aug. 4 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. According to the treaty of Washington and Hague Convention No. XIII, a neutral government is bound to prohibit its citizens from fitting out a belligerent vessel for purposes of war, and to prevent departure of such vessel from its jurisdiction. Probable that Germany will attempt to use United States ports in this manner. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952]

254 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Kronprinz Wilhelm sailed from New York without passengers, having made preparations for war in United States waters. Similar preparations are being made by other German vessels. This is a breach of the laws of neutrality; asks Department to take steps to prevent it. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953]

253 Aug. 4 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Wireless telegraph stations at Sayville, Long Island, and Tuckerton, New Jersey, have been sold to a German company and are operated as intelligence bureaus for German Navy. Suggests that United States take them over and operate them for all belligerents alike or else close them entirely. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068]

Aug. 5 See Austria-Hungary, Aug. 4 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

269 Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). War declared between Great Britain and Germany. Large British force landed in Belgium. French and English Fleets in North Sea to engage German Fleet. 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

271 Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ A state of war exists between Great Britain and Germany. 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

278 Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 6] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards British list of absolute and conditional contraband. 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 355]

265 Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German merchant vessels, warned by wireless from Sayville, have escaped British war vessels. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France, Germany, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and the Ministers in Belgium and Servia American Red Cross offers to British Red Cross a unit consisting of three doctors and twelve nurses, with hospital supplies. Like offer made to all belligerents. 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

284 Aug. 6 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Rumored that Austria will not join Germany against England, also that Italy may join France and England. Jewish banks forced to help England, France, and Russia. Most important that no belligerent power have wireless on our shore and no belligerent warships leave our ports disguised as merchantmen. 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegrams). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Russia, France, Germany, and Austria-Hungary, and the Minister in Belgium. United States recommends that the laws of naval warfare laid down by the Declaration of London, 1909, shall be applied in the present conflict. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

283 Aug. 6 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits resolutions from the American relief committee requesting European Governments to refrain from interference with vessels transporting American citizens to United States. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ascertain if British Government is willing to agree not to molest vessels bringing American citizens. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

287 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain. German ships leaving American ports constantly, provisioned and armed to prey upon British commerce. British Government will make claims for full value of goods destroyed. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957]

298 Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 8] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Interview with Sir Edward Grey: England at war only to preserve her place among the nations; will welcome mediation when favorable opportunity arrives; appreciates offer. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

299 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ President’s message delivered to King, who expressed his appreciation and the hope that his offer of mediation might later be accepted. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

296 Aug. 7 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits telegram from G. H. Adhere asking that Embassy be authorized to pass S. S. Viking under United States flag to carry 400 Americans to New York. Requests explicit instructions. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram) No German vessels have left American ports since declaration of war, so far as known to United States Government. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Communicates the Executive order of August 5 re radio messages. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France and Germany. Instructions to secure assurance of Liberian neutrality. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

304 Aug. 8 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government has been informed by Embassy at Washington that the United States observes efficient and complete neutrality in every respect. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957]

259 Aug. 9 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. British merchant vessels are armed for defense only. British merchant vessels cannot be converted into men-of-war in foreign ports. Germans claim right of conversion on high seas; their vessels adapted for conversion should be interned in absence of binding assurances. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960]

Aug. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has received information that belligerent powers are scattering contact mines in Channel. Inquire whether there is any foundation for this statement. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Under United States law Viking cannot be registered as American ship. Department considering asking belligerent governments to permit unmolested voyage for Americans returning home. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

323 Aug. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Neutralization of Pacific Ocean hardly possible, but status quo in China should be maintained. Grey anxious to prevent disturbance in China. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey’s desire to preserve the status quo of China gratifying to United States. Inquiry of other nations as to attitude on subject. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Japan unable to refrain from war with Germany. The Anglo-Japanese treaty binds both parties to respect neutrality and integrity of China. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

333 Aug. 11 Admiralty gives assurance that mines will not be laid in navigable waters except at entrance to ports to be defended. German mine-laying ship, destroyed by Amphion, was laying a line of contact mines to extend across North Sea. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Communicates telegram from Foreign Office warning shippers that Germans are scattering mines indiscrimately about the North Sea. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). An attempt is being made to put all belligerents on same footing as regards cable and wireless messages. 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in France. Submits for consideration of British Government alternative suggestions for receiving and transmitting wireless and cable messages by belligerents. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 12] From the Consul General at Vancouver (telegram). Requests instructions as to whether military reservists are permitted transit through United States. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

264 Aug. 12 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Notice regarding armed merchantmen sent to other neutral countries. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960]

267 Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Calls attention to fact that Austria-Hungary is probably equipping merchantmen in United States waters for conversion into warships at sea. Similar notice sent to other neutrals. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

350 Aug. 13 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Notification that war exists between Great Britain and Austria. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Department desires full facts of report re diverted steamers and reasons and basis for British Government’s action. Names of vessels and cargoes specified. Attention called to great loss entailed. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Chargé d’Affaires. States that if Germans are scattering mines indiscriminately in the North Sea, as reported, he hopes that England will not retaliate in like manner. Is loath to believe that a signatory of the Hague convention will disregard its treaty obligations in such manner. 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Vancouver (telegram). Passage through United States of individual reservists is not prohibited; organized and armed forces not entitled to such transit. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

Aug. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Inquiry as to when Great Britain will sign peace treaty. Others awaiting action of Great Britain and France.

Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 15] From the British Embassy. Encloses telegram from British Government stating that British will endeavor to keep a channel open for trade subject to naval exigencies. 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711]

Aug. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in France. Instructions to ascertain if Americans stranded in Genoa can be transported home on Moltke and König Albert unmolested. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

280 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Chargé d’Affaires. A recapitulation of various points of advantage of wireless over cable messages. Two German wireless stations in United States great danger to British shipping. 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 1077 and Doc. 1078]

376 Aug. 15 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Promises definite answer soon as to signing of peace treaty. War causing delay.

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandts, to the Ambassador in France. Department considering chartering German vessels now in American ports for transporting stranded Americans home. Instructions to ascertain if British are willing to extend every facility to such ships. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and the Minister in Belgium (telegram). United States regards vessels chartered for the purpose of returning stranded Americans home as neutralized under the Hague convention. Instructions to ask Government for declaration to this effect. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to request of British Government a more reasonable attitude with respect to censorship of cable messages. Capacity of company cut 50 per cent by unreasonable demands as to signatures and addresses, and cost to sender increased. 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

387 Aug. 17 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Liberian Minister transmits letter from President of Liberia setting forth the situation concerning cable lines. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Aug. 18 From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Great Britain and Japan deem it necessary to preserve the independence and integrity of China and to protect shipping in adjacent waters. 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 18] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Marshal of prize court states neutrals can obtain possession of their property not contraband by applying to the procurator general. Proof of ownership required. 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465]

405 Aug. 18 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British will pay claims for loss by diversion, when established. 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465]

404 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Declaration of London forbids sale of belligerent ship in neutral port for use under neutral flag. Grey saw no objection to the trip to repatriate Americans, provided ships were manned by American officers and returned to former place and condition. 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757]

403 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits cipher telegram from Gerard advising British Government not to allow any German subjects to leave British domain until arrangements have been made for British to leave Germany. 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 1167]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, and Germany, and the Minister in Belgium (circular telegram). Press Government for reply as to willingness to observe Declaration of London. Austria-Hungary willing to adopt it if enemy will do so. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

413 Aug. 19 [Rec’d Aug. 20] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States asked to ascertain the attitude of Germany and Austria-Hungary as to Declaration of London. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Chargé d’Affaires. Grey’s reply to protest of United States against indiscriminate mine laying: Not breach of Hague convention. Unless England adopts the methods of Germany, British commerce will be impeded while Germany receives immunity. 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711]

Aug. 19 To the British Chargé d’Affaires. No precedent and no general practice of nations on point of conversion at sea. United States is not bound to assume attitude of insurer, and does not hold herself responsible for damage to British shipping. United States is as solicitous of its neutral duties as of its neutral rights. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). To comply with Gerard’s suggestion would be an unneutral act. 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 1167]

Aug. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ American shippers desire release of grain cargoes diverted to England and of the funds resulting from sale of cargoes. Money thus tied up blocks trade. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey seemed puzzled and surprised at our wish to exact from him a pledge which would give Germans license to use mines and bind English not to use them. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Chargé d’Affaires. Reply to the British claim of United States breach of neutrality: Affair of Kronprinz Wilhelm occurred before British declaration of war with Germany; other vessels mentioned have been under surveillance of authorities to prevent their leaving American waters. 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Acknowledges receipt of communication of August 9 re armed merchantmen. 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 963 and Doc. 964]

442 Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey has discussed question of purchase of German ships in American ports. Money paid for them would aid Germans in building new ships. If purchased and set afloat they might lend aid to Germany. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771]

Aug. 21 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States has not proclaimed Liberian neutrality. French Government asks Liberia to close German wireless station. Wilson’s proclamation sent Howard as guide in taking necessary measures for preserving Liberian neutrality. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136]

446 Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British give assurance respecting neutrality of Liberia. They rely upon Liberia to take steps to protect her neutrality. 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Aug. 22 To the British Chargé d’Affaires. Acknowledges receipt of memorandum of August 18 regarding the protection of foreign interests in Far East by Great Britain and Japan. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

483 [Enclosure] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Foreign Office. Note and memorandum re Declaration of London. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Aug. 23 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). This Government considers that all cargoes afloat before the outbreak of hostilities are not subject to adjudication as prize; it is only an act of justice for British to direct release of them. Where should claims be presented for ships taken to British ports not in England proper? 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

Aug. 23 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the British Ambassador. Telegram from Foreign Office states Admiralty has not yet laid any mines but is endeavoring to keep sea routes open for peaceful commerce. S. S. Maryland and Broberg have been destroyed in North Sea by mines scattered by Germans. These contact mines do not become harmless after a certain number of hours. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713]

Aug. 23 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to make representations to British Government looking to removal of embargo on repetition requests in international telegraph service. 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798]

419 [Enclosure] Aug. 23 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. The Government is unable to modify censorship regulations of telegraph messages to the extent desired. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802]

471 Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Great Britain supports French request that Liberia close German wireless station or prohibit cipher and unneutral messages. Liberian citizens caught in Germany by war unable to secure money to return home. Loan of $2,000 asked of United States. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

289 Aug. 25 [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the British Ambassador. British armed merchantmen will frequently visit United States. Assurances given that they are armed solely for self-defense and will under no circumstances attack any vessel. 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966]

483 Undated [Rec’d Aug. 26] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits Foreign Office note of August 22 regarding Declaration of London, in which England agrees to adopt Declaration subject to certain modifications and additions; also text of order in council specifying those modifications and additions. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

420 Enclosure] Aug. 26 From the British Secretary for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Re proceedings in British prize courts. 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 475]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 27] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Persons seeking cargoes other than enemy cargoes on captured ships may obtain release on submitting proof of ownership to procurator general, if submitted prior to issuance of writ in prize-court action. Subsequent thereto an order by court for release is necessary. When a writ has been issued, an appearance to such writ should be entered by a solicitor at Admiralty marshal’s office within eight days thereof. 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

420 Aug. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 9] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits note of August 26 from Foreign Office concerning proceedings in British prize courts and notice of rules governing prize court which appears daily in the Times newspaper. 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

Aug. 27 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Department asked to inform all foreign missions that British censorship regulations require all telegraph messages to go open unless sent by diplomatic missions to Government at Washington, which messages may be in code. 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798]

Aug. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France, Germany, Austria-Hungary and Russia. American Red Cross has taken over Prinz Joachim for purpose of carrying units and supplies to all countries at war, manned by Americans and flying American and Red Cross flags; to return in thirty days with privilege of similar voyages. Requests assurance that ship will not be molested. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Aug. 28 To the Consul General at London (telegram). Are ships captured and taken to British ports required to apply to procurator general in London, or will prize courts be held in other British ports outside of London? Owing to interrupted communication and great number of ships seized, impossible to present claims in short time required. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

504 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). A special committee has been appointed to deal with all cases on their merits. It will sit daily at the Board of Trade. No difficulty in regard to release of cargoes when question of prize is not involved. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Immense number shipments were afloat prior to declaration of war. Under principles of international law and justice, neutral cargoes under such circumstances cannot be confiscated, and cannot rightfully be subject to adjudication and condemnation as prize. United States hopes that British will facilitate release of American-owned cargoes that were afloat before war, and give sufficient time and opportunity for them to establish their rights. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472]

503 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government will consent to use of German ships for repatriation of Americans, provided these ships carry no cargo from Italy and that they be interned for the remainder of the war. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

508 Aug. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Conveys text of statement issued by British Government regarding diverted cargoes and dealings with such cargoes. 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges receipt of note of British Ambassador of August 25 giving assurances that armed merchantmen will not be used for offensive purposes. 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Liberia should not discriminate in favor of either French or German station. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Aug. 29 From the British Ambassador. British and French consider that nothing less than the presence of a United States warship in Liberian waters would enable Liberia to fulfil its obligations of neutrality. 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador in Washington (telegram). British Government agrees to arrangement to place any ship under American control for Red Cross use. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

514 [Enclosure] Undated [Rec’d Aug. 30] From the British Foreign Office to the American Ambassador (telegram). Re alternative proposals for the transmission of telegraphic communications. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1085 and Doc. 1086]

Aug. 30 [Rec’d Aug. 31] From the British Ambassador. Communicates telegram from Grey: Iceland trawler struck by mine 25 miles off the Tyne. Numbers of German trawlers appear to have been engaged in laying these mines. 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715]

301 Aug31 [Rec’d Oct. 3] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Requests that United States take charge of British affairs in Turkey in case of war between the two countries. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

428 [Enclosure] Aug. 31 [Rec’d Sept. 15] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Requests United States to inquire if Germany and Austria-Hungary have specified the articles which they intend to treat as contraband. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Sept. 1 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government asks if Germany and Austria-Hungary have specified the articles which they intend to treat as contraband of war. 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Sept. 1 [Rec’d Sept. 8] From the British Ambassador. German warships Leipzig and Nürnberg are lying off the coast of California and are in communication with the German Consul. 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

17 Sept. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ask British authorities to remit port duties of American Red Cross ship: suggests that ship can bring home American citizens. 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323]

25 Sept. 2 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to bring to attention of Foreign Office the repeated request of Western Union Telegraph Company to still further modify censorship regulations with reference to code addresses and signatures. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800]

558 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Difficulties in telegraphic service now adjusted. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800]

Sept. 2 From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Denial that Adriatic carries troops. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969]

565 Sept. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). If Germans enter Paris, Emperor will dictate peace terms. Bureaucracy must be struck a swift, final blow at any cost. All Europe condemning German methods. Rumored that Germany is preparing a Zeppelin raid on London. All Americans urged to leave England. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul General at London (telegram). President Admiralty division prize courts gives ruling concerning seat of prize courts. Time extended for presentation of claims. List of courts authorized to act as prize courts under Prize Courts Act of 1894. 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

302 Sept. 4 [Rec’d Sept. 5] From the British Ambassador. British Government protests United States policy of detaining armed merchantmen. Merion will land her guns; Adriatic sailed carrying passengers. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972]

Sept. 4 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Germany 828n [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

66 Sept. 5 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ask if restrictions on cipher messages between business firms would be removed if copy of the code is deposited with British censor. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802]

601 Sept. 5 [Rec’d Sept. 6] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British reports from Turkey confirm fear of anti-Christian uprisings. British would welcome presence of American warships in Turkish waters. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210]

621 Sept. 7 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ No peace proposals will be entertained until militarism is crushed. 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Sept. 7 [Rec’d Sept. 10] From the British Ambassador. Data concerning passenger list and cargo of Adriatic give assurance of peaceful commercial voyage. 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974]

Sept. 8 To the Ambassadors in Great Britain and France (telegram). Proposal of mediation sent to Germany. It at least gives nations opportunity to explain their attitude, and fixes responsibility for continuation of war. 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Sept. 9 From the British Ambassador. Memorandum citing precedents for arming of merchantmen for defense only entitled to status of peaceful trading vessels. 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German merchant vessels with offensive armament continue to obtain supplies of coal from United States and to prey upon British shipping in Atlantic. British trade with United States thus jeopardized. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975]

636 Sept. 10 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). England has exhausted every honorable means to preserve peace. Any terms that England will agree to must end militarism forever. Germany will propose terms that Allies can not accept, thus making it appear that Allies are responsible for continuing the war. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

87 Sept. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Quotes telegram from Grey: An executive committee appointed to deal expeditiously with detained cargoes. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477]

644 Sept. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Enumeration of German atrocities in France and Belgium. 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 1262 and Doc. 1263]

446 [Enclosure] Sept. 14 From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. British argument re cargoes in custody of prize court. 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

446 Sept. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Forwards note of September 14 from British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, giving British argument re cargoes in custody of prize court. 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481]

450 [Enclosure] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Acknowledges appeal of Western Union Telegraph Company and promises to give it attention. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807]

675 Sept. 15 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Suggests that a committee of inquiry be appointed by the Carnegie Peace Foundation to investigate alleged atrocities. 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 1262 and Doc. 1263]

315 Sept. 16 From the British Ambassador. The Vaterland is ready to sail from New York with 17,000 tons coal on board, probably to be converted into an armed cruiser on the high seas. Requests investigation. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Procurator general states certain goods will be released upon payment of freight to London. 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477]

Sept. 17 To the British Ambassador. Vaterland has 5,000 tons of coal and no cargo; has no intention of sailing soon. 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. Ships of Hamburg-American Line might be able to effect their departure from neutral ports unless there is a United States naval force on hand to prevent. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Ships in New York stationed for patrol duty. No German vessels are leaving the United States with enough cargo to excite suspicion. The Pisa has a large cargo coal and provisions, but apparently has no intention of sailing. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979]

700 Sept. 18 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British will grant all courtesies requested for Red Cross ship. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

701 Sept. 19 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office regrets delay of telegrams. Instructions given to interfere as little as possible with genuine business. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

467 Sept. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits note from the American Minister in the Netherlands requesting information regarding the regulations and authorization under which British officials are opening the mail of the American Consular Service, some under official seal. 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866]

162 Sept. 21 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to investigate report that mail on Noordam was seized or held up by British. 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861]

Sept. 22 To the Consul General at London (telegram). Department considers British Government not entitled to collect freight on cargo on diverted, detained, or seized vessels sailing before the war. Instructions to press for release of American goods, free of charges. 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Embassy. Radio messages between German warships and German Consul picked up but not transmitted. Unlicensed stations ordered closed and no other unneutral messages received. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Sept. 23 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The same to the Ambassador in France and the Minister in Belgium. Forwards communication from the German Government signifying the willingness of Germany to observe the neutrality of African colonies in free-trade zone according to treaties. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

470 Sept. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Sealed letter from Germany to Hull, England, opened and found to contain directions for sending mail to Germany through United States consular mail. Announcement in American Bulletin to this effect. British object to forwarding mail “under cover of United States representatives. 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 867]

Enclosure 1: Protest of September 18 from United States Minister in the Netherlands against opening official mail. Enclosure 2: Protest of September 19 from Consul at Sheffield against opening consular mail.

Sept. 24 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Re the fact that a British warship requested supplies from the United States by wireless. British ships have been instructed not to do this. 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Sept. 24 See Germany 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Procurator general disposed to release cargoes upon payment of freight with protest; final judgment reserved until later, when reimbursement will be made if decided in our favor. 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

66 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Oct. 7] From the Consul General at London. Dutch ships arrested in order to prove that they carried no contraband. Managing director of Holland-America Line hopes for support of United States in efforts of Netherlands to prevent further interference from British Government. Large shipments of cotton expected. Some may find its way to Germany. 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

Sept. 25 To the British Ambassador. The same to the French Ambassador. American citizens claim letters to friends in Germany have not reached their destination. Request that some course be taken to prevent this delay or loss of mail. 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861]

334 Sept. 25 [Rec’d Sept. 26] From the British Ambassador. Requests permission for British Army reservists in Canada to pass through United States in order to embark for Great Britain. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

Sept. 26 To the Ambassador in Great Britain. United States wishes belligerents to accept Declaration of London as definite naval code, in order to prevent misunderstandings. The changes proposed by Great Britain deny the rights of and impose greater hardships upon neutrals. Action of Great Britain inconsistent with policy of her statesmen in former wars. As changed by order in council, Declaration of London cannot be accepted by United States, as it would fail to safeguard interests of her citizens and those of other nations. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

476 [Enclosure] Sept. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 12] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Protests against methods of German Navy in laying mines in North Sea. 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 717]

Sept. 26 [Rec’d Sept. 28] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. British Consuls instructed not to raise difficulties in case of transfer of ships to American flag if already owned by Americans. Understanding is that ships will not trade with Germany. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778]

210 Sept. 26 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Protests against hardships endured by many commercial houses on account of suppression of cable messages between the United States and neutral countries. 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

500 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Re the status of armed merchant vessels in neutral ports. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

218 Sept. 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructs Ambassador to protest against changes in Declaration of London as they are certain to arouse resentment in America. The Declaration represents the limit of restrictions to which our people will submit. 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Sept. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 1] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Declaration of London has not been ratified; doctrine of continuous voyage has been part of international law, upheld by United States courts; proclamation departing from the Declaration of London should be judged by rules of international law accepted by courts and applied in previous wars; British wish to prevent foodstuffs and war material going to Germany; cargoes have been bought not confiscated; willingness to come to an agreement. 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Sept. 28 To the Consul General at London (telegram). Instructions to appear before Bonar Law’s committee for expeditious settlement of matter of freight, making plain the Department’s attitude. American interests advised to pay with protest, to avoid further delay; all freight collected to be reimbursed if decided in our favor. 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul General at London (telegram). Two Dutch steamers brought to Plymouth because of copper in cargo. Dutch liners required to give proof that goods are for Dutch consumption. 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

753 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Foreign Office wishes to be informed about arrangements for repatriation of British subjects in Germany. Request that Gerard be instructed to make all arrangements through American Embassy, not through any private agency. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 1171 and Doc. 1172]

758 Sept. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British wish to avoid any action which will give offense to United States. Purpose is to prevent enemy from receiving food and material for military use. Discussion of whole matter proposed. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

Sept. 29 Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State. Took up with the British Ambassador modifications of the Declaration of London. Ambassador admitted that the inclusion of foodstuffs in absolute contraband was contrary to British tradition, and that it was better to get the Netherlands to place an embargo thereon. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

763 Sept. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). England agrees to make a new list of absolute contraband and to prepare a new order in council, in which she will endeavor to meet the wishes of United States so far as possible; has accepted Netherland assurance that embargo will prevent exportation of foodstuffs. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits proclamation of September 21 specifying additional articles which are to be treated as contraband of war. This to take the place of any other order in council. 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Sept. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 1] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Has proposed to United States Ambassador that a new British proclamation of contraband be issued to supersede previous ones, with no mention of Declaration of London along the lines suggested by the United States. Cargoes containing copper and petroleum will be detained when consigned to Krupps. Relying upon Netherland embargo, foodstuffs will be considered noncontraband. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 30] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Inquiries concerning cargoes captured and taken to French ports should be addressed to Prefect Maritime of district where ship is detained. Cases go to prize court at Bordeaux. 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

226 Oct. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). A summary of the correspondence between United States and Great Britain on the subject of the Declaration of London. British appreciate consideration shown by President in not making formal protest. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

227 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instruction of September 26 re Declaration of London and order in council is not to be presented to Foreign Office until he is notified; the information is for his own use in informal discussions. 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

228 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Expresses gratification over proposed new order in council, but desires to see text before approving or suggesting changes. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

229 Oct. 1 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Are full address and signature still necessary on Department’s telegrams to London and beyond? 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807]

Oct. 1 [Rec’d Oct. 2] From the British Embassy. The Alexandria, belonging to Kosmos Line and flying German flag, has been bought by the Northern and Southern Steamship Corporation, whose local manager is manager of the Kosmos Line, which operates steamers between Hamburg and San Francisco via South American ports. Thought Alexandria, changed to American registry, engaged in supplying coal to German cruisers. 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997]

Oct. 2 To the British Ambassador. United States hopes that a naval code will be adopted by all nations. Germany and Austria have agreed to the adoption of the Declaration of London. The order in council prevents this Under the Declaration a belligerent has the right to add to the list of absolute or conditional contraband. Suggests that Great Britain and France accept Declaration and then modify lists. 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State of a conference with the British Ambassador. The Ambassador thought that the British Government did not realize that Germany and Austria had promised to abide by the Declaration of London; great advantage to have uniform code of naval warfare. Will submit the United States proposals to Grey by telegram. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct. 3] From the British Ambassador to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (telegram). Britain urged to accept Declaration of London in order that all belligerents may agree on conditions. Permissible that list of conditional and absolute contraband be added to, also that embargoes be arranged with neutral countries. 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). German mine laying and sub-marine activity forces England to adopt countermeasures. Mine laying has been ordered in certain specified areas, and shipping warned. 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

Oct. 2 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. Re transfer to American flag of vessels already owned by Americans. Objections taken to instructions not to trade with Germany. This an interference with legitimate rights of neutrals. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780]

Oct. 2 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). No change in censorship regulations. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807]

776 Oct. 3 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ A new order in council will be drawn up, specifying added articles of conditional and absolute contraband. Special arrangements made with Netherlands concerning embargoes on foodstuffs. Mines laid in English Channel by British makes safe route from American to Holland around Scotland. 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

246 Oct. 4 To the Ambassador sin Great Britain (telegram) Repetition of arguments for adopting Declaration of London. 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

Oct. 4 [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Mail for Germany returned as undeliverable; postal communication suspended. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

514 Oct. 5 To the British Ambassador. United States will take over British affairs in Turkey in case war is declared. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to direct attention of proper authorities to subject of release of Robert Dollar , as suggested by British Ambassador at Washington in message to his Government. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey and chief censor agree to avoid undue interference with telegrams between the United States and neutral countries. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 5] From the Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (telegram). British authorities in Jamaica ask that vessels under the American flag carry no Germans or Austrians liable to military duty, thus avoiding need for search. 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896]

Oct. 5 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. British cruisers Lancaster and Suffolk in proximity to New York Harbor give impression of interference with American commerce. 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1050 and Doc. 1051]

85 [Enclosure] Oct. 6 From the Procurator General to the American Consul General at London. Re Great Britain’s contention for freight and other charges on diverted and detained vessels. 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 500]

268 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Encloses copy of telegram to American Consul General, Sydney, asking if embargo can be lifted so far as United States is concerned. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

Oct. 6 [Rec’d Oct. 7] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Expression “instructions not to trade with Germany” misconstrued; explanations given. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782]

269 Oct. 6 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Telegram from American Minister in Peking states that United States commander of China expedition reports that official telegrams are held up. Request that orders be given Hongkong authorities to avoid repetition of this. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

783 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Belgian committee formed at Brussels under patronage of Spanish and American Ministers to import, foodstuffs for poor of Brussels. Requests authorization of the United States Government. 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 1285 and Doc. 1286]

789 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey assents to the suggestion concerning hospital supplies and asks that Spanish and American Governments define them and submit the definition to all belligerents, together with the proposal that they will not be considered contraband. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

Oct. 7 From the Consul General at London (telegram). Re seizure of shipment of wood alcohol. Protests procurator’s claim for freight and incidental expenses while in port. Suggests that American position be restated. 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (telegram). American vessels are under no duty to refuse to ship belligerent seamen or citizens of belligerent countries. 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 893]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Re presence of Lancaster and Suffolk in proximity to New York Harbor. Instructions have been issued to British Admiralty to take steps to prevent repetition of such incidents. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

79 Oct. 8 [Rec’d Oct. 19] From the Consul General at London. S. S. Sturmfels , from Calcutta to New York, with miscellaneous goods on board, has sought refuge in the Italian Red Sea port of Massaua. Permission asked of Great Britain for ship to continue journey. Necessary to obtain assent of Germany also. 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

Oct. 8 To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges note suggesting presence of United States warship to preserve neutrality of Liberia. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

800 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Requests to know if unimportant communications of details and routine work must also go through Department, thus causing delay. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175]

806 Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 10] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Draft of new order in Council containing lists of conditional and absolute contraband submitted to United States for approval. 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

284 Oct. 9 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Foreign officers may send by any route feasible unimportant communications of detail work, etc. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

362 [Enclosure] Oct. 10 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Places blame for detention of the Robert Dollar upon Brazilian authorities. 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

Oct. 12 From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. British are under false impression that United States has proposed articles to be placed on lists of contraband. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at London (telegram). Seizure of shipments of cotton-seed products has resulted in serious injury to American commerce and produces spirit of antagonism to British Government. Satisfactory understanding respecting our commerce with neutrals should be given. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

85 Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 26] From the Consul General at London. Advises shippers to accept terms under protest, with view to reimbursement. 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500]

821 Oct. 12 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States mail on board Noordam not interfered with by British officials. Request for specimen of envelope opened. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

[Enclosure] Undated [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the British Government. The Anglo-Japanese Alliance antedates the agreement with the French and Russian Governments, therefore British Government must act in mutual agreement with Japanese as regards the war. 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

302 Oct. 13 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Denial that additions of petroleum and motors to contraband list were suggested by United States. Spring Rice made suggestion. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

300 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Holland-America Line will not accept goods for shipment unless consigned to Netherland Government. Situation unsatisfactory. Further protests. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

826 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Commercial telegrams passed unless delivery entails some transaction detrimental to Great Britain. To notify sender of non-delivery would be to defeat object of censorship. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 15] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Minister at Stockholm (telegram). Swedish vessels asked to call at British ports and give assurance that cargoes of which exportation is prohibited, will be landed at port of destination and not exported. This to avoid search at sea. 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

313 Oct. 14 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to insist upon notification to sender of non-delivery of message. Failure to do this inflicts great hardship and unnecessary expense. 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

307 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Spanish Ambassador at Washington has had no instructions re hospital supplies and prefers that Spanish Ambassador at London be conferred with List of hospital supplies from. Red Cross enclosed for submission to British Foreign Office. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, and Doc. 1342]

Oct. 15 [Rec’d Oct. 16] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Shipping controversy academic. Life of English-speaking civilization is at stake. Friendly relations with England are in jeopardy; also our usefulness in bringing about peace. 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394]

323 Oct. 16 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Suggests that England, France, and Russia adopt Declaration of London without amendments, thus making effective the German and Austrian acceptance. Later Britain can proclaim additions to list of contraband. If military supplies are discovered en route through a neutral country to Germany, that neutral would be subject to the rules governing trade with the enemy. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

324 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ The United States is bound to recognize the rights of neutrals; proposed order in council does not accept the Declaration of London without change; this unsatisfactory to other belligerents. Objections enumerated. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the President to the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Urges Ambassador to use persuasion in effecting an understanding concealing commerce. United States has pointed out a way of accomplishing it with least friction. 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

Oct. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Repetition of reasons why Britain will not adopt Declaration of London. Requests United States not to protest against order in council, but to act on merits of each particular case of detained vessels. 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

Oct. 17 [Rec’d Oct. 19] From the British Ambassador. Memorandum concerning German oil steamships Chatham and Standard sold to Standard Oil Company. British Government entitled to seize these ships. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

864 Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Declaration of London forbids addition to contraband list of articles such as rubber and iron, ore, now necessary for manufacture of war materials. Therefore Britain can not accept it. To do so and then issue a proclamation contradicting a part of it would be impossible. Britain will issue an order in council which will disturb neutral commerce as little as possible, reserving right to stop cargoes of contraband evidently destined for enemy. United States can make claim for damages. 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). British will accept Declaration of London on general terms, making exceptions in draft proclamation already submitted, solely to prevent contraband reaching enemy. United States asked not to make formal protest. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Oct. 19 From the Consul General at London (telegram). British Government said to be ready to declare cotton as conditional contraband. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

341 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Germany approves plan to supply population of Belgium with food. Authorization to proceed with plan. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293]

Oct. 20 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey’s proposal should be accepted as an emergency plan, thus throwing responsibility on British Government. Preferable to a break with Great Britain. United States Government upheld doctrine of continuous voyage during Civil War, which Grey now wishes to establish. Request that House be sent to confer with Grey. 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

866 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Grey has learned that arrangements are in progress by which general correspondence with Germany shall pass through American Consulate General at Rotterdam. Requests that this be stopped. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

Oct. 20 [Rec’d Oct. 22] From the British Ambassador. Transmits communication of the British Consul General at San Francisco concerning the Alexandria, changed to United States registry under name of Sacramento. Has loaded cargo of coal and potatoes consigned to a German company in Valparaiso. A high price was paid for the coal, yet there is no market in Valparaiso. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005]

358 Oct. 20 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Authorization to aid in obtaining permission from British to ship foodstuffs to Belgium. 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293]

Oct. 21 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey gives reasons why British reject Declaration of London: (1) Parliament considers it unsatisfactory; (2) Article 28 excludes rubber, metallic ores, and hides from treatment as contraband; (3) Holland a base for military supplies for Germany. Britain considers Declaration advantageous to Germany. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Consul General at London (telegram). Every insurance company in London and Liverpool and member of Lloyd’s agrees to insert clause excluding risk liability from any claim arising from capture or detention of ship by British or Allies. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

362 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The John D. Rockefeller, American ship carrying illuminating oil to Copenhagen, detained by British. Requests release. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

373 Oct. 22 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ United States withdraws its request that belligerents adopt Declaration of London. Insists that its rights be defined by existing rules of international law. Reserves right to protest in case of violation. 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. The John D. Rockefeller’s cargo consigned “to order.” Destination has been ascertained and vessel ordered released, with assurance that oil will not be re-exported. Necessary that ships carry papers showing destination and names of owner and consignee. Fuel and lubricants declared conditional contraband. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

375 Oct. 22 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Steamer Brindilla, owned by Standard Oil Company, carrying oil to Alexandria, Egypt, detained by British at Halifax. Seizure unjustified. Requests release. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Memorandum re Chatham and Standard. These ships owned and controlled by American capital, a question of change of registry, not of ownership. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

378 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to report any opening of United States official mail in pouches under seal. This not approved by our Government. 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

893 Oct. 23 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey expresses satisfaction that United States will not offer protest against new order in council but will reserve right to enter protest where rights are considered violated. Promise to consider all cases in friendly spirit. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

894 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Overwhelming military business absorbs Government. Difficult to get information or attention of Foreign Office. 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

379 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Requests release of steamer Platuria, owned by Standard Oil Co. and carrying oil to Denmark. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

887 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States Steel Products Co. urges Embassy to have British Government raise embargo on shipments of manganese ore from India to United States; also for release of two steamers of ore held in Bombay. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

892 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey States that code messages from Tilson and Rowell to Philippines detained at Hongkong. These took unusual route. British Government expresses regret and promises to facilitate transmission of such messages. 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

Oct. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 25] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ New order in council to be issued after conference with France; to be published in United States as soon as possible. Urge upon British Government prompt action and publicity of facts in every case of detention of vessels. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

391 Oct. 24 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Increasing complaints of Americans against Great Britain for interference with legitimate commerce. Great Britain asked to declare that American-owned cotton in neutral ships be unmolested. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

393 Oct. 24 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British underwriters will not insure unless owner warrants goods free of capture. American companies follow same course. It is hoped British will take steps to relieve situation. Much adverse criticism in this country. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440]

903 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Release of steamer Brindilla ordered. 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500]

Oct. 24 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Moore, San Francisco, supplying coal to German cruisers at Guaymas by means of steamers chartered by him and consigned to his agent at Guaymas. Railroad plant used for storing coal. Has already coaled the Leipzig in this way. Desires that this be brought to attention of the proper Government Department. 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005]

[Enclosure] Oct. 25 From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (telegram). Assurance that cotton will not be seized; not on contraband list. Copper destined for Krupp detained. No cargo taken without payment; that for neutral countries allowed to proceed. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Oct. 25 [Rec’d Oct. 26] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Remarks upon the general question of contraband and the attitude of the British Government. The demand for mineral oils by neutrals in touch with belligerents has greatly increased; evidence is that these are transmitted to belligerents. Neutrals making arrangements to guarantee that these goods will not be re-exported. 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]

911 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey makes positive declaration that cotton is not contraband. No ship has been detained. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440]

Oct. 26 From the British Ambassador. Grey authorizes assurance that cotton will not be seized; not on contraband list. Copper destined for Krupp detained. No cargo taken without payment; that for neutral countries allowed to proceed. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

912 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Detained ship Platuria has on board 1,500,000 gallons oil. Will be released if Denmark gives assurance that oil will not go to Germany. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

910 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Food sent to Belgium should go to Commission of Belgian Relief, which has guarantee of German military commander not to confiscate it. Money of no use American committee should consult with Hoover, chairman of the commission. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295]

407 Oct. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Permission given to assist United States Steel Products Co. in effort to lift embargo on ore. 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

405 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Confirmation desired of advices that cable addresses and short signatures may be used. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

Oct. 27 [Rec’d Oct. 28] From the British Ambassador. Gives assurances that any British reservists who may become public charges in United States will be permitted to return to Canada. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910]

Oct. 27 From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. United States Government is not under obligations to prevent shipments of naval supplies to a neutral port, although this port may be used as a base for naval operations. Attention called to the report that a British ship with cargo of coal for Southern Pacific Railroad of Mexico was seized by the British and part of its coal removed. The ship was then sent to British Columbia, causing a loss to the company of $30,000. 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 1005 and Doc. 1006]

418 Oct. 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). United States cannot foretell the effect of new order in council, and does not waive the right to protest against the inclusion of any article in list of contraband. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Announcement that mine field has been discovered off north coast of Ireland. Shipping warned. British ship bound for Montreal sunk; also Dutch ship. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]

369 Oct. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the British Ambassador. Protests against continued presence of Geier in a United States harbor. Locksun alleged to be supplying German warships with coal in Honolulu Harbor. Grounds for detaining her under charges of false declaration of destination. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939]

Oct. 29 To the British Ambassador. Turpentine and rosin not on list of contraband. Desires a statement from British Government regarding immunity of these products from seizure. 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

948 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British are fearful that order to refrain from giving out information concerning sailing of vessels may assist United States citizens in carrying on contraband trade with belligerents. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

945 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office states that private individuals telegraphing to England are allowed to use registered cable addresses. Signatures may be abbreviated. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

944 Oct. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey states that as a rule senders are not informed of stoppage of messages. Same rule applies to British and American senders. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

938 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Requests Department to instruct Ambassadors at Berlin and Vienna to discontinue sending private mail through official channels. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Notification of Government’s intention to fix definite period for repairs to Geier, after which time, if unable to leave, she will be interned. Locksun detained for investigation. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, and Doc. 941]

433 Oct. 31 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Protest against detention of American steamer Kroonland laden with copper and rubber consigned to neutrals, and of American shipments of copper on Italian steamers bound for neutral countries. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

37 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at London. Approves action of Consul General in asking permission for safe-conduct of S. S. Sturmfels . This case to set precedent. 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

439 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Carnegie Steel Co. wishes embargo lifted on manganese ore from India. 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

371 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. Representations have been made to customs officials that the Berwind-White Coal Mining Company is under suspicion of chartering neutral ships to supply German cruisers. The Amistà was allowed clearance for Montevideo via Barbados, but never arrived there. Systematic way in which neutral ships have left American ports to supply German cruisers is a source of grave anxiety to the British Government. Requests that preventive measures be taken. 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007]

Nov. 1 [Rec’d Nov. 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Government has no present intention of interfering with turpentine and rosin. Lists of contraband published; may be consulted. Final decision for prize courts. 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

447 Nov. 2 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Order not in unfriendly spirit. Trade, whether contraband or non-contraband, is legitimate, and within neutral rights. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

964 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The Kroonland detained, not seized; investigation and report promised. British Government has found evidence that copper on Italian steamers was for belligerents; will buy the cargoes. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]

Nov. 2 From the British Ambassador. Shipments of military stores to Denmark increase daily, in many cases forwarded directly to Germany. Encloses copy of telegram of October 31 from Grey to British Minister in Denmark, inquiring how case stands regarding Platuria and Knudsen. These vessels have been released. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513]

Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Rome (telegram). Instructions to induce Italian Government to prevent reexport of copper on board Regina d’Italia. Large shipments of copper consigned to Italian bank by German agent. British willing to buy it. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521]

Undated [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (telegram). Minister is being urged to modify restrictions on exports to United States. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

966 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 3] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Re S. S. Kassala and Waddon . Special licenses will be issued by Government of India for export of ore, if United States will give assurances that it will be used at home. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

961 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germans laid mine fields north of Ireland from ships flying neutral flags, directly in path of transatlantic liners. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]

Nov. 2 To the British Ambassador. Investigations into case of the Amistà will be made. Department will ascertain whether consignee expected such shipments. United States resents suggestions that vigilance in neutral duties has been relaxed. 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

549 Nov. 3 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Transmits revised British list of articles of contraband; also order in council of October 29 defining attitude of Britain toward Declaration of London together with modification of same. 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

455 Nov. 3 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to ascertain attitude of British Government concerning shipments of goods through Italy to Switzerland. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]

454 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ American interests desire lifting of embargo on wool and rubber. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (telegram). Instructions to inquire whether shipments of wool might be allowed to United States with guarantee against reexport. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Consul General at Singapore (telegram). Inquire as to grounds of embargo on rubber and whether shipments would be allowed to United States with guarantee against reexport. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

375 Nov. 3 [Rec’d Nov. 4] From the British Ambassador. Transmits letter from Grey recommending that certain routes be followed for ships trading with Norway, Denmark, and Holland. North Sea must be considered a military area Shipping should take English Channel according to explicit directions laid down. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]

969 Nov. 3 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). French Minister at The Hague threatens to protest against transit of foodstuffs through Netherlands without approval of French Government. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298]

978 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ International Commission for Relief of Belgium, with Hoover as chairman, has completed arrangements to insure that food for starving Belgians will not be diverted. Relief given by various European governments and individuals. Recommends that Hoover be consulted as to amount of food, the kind needed, and how to ship it. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298]

550 Nov. 4 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Clippings from British newspapers concerning attitude of the United States in present crisis. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

992 Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). War exists between Turkey and Great Britain. United States has taken charge of Ottoman interests in England. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

1000 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Kroonland allowed to proceed, her copper brought into the prize court. Giovanni released, copper discharged. Regina d’Italia allowed to proceed, copper, not consigned to Italian firm, placed in prize court. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Nov. 6 To the British Ambassador. Request that Great Britain will not interfere with shipments of tobacco. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Washington (telegram). Large shipments of copper and rubber passing through Italian ports to Germany. Large purchases also through Rotterdam, Amsterdam, and Copenhagen by houses working on German account. British must stop contraband trade in copper. 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

1005 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey negotiating agreement with neutral countries bordering on Germany and Austria for the regulation of neutral commerce with object of preventing contraband from reaching enemy and of giving least possible trouble to neutral trade. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

Nov. 6 From the Consul General at London (telegram). Exports of wool permitted only when shown that such wool is for manufacture of goods for Allied Governments 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

1006 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Reasons for imposing embargo to insure abundant supply for Great Britain and Allies, and to prevent war material from reaching enemy through neutral countries. Neutrals must give guarantee that such goods will not be reexported. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

Nov. 7 To the British Ambassador. Protests against fate of Rockefeller, Platuria, and Knudsen; requests that visit and search be made at sea with greatest expedition possible. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. British Government has no intention of interfering with shipments of tobacco in neutral bottoms, sent to any European country. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

495 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to render all possible assistance to Muir and Company in claim for wheat on Miramichi, held in prize court in London. 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Nov. 8 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Consul General at Cape Town. Birkenfels with cargo from New York to Australia held up at port in British South Africa. Suggests taking matter up with British Government. 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 573]

490 Nov. 8 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Argentina is desirous of knowing course pursued by United States regarding detained cargoes. Instructions to confer unofficially with Argentine Minister at London. 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682]

Nov. 9 [Rec’d Nov. 11] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Forwards copies of telegrams sent by Grey to British Ministers at Christiania, Stockholm, and Copenhagen and to Ambassador at Rome, containing information as to arrangements with neutral governments for putting fewest possible hindrances in way of neutral trade while at same time carrying out necessary measures of restriction. 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522]

1029 Nov. 9 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits statement from Grey: Great scarcity of copper in Germany; their agents bringing it in by carefully organized plan to supply German arms factories; swollen trade in Italy an artificial one. 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

1027 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Urges that French Government send as soon as possible permit for transshipment of foodstuffs for Belgium through Holland. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304]

511 Nov. 10 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Repeats protests against seizure and detention of copper and requests release. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527]

513 Nov. 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Rosenthal Brothers of Columbus purchased wool skins prior to embargo. English and O’Brien of Boston purchased 600 bales of wool prior to embargo. Both give assurance of home use. Instruction to ask if goods can be shipped. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

518 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Wool urgently needed by United States. If it cannot be obtained, prices of American woolen goods, which British may desire, will be excessively high. Instructions to press for definite statement regarding supply of wool. 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Embassy. German liners in American ports are ready to sail; are to operate with fast German cruisers in Pacific against Allied forces. Charges that the United States is responsible for losses to shipping and trade which may ensue. 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 984 and Doc. 985]

516 Nov. 12 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has not intended to authorize Ambassador to negotiate with other neutral ministers for agreements as to shipping. Conversations relating to free movement of American commerce to neutral countries being conducted in Washington. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

526 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ It seems not to the interests of British to cripple American manufacturers and depress British interests in colonies. Hopes that permits will be allowed for excess over needs of Great Britain. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

523 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to present to Foreign Office protests of Danish firms conducting business with American houses as English censorship of commercial cables is ruining business. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Reports interning of the Geier and Locksun in Honolulu. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

Nov. 13 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Restatement of British attitude as to detained vessels and seized cargoes. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

1057 Nov. 13 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Has not negotiated with other neutral ministers for agreements as to shipping. Encourages neutral ministers to tell of their negotiations with British Government only to keep informed. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

Nov. 14 [Rec’d Nov. 16] From the British Ambassador. Requests transmission of enclosed message through United States Consul General at Beirut stating that it is not the habit of the British to fire on open towns unless attacking an armed force of the enemy. Great Britain will hold responsible any officer who orders killing of British subjects in cold blood. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1237 and Doc. 1238]

1060 Nov. 14 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The report that Germans have been stopping food for needy Belgians is untrue. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304]

540 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The President does not think it wise to appoint a Government committee for the management of Belgian relief. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307]

Nov. 15 From the British Ambassador. Communicates rules issued by the Brazilian Government relative to the treatment of merchant vessels in Brazilian ports. Grey desires to know if the United States is willing to issue similar rules. 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011]

Nov. 16 To the British Embassy. Regarding sailing of German liners from American ports, United States is maintaining customary vigilance. 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Nov. 16 [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Bitterness exists between British and German Governments concerning treatment of prisoners. German Government expects him to visit camps in person and furnish from German funds necessities for prisoners. Requests instructions. 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

Undated [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Foreign Office states that cotton-seed cake is conditional contraband and will be treated as such, and under order in council will be liable to seizure if consigned to order or to an enemy. 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

558 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Explanation regarding conferences with other neutral ministers satisfactory. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

1078 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Arrangement being drawn up by which rubber, hides, ore, and wool can be sent to United States upon satisfactory guarantee against reexportation. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

1079 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey states all meat, wool, and skins are required by British on account of war; preembargo contracts cannot be filled. 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

1083 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Nov. 19] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). General French believes that Germans have done their utmost; a slow victory for Allies now probable; German commanders know they will be beaten; Allies will insist upon enormous indemnity to Belgium, which Germans will not grant until hopelessly defeated. Germany putting out “feelers” for peace. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

562 Nov. 18 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Norwegian steamer Uller, chartered by American corporation, with full cargo cotton detained by British at Kirkwall. Detention not justified; people are persuaded that Great Britain not friendly to American trade. 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

564 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Inquires concerning the agreement Italy has made with Great Britain to prevent reexportation of goods to Germany. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531]

144 Nov. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 14] From the Consul General at London. Permission for Sturmfels to continue journey denied. Letter received by Lloyd’s indicating line of conduct which cargo interests should follow in order to recover property contained in German ships seeking refuge in Italian ports. 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 572]

1092 Nov. 19 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government regrets that it cannot raise embargo on meats from Australia. 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

551 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. British Government required to furnish guarantee that reservists en route through United States will depart without expense to the country. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

1104 Nov. 20 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Uller was not detained for cotton. More information later. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

582 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Daily increase in number of protests against British suppression of commercial telegrams, both in United States and neutral countries in Europe. Instructions to cooperate with Swiss Minister in protesting rigors of censorship. 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, and Doc. 824]

391 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Ambassador. Requests that, in event the Berwind prepares to put to sea, again with supplies, she be detained according to United States rules. The fact has been established that she coaled the Cap Trafalgar at sea. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012]

577 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Further investigations inadvisable. Grants permission to lend personal aid and to expend money furnished for amelioration of distress in every way possible. 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 1191 and Doc. 1192]

1117 Nov. 23 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Proposal re neutralization of African free-trade none not practical since hostilities have been begun by German forces. This to be communicated to German Government. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Nov. 23 To the British Ambassador. United States refuses to be governed by rules issued by Brazilian Government regarding treatment of merchant vessels. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

397 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Nov. 24] From the British Ambassador. Continued supplying of German cruisers by United States ships a matter of gravest anxiety to Great Britain. United States can not repudiate all responsibility. Requests careful investigation of Olson and Mahony. 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

176 [Enclosure] Nov. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. The Alfred Nobel will be placed in prize court. 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 551]

594 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain. Forwards copies of lists of articles, the exportation of which is prohibited by Norway, Sweden, and Denmark under agreement with Great Britain. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

Nov. 24 From the British Embassy. Memorandum stating that the Chilean is about to sail ostensibly for South American port with large quantities of supplies. There are strong suspicions of her intention to assist in belligerent operations against peaceful commerce. 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017]

Nov. 24 [Rec’d Nov. 25] From the British Ambassador. Regrets inaccuracy of statements regarding the Italian S. S. Amistà . 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

Nov. 25 To the British Ambassador. British proclaim unwrought copper as absolute contraband. List of conditional contraband contains materials for telegraphs, etc. Explanation asked. Manufacturers entitled to know what treatment to expect for shipments of manufactured copper. 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

153 Nov. 25 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Consul General at London. Attention of procurator general has been called to promise that seized cargo will be disposed of by special committee without reference to prize court. Forwards procurator general’s reply of November 21. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]

1138 Nov. 25 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Joint protests to Grey regarding suppression of commercial telegrams between United States and Switzerland; also between United States and Denmark. Protests referred to Prime Minister. 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827]

620 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ See Austria-Hungary, No. 305 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Re the movements of the Italian S. S. Amistà . 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

559 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Acknowledges note regarding Olson and Mahony. Cases have been brought to the attention of the Treasury Department. 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

560 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Attention of Attorney General has been called to the case of the Berwind, with view to such action as will prevent owner from again using United States ports in supplying belligerent war vessels at sea. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

628 Nov. 27 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to report whether British Government has mined River Tyne and Firth of Forth. 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the British Embassy. Coal was transferred from the Mazatlan to the Leipzig, notwithstanding bond to the contrary. Would like to know, if possible, what action has been taken by United States authorities. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

176 [Enclosure] Nov. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Re the Fridland and Björnstnerne Björnson. 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 551]

640 Nov. 28 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Plumbago supply in Ceylon greater than English demand. Inquire attitude of British Government concerning shipments to America. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

1163 Nov. 30 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). No further decisions can be given by Foreign Office re reexportation of shipments to Italy until new Italian decree has been tested. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Dec. 1 To the British Ambassador. Quotes a communication from the British Consul General at Philadelphia to an American firm urging that ships proceeding to Scandinavian ports call at British ports to avoid search at sea. Advantage of this not clear to Department. 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Embassy. Memorandum stating that request has been made of the Treasury Department that the Chilean be refused clearance until it be clearly shown that the cargo will not be transferred to war vessels at sea. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Dec. 2 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Defends British attitude on seizure of cargo. 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537]

660 Dec. 2 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Request for lifting of embargo to be repeated. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

667 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ War Risk Bureau anxious for reply. Steamers delayed, awaiting information as to whether River Tyne and Firth of Forth have been mined. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

664 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmission of telegram from Madrid Embassy, requesting relief from censorship interference with messages regarding importations of cotton to Spain. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

1183 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey asks for special instances of difficulties in censorship of cable messages; assures us that messages are stopped only for good reasons. 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]

Dec. 2 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the British Ambassador. Transmits substance of a memorandum of November 29 addressed by British Foreign Office to the Chilean Minister in London on the subject of new neutrality rules which the Chilean Government proposes for all American Governments. These rules are supplemented by a fourth suggestion by the British. 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 1110]

680 Dec. 3 To the Ambassador to Great Britain (telegram). Denial of justice and the illegality of British policy in continuing to seize cargoes despite the agreement with Scandinavian countries to forbid reshipment. 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538]

678 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Specific instances useless in settling general question of censorship of cables; however, protest forwarded from Western Union stating that French had made arrangements for facilitating communications, and claiming that British seem to discriminate against American cables. Instructions to make further representations to Foreign Office. 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]

679 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Galveston Cotton Exchange claims interference of cables is hampering cotton trade. Instructions to bring this to attention of Foreign Office. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

684 Dec. 4 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram) Copper from steamer Sif for Stockholm detained at Glasgow and from steamer Sigrun held at Newport. Desires to know grounds for seizure. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

176 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Consul General at London. Is making representations to procurator general and Foreign Office as to reasons for seizure of certain ships and detention of cargoes. Encloses copies of replies of November 24 and 28 from Foreign Office to American Ambassador; also his own letter of December 4 to the Ambassador at London describing the situation and stating that vessels have been placed in prize court. 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551]

681 Dec. 4 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Authorities in Ceylon willing to release plumbago under proper guaranty. Ascertain whether bond filed with British Embassy here against exportation from United States will be acceptable. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

1194 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits British instructions of November 21 regarding safe trade routes and the supplying of pilots in English waters. 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Instructions have been sent to the Commissioner of Immigration at Montreal permitting reservists of Great Britain to pass through United States en route to the United Kingdom. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

Dec. 5 From the Consul General at London (telegram). No settlement can be obtained for cargoes of packing companies except through prize court decisions, and they are four months behind time. Re cases of the Alfred Nobel, Björnstjerne Björnson , and Fridland. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

187 [Enclosure] Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Regarding treatment of seized vessels. 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 553]

687 Dec. 5 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Difficulties have arisen regarding shipments of cotton to Switzerland through Italy. Swiss government requests British to adjust matter. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

688 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits a specific instance of cable interference for attention of British authorities: Undelivered messages to Galveston Cotton Exchange. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

1202 Dec. 6 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Scandinavian Governments have not yet forbidden reexportation of copper. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542]

1199 Dec. 6 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits text of proposed working arrangement whereby difficulties of trade and shipping may be removed. Grey asks that United States shippers ship to some definite consignee and not “to order.” British agree to wool, rubber, etc., entering United States provided it is not reshipped to enemy. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542]

1209 Dec. 7 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Has been informed that copper shipped to neutrals goes to German concerns in neutral disguise for reshipment to Germany. Copper very high in Germany. Sweden has put copper on prohibited export list. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

1201 Undated [Rec’d Dec. 7] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re telegrams regarding “working arrangement,” embargoes, and interference with ships and cargoes. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Certain telegrams have been stopped because thought to have concealed cipher messages. Discussion of subject promised. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

708 Dec. 7 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Fore River Company planned to build submarines for one of Allies. Mr. Schwab laid plans of company before Department. President declared it a violation of the spirit of neutrality. Company then announced it would not build submarines for any belligerent. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

1209 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Forwards copy of note received from Grey for transmission to Constantinople: British Government surprised at Turkish threat since Turkish warship bombarded two unprotected towns before declaring war; will hold Ottoman Ministers responsible for any molestation of British subjects. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]

1220 Dec. 8 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re cotton held in Italian ports consigned to shipper or to order and destined for Switzerland. 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

1222 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits telegram from Bliss at Beirut stating that British noncombatants including women have been ordered to interior as hostages, pending release of detained Ottomans. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

714 Dec. 9 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Hopes soon to make definite response to proposed working arrangement for facilitating trade. 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Dec. 9 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the British Ambassador. Re further revision of neutrality rules proposed by Chilean Government for general adoption on the American continent. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

1240 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Suggests that if United States accepted proposed working arrangement, it incorporate a stipulation that British Government shall promptly inform us of the detention of every American ship and the reason therefor. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

187 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 1] From the Consul General at London. Forwards note of Grey of December 5 on subject of seized shipments; quotes Article 43 of Declaration of London and asks how goods can be detained for adjudication when it is not liable to condemnation. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

737 Dec. 11 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Arrangements for Denmark to adopt same system of trade as used in Holland. 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the Consul General at London. Transmits Admiralty circular of November 30 regarding navigation on the North Sea and English Channel, with instructions concerning mines, general and particular passages, pilots, blockaded ports, etc. 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734]

739 Dec. 11 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Confusion and expense caused by interruption of cable service. Influence on financial conditions in cotton States disastrous. Asks permission to use cotton codes. 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 840 and Doc. 841]

1245 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 12] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Has had a conference with Grey and the head censor, who deny alleged discrimination against America, and disclaim knowledge of interference with certain telegraph messages. Telegraphic route must be known before specific messages can be investigated. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]

1247 Dec. 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey denounces bill introduced in Senate to prohibit exportation of munitions of war to belligerents, and calls this unneutral act. 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

1255 Dec. 13 [Rec’d Dec. 14] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards statements of Grey re disposition of ships and cargoes consigned to neutral countries, which had been seized by Great Britain. 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

Dec. 14 [Rec’d Dec. 31] From the Consul General at London. A committee has been appointed by the British Government to receive and consider claims made by British, Allied, or neutral parties against ships or cargoes which have been condemned by prize courts and to provide for them out of prize funds. 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565]

1259 Dec. 14 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey states that certain companies have sold their supply of manganese to the German Government. Their shortage will not be supplied by Great Britain. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Mr. Hitchcock did not consult the President nor the Department in regard to the resolution to prohibit sale of munitions of war to belligerents. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931]

763 Dec. 15 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Burdens of nations not at war growing greater. Aggrieved firms presenting their claims to members of Congress. Instructions to bring matter to attention of Foreign Office. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

84 Dec. 16 To the Consul General at London. Re seizure of shipments made prior to a knowledge of the latest order in council. In this case the order in council should not apply. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

771 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Quotes, telegram from Threefoot Bros. & Co., of Meridian, Miss., regarding messages in advance of large shipments of cotton. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Embassy. Transmits copy of letter from Department of Justice stating failure to find any facts in case of Mazatlan constituting a violation of Federal penal laws. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034]

Dec. 17 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). British Government announces that cotton code may be used. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Dec. 17 [Rec’d Dec. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Subject of censored telegrams taken up with Danish and Swiss Ministers and Italian and Spanish Ambassadors. Censor refuses to notify sender of interrupted messages, saying it would defeat the object of censorship. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

434 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] From the British Ambassador. Because of the war initiated by Turkey against Egypt, Great Britain considers the suzerainty of Turkey over Egypt to be ended. Protection of Egypt undertaken by Great Britain, and a High Commissioner appointed who will also be Minister for Foreign Affairs. 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

1297 [Enclosure] Undated [Rec’d Dec. 18] From the British Foreign Office (telegram). Schneefels captured by British while on way to the United States. Ship will continue voyage and deliver cargo to owners. United States asked to protect the vessel, now considered British prize. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

1291 Dec. 18 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Transmits memorandum from the British Government showing regulations regarding the use of codes in foreign telegrams. 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849]

432 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] From the British Ambassador. Defense of British ships which have been accused of violation of neutrality in the Canal Zone. Statement by Sir C. Mallet concerning the Mallina. Regulations for enforcing neutrality in the Canal Zone delayed in reaching Great Britain. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Dec. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 21] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Subject of unwrought copper will be studied and decision rendered. 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

1307 Dec. 21 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Forwards reply of Foreign Office to note claiming undue delay in releasing vessels carrying cotton. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555]

1308 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Would United States merchants agree to export only what is needed for consumption in each country? Would United States object to appointment of a trustee to whom proper apportionment of goods could be shipped? 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

1309 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Chief censor sending daily report of stopped telegrams. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 24] From the British Ambassador. Fifty thousand commercial telegrams pass through censor’s hands per day, a few of which are delayed or stopped. Reasons for stopping messages will be given. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 23] From the British Embassy. Reviews the case of the Mazatlan and inquires whether the United States will take further action in matter. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034]

441 Dec. 22 [Rec’d Dec. 23] From the British Ambassador. Resinous products, camphor and turpentine, have been added to list of absolute contraband. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

1319 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Grey denies that American cotton is stopped while Egyptian cotton is allowed to proceed. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

806 Dec. 22 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Permission asked for Aryan to sail with wool; both wool and ship owned by American citizens; reasonable assurances against reexportation will be given. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

815 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Hides from Melbourne guaranteed against reexportation; instructions to secure export. 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

804 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Business firms in Manila suffering serious loss owing to delayed telegrams. Compañia General de Tobacos Filipinos desires to use code signature. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

808 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Hopes there will be good results from discussion of censorship of telegraph messages. Suggests that British arrange with French for better facilities for cabled communications. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

1318 Dee. 22 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Messages from United States stopped because they said that a British ship had been sunk, which was untrue. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador. Further protests against the hovering of British warships in vicinity of American ports. 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

819 Dec. 23 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Hopes that British Government will modify existing embargo to permit shipments of crude rubber from British colonies. Form of guaranty given. American-owned rubber now held in London and Liverpool. 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

1325 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Ambassain Great Britain (telegram). No wool allowed to be exported from Great Britain or colonies. 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

1326 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re hides from Melbourne. British Government awaits our answer to proposed arrangement. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

1330 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Government prefers that subject of delayed telegrams in France be taken up direct with French, and not through British authorities. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Embassy. Case of the Mazatlan still under consideration. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 24] From the Consul General at London (telegram). Transmits British amended list of absolute and conditional contraband of December 23. 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 416]

825 Dec. 24 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Objects to seizure of steamers Ellen and Sandefjord and requests release. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Ambassador. Regrets that resinous products have been added to absolute contraband list. Many ships have sailed with this cargo. Case similar to that of copper and other products. 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558]

830 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Restriction of trade to home consumption not practicable nor fair to American commerce. 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the British Embassy. The Gladstone (now Chilean) left Newport News bound for Chilean ports, owners taking oath that cargo would be discharged at port of consignment. 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1037 and Doc. 1038]

448 Dec. 25 [Rec’d Dec. 28] From the British Ambassador. Re British violation of quarantine regulations in the Canal Zone. Time to become familiar with new regulations had not been allowed. The Protesilaus fitted with wireless but was dismantled in port. The Mallina ordered to leave port before receiving clearance papers. British anxious to conform to neutrality regulations in the Canal Zone. 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046]

836 Dec. 26 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Makes a full statement of views of the United States Government on present condition of American foreign trade resulting from seizures and detentions. Maintains an inconsistency and lack of consideration on part of British. 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 559]

841 Dec. 27 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Embassy reports irritation in Italy against Great Britain for interference with trade. 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

1342 Dec. 28 From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Acknowledges communication of December 26. Grey will not return to London until December 30. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

1351 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ No hope that Great Britain will grant requests until answer received to the proposed working arrangement. 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

1340 Dec. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 29] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British naval authorities will facilitate voyage of relief ships which carry whole cargoes of food for Belgium. Ships should not contain other cargo. All ships for Belgium must be reported to the British Ambassador in Washington. 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

851 Dec. 29 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). Instructions to request British Government to permit examination of condition of German prisoners in England in return for German permission. 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 1192]

1368 Dec. 30 [Rec’d Dec. 31] From the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The United States is criticized for protests, which are attributed to German propaganda, and for failure to protest against Belgium’s treatment; is also accused of a desire to make money out of England’s misfortune. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

1374 Dec. 31 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Grey will reply to note [of December 26] “in the same tone.” 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567]

209 Dec. 31 [Rec’d Jan. 12, 1915] From the Consul General at London. Explanations of British action as to goods shipped before declaration of war. Specific case of lumber of George W. Howe & Co. consigned to J. H. Müller & Son of Hamburg. Apparent intention of authorities to weigh minutely every evidence of ownership. 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 568]

5 Jan. 1, 1915 From the British Ambassador. Upholds British decision that rosin and turpentine are contraband, as being “articles from which ammunition is manufactured.” 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567]

Jan. 2, 1915 To the British Ambassador. Acknowledges note explaining irregularities in observance of regulations in the Canal Zone. 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

1386 Jan. 2, 1915 From the Ambassador Great Britain (telegram). Permission will be given to an impartial person from the American Embassy in Berlin to visit British camps where German prisoners are kept. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

1394 Jan. 4, 1915 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ With regard to request of Compañia General de Tabacos Filipinos for permission to use code signature in telegrams exchanged with Barcelona, British Government cannot grant request. 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

730 [Enclosure] Jan. 5, 1915 [Rec’d Jan. 23] From the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador. Giving ultimate disposition of S. S. Ellen, Tellus , and Sandefjord . 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Jan. 9, 1915 [Rec’d Jan. 12] From the British Ambassador to the Counselor for the Department of State. Assurances given that ships will not approach Ambrose Lightship nearer than six miles. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062]

944 Jan. 12, 1915 To the Ambassador in Great Britain (telegram). The Schneefels will be treated as any other merchant vessel. 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

610 Jan. 13, 1915 To the British Ambassador. The same to the French Ambassador. In reply to complaint against Ecuador for non-observance of neutrality, the enclosed notes of December 1 and 25 from the Ecuadorian Minister will furnish an explanation. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1123 and Doc. 1124]

GREECE

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

June 15 To the Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs (telegram). President Wilson’s plan for peace treaties accepted in principle by thirty-four countries; Great Britain, France, Norway, and Uruguay to accept soon. Copy of treaties sent to Greece. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

132 July 31 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Consul at Saloniki. Epirus struggling for autonomous government. European concert declared Albania independent; opposed by Greece. Epirotes received religious freedom from Mohammedans; took possession of greater part of Albania. Concentration of troops in Macedonia under French direction against Bulgaria. Refugees in and around Saloniki approximately half million; cholera reported. War imminent. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Aug. 2 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (telegram). Greece’s attitude dependent upon Bulgaria and Turkey. Bombardment of Belgrade by Austria. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (telegram). Mobilization expected. Fleet near Dardanelles. Coal for Government sufficient; supply for private use for 15 days only. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Aug. 17 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Germany 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Aug. 20 [Rec’d Aug. 21] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (telegram). Greece willing to sign peace treaties with United States but with no other country. Government requests regulations concerning neutral commerce. Greece to remain neutral unless Turkey or Bulgaria enter war. 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

43 Sept. 11 [Rec’d Sept. 29] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Greece. Greece as well prepared for war as possible. Public opinion pro-French. Germany striving to win over Greece. 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

GUATEMALA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 9 [Rec’d Aug. 10] From the Guatemalan Minister. Note from President Cabrera tendering good offices. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Aug. 17 To the Guatemalan Minister. The Secretary of State acknowledges with pleasure the receipt of memorandum of President of Guatemala looking to conclusion of European war. 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

ITALY

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

131 July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Italy. Italy bound to Germany and Austria by the Triple Alliance; in reality, antagonistic to Austria for holding Italian-speaking provinces on the Adriatic. She is opposed to war and wishes to remain neutral. 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 2] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (telegram). Despite existing treaties, Italy can not declare war in support of Austria, her enemy and her rival in Adriatic and Balkans. Fleet mobilizing at Gaeta. Financial situation good. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

Aug. 2 [Rec’d Aug. 3] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Italy to remain neutral. Treaties require her support for defense, not for aggression; was not consulted by Austria. Export of food prohibited. Stock exchanges closed. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Two hundred thousand called to colors, not considered mobilization. Maneuvers on sea. Navy has one million lira available for munitions of war. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

1166 Aug. 4 [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Italian Chargé d’Affaires. Italy intends to remain neutral 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 11] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Suggested to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the mediation of the President. Reply: The time may come; Italy will be glad to exchange views. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 13] From the Consul General at Genoa (telegram). German liners Moltke and König Albert in Italian port. Suggests Department arrange with England for them to carry stranded Americans home. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

1267 Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] From the Italian Chargé d’Affaires. By Royal decree of August 6 territorial waters have been fixed at six nautical miles, for purposes of neutrality. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

Aug. 15 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Instructions to ascertain if German ships, chartered for the sole purpose of transporting Americans to the United States, may enter Italian ports for this purpose. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754]

Aug. 19 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy preparing to take sides against Austria. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150]

Aug. 22 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Italy making great preparations quietly. Troops sent to northeast border; factories running night and day; Government buying stores and coal from United States. Roumania dangerous, Turkey restless, Islam threatening, British sending 20,000 Indians to Egypt, Japanese seeking medicaments. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Aug. 23 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Following for Navy Department: Italy to declare war on Austria; fleet at Taranto; Abruzzi, Commander in Chief; Austrian vessel sunk; French-English fleet near Corfu. 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156]

Aug. 25 [Rec’d Aug. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Greek Minister inquires about rumored mediation services. German Ambassador thinks it too early for peace; that reported German victory practically decides the war. Germany would not claim territory of France but transfer of colonies only. Mobilization of Italy denied. Germany bitter towards Japan. 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

1426 Sept. 8 [Rec’d Sept. 10] From the Italian Chargé d’Affaires. Quotes text of articles of the Royal decree of August 6 respecting the limits of territorial waters in bays, bights, and gulfs for purposes of neutrality. 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

18 Sept. 24 [Rec’d Sept. 25] From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). War between Greece and Turkey imminent. Italy cannot long continue neutral. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

Oct. 12 [Rec’d Oct. 29] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ New Minister of War appointed from the army; Government holds to neutrality while preparing for war. Minister for Foreign Affairs ill. A new minister may mean a new policy. 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 232]

Oct. 16 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Norway 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 22 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy reported to have landed troops at Avlona. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

54 Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office does not prohibit goods from being shipped through the Kingdom from one foreign country to another, provided it is not placed in warehouses. In latter case agreement must be reached with customs authorities. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]

1837 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Italian Ambassador. Requests acceptance of United States Government of the limit set by Royal decree to territorial waters for purposes of neutrality. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066]

Nov. 9 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Harry S. Cavanaugh, representing American Trade Agency, Rome, protests stoppage of cable communication with American firms. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

81 Nov. 10 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Grey has promised to facilitate transmission of commercial messages sent in plain language and agrees that code addresses may be used where registered. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

87 Nov. 17 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to obtain a favorable statement on two points: Consignment of cotton for German ports via Netherlands, and shipments of cotton consigned to Netherland concerns for reexportation to Germany. 398n [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

Nov. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Ambassador in Italy. Transmits despatches presenting opportunities in Italy for American enterprise. Italian Government has provided additional funds for military purposes. Need for grain and guns. Italy and England have agreed to protect North African colonies. Conviction prevails that the power that wins will next attack America and that America will have to step in to save civilization. 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Nov. 27 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Continued complaints that commercial telegrams to American companies are undelivered. Business much disturbed. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

Nov. 28 To the Italian Ambassador. The United States does not accept the limit of territorial waters set out in the Royal decree of August 6, 1914. The principal nations generally recognize territorial jurisdiction to extend over three nautical miles. Important that any change should be recognized by principal maritime powers. 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066]

Nov. 30 From the Consul General at Genoa (telegram). Goods entering Italy marked “to order” are considered for Italy and not for reshipment. Many bales of raw cotton are tied up in Genoa. Government urged not to hold goods shipped before decree was published. Otherwise American shippers suffer great losses. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

95 Dec. 2 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). British Ambassador in Italy states that his Government and French Government are taking up matter of censoring commercial telegrams. American cooperation requested. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

98 Dec. 4 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Cotton non-contraband. Shipments made before publication of decree and tied up in Genoa should be allowed reshipment. Italian Government asked to give favorable consideration. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

98 Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 6] From the Ambassador in Italy. Grey informed Swiss Minister in London that instructions will by given immediately to allow cotton to be exported to Switzerland and other neutrals without interdicting its reexportation. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

Dec. 10 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Continued complaints received of delay in cable messages: One from Royal Servian Commission, regarding supplies from New York amounting to $5,000,000; another from American Vice Consul, Rome, about 10,000 tons wheat. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840]

110 Dec. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ No difficulty now in shipping cotton through Italy to named final destination. Shipments destined for Switzerland released. Complaint still regarding censorship commercial cables. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Italian Ambassador. The United States, while maintaining its position on the three-mile limit of territorial waters, has notified its vessels of the extent of territorial waters of Italy, as set forth in decree of August 6 1914. 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 1066 and Doc. 1067]

114 Dec. 14 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Italy asks our aid to obtain assurances from England that commercial telegraph messages to America will not be held up. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

116 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Complaints received regarding delivery of telegraph messages; investigate. If Italian censors are detaining messages, protest to Foreign Office. 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

Dec. 23 From the Ambassador in Italy (telegram). Strong resentment against England and France because of interruptions to commerce. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

141 Dec. 30 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Cotton can be shipped freely; no embargo on reexportation. 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

JAPAN

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 10 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). German Ambassador says England has called on Japan for assistance under treaty of alliance. Rumors that Atlantic Fleet of United States on way to Far East to protect China. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Aug. 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador anticipates proposition from Japan for neutralization of Orient. This desirable for Germany, as German resistance hopeless. 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Department is making inquiry of Germany respecting the possibility of circumscribing area of hostilities in Far East. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

Aug. 12 From the Secretary of the Navy. Forwards cablegram from naval attaché at Tokyo: Japanese Fleet mobilizing; strong feeling against Germany. 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Transmits Japan’s ultimatum to Germany. Minister for Foreign Affairs states that Japan is not animated by self-interest and seeks no territory in China; intimates that less danger of disturbance if China could borrow money from United States. German Ambassador declares that Germany cannot concede Japan’s demands, and prepares to leave. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Forwards note to Japanese Government: United States regrets impending war between Germany and Japan, but is gratified that Japan is acting in alliance with Great Britain, intending to restore Kiaochow to China, preserving equal opportunity of commerce for all nations with China, according to previous agreement with United States. Requests to repeat to Peking. 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Aug. 23 From the Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Ambassador (telegram). Notification of Japanese declaration of war against Germany. United States requested to take charge of Japanese interests in Germany. 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Imperial rescript of the Japanese Emperor. Declaration of war against Germany. 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Aug. 24 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japan agreeable to the proposal that the Empress Elizabeth, Austrian war vessel, be disarmed and interned. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Aug. 26 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Satisfactory arrangements have been made concerning Austrian war vessel. 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Aug. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 23] From the Ambassador in Japan. Transmits letter from the General Agent of the Great Northern Steamship Company asking if it would be an unneutral act to carry Austrian reservists from Shanghai to the United States, and reply thereto. 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891]

114 Aug. 29 [Rec’d Sept. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austria proposes internment of Kaiserin Elizabeth at neutral Chinese port. Diplomatic relations between Austria and Japan severed. Has taken over Austrian interests. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 328]

119 Sept. 1 [Rec’d Sept. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards Japan’s declaration of war with Germany. General conviction existed that war is inevitable and Government supported by press. Opinions differ as to return of Kiaochow to China. Special session of Diet called to vote war budget. 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Sept. 12 To the Ambassador in Japan and the Chargé d’Affaires in China (telegram). Directed to ascertain truth as to statement that Japanese will expel Germans from neutral districts in China. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Sept. 15 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Expelling of Germans from China denied. 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

127 Sept. 22 [Rec’d Oct. 13] From the Ambassador in Japan. Special session of Diet voted appropriation for construction of ten destroyers. Quotes speech of Minister for Foreign Affairs: England had requested Japan to furnish assistance under terms of alliance; Japan did her duty; appreciates prompt compliance of United States with her request that she take over her interests in Germany and Austria-Hungary. 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Sept. 24 To the Ambassador in Japan. Approves advice given steamship companies against transporting reservists of belligerent armies. 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See Germany 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Oct. 1 From the Japanese Embassy. Japanese have decided to take over and operate Shantung Railway. Now under complete control of Germans and used to facilitate German military operations. 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Oct. 6 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japanese Fleet has landed a force on Jaluit Island, destroyed the military works, and received surrender of authorities. 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

135 Oct. 8 [Rec’d Nov. 11] From the Ambassador in Japan. Japanese newspapers in general approve actions of Japanese Fleet, since Japan has disavowed any intention to seek territorial aggrandizement. Assistance of Japan in preserving order in the South Seas insures: safety of international commerce. Yellow journals unfriendly toward both Japan and United States. 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Oct. 16 To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Just signed thirtieth peace treaty. Ask Japanese Government if it will consider similar treaty. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Oct. 20 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japan has taken possession of [South Sea] islands of strategic importance and captured one enemy war vessel in hiding there. 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Oct. 27 To the Japanese Ambassador. Calls attention to Japanese battleship Hizen, cruising in neutral waters around Honolulu without lights. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059]

Oct. 28 [Rec’d Oct. 29] From the Japanese Ambassador. Transmits substance of telegram of October 27 from Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs, stating German man-of-war Geier, lingering in Honolulu port, ostensibly for repairs, is constant menace to Japanese merchant vessels. Requests information regarding intended disposition of Geier. 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937]

Oct. 30 To the Japanese Ambassador. Notification that Geier will be interned on a certain fixed date if repairs are not completed by that time. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, and Doc. 941]

Oct. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 31] From the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Japanese Embassy at Washington (telegram). Several members of Geier complement are suspected of having left Honolulu for San Francisco. The United States as neutral is under obligation to prevent their leaving the vessel for distant point. 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 941 and Doc. 942]

Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Japan reluctant to join in peace treaties. United States and Japan have conflicting views on China. Dissatisfaction in Japan concerning California legislation. Fear of hostile legislation. 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

Nov. 7 From the Consul at Nagasaki (telegram). Tsingtao fallen 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Nov. 11 To the Japanese Ambassador. Four members of Geier complement paroled in San Francisco. 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944]

Nov. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Reports interning of the Geier and Locksun in Honolulu. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947]

Nov. 14 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Forwards text of telegram received from supposed officers of the Shantung Railway, containing a petition to the Foreign Office that mines and railway seized by Japanese be restored to the company. 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Nov. 16 To the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Instructions to present the petition of officers of Shantung Railway to Foreign Office. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

161 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Dec. 17] From the Ambassador in Japan. Reviews newspaper discussion of the final disposition of Kiaochow. 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards extracts from Japan Advertiser: Foreign Minister opposed to sending troops to Europe; Japan interested only in peace of Orient. 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

164 Nov. 25 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Austria-Hungary, No. 305 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Dec. 7 [Rec’d Dec. 30] From the Ambassador in Japan. British Ambassador unwilling to reply to question as to whether German islands captured by Japan have been turned over to Australia for administration. British inquire of Japan’s purpose in entering war. Baron Kato assures American Ambassador that Japan is not in war for selfish purpose but because of her alliance with Great Britain. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Dec. 12 [Rec’d Jan. 14, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Forwards extract from the Parliamentary Supplement to the Official Gazette of December 9 containing a speech of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who denies the existence of an agreement between Japan and any nation binding Japan to retrocede Kiaochow to China. Whether Japan will succeed to Germany’s rights in Shantung, is left for future negotiations. 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 352]

170 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Jan. 14, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Encloses extract from Parliamentary Supplement to the Official Gazette of December 10, in which Matsuda charged the Cabinet with having given guarantees to Great Britain and United States that Japan would retrocede Kiaochow to China and that Japanese occupation of Jaluit Island was only temporary, and in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs denies the charge. 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Dec. 31 [Rec’d Jan. 27, 1915] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Encloses summary of further replies by the Minister for Foreigh Affairs to parliamentary inquiries regarding Japan’s participation in the war, December 10. 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 354]

LIBERIA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 7 To the Minister in Liberia (telegram). Instructions to recommend that Liberia proclaim neutrality at once. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Aug. 14 From the Minister in Liberia (telegram). French demand that German wireless be closed. French wireless still open. Requests advice. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Aug. 18 To the Minister in Liberia (telegram). For the information of President Howard in taking such measures as he may deem necessary to preserve neutrality, transmits text of President Wilson’s proclamation on radio communication. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

59 Sept. 4 [Rec’d Oct. 9] From the Minister in Liberia. Liberia has closed both French and German wireless stations. 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Dec. 30 To the Minister in Liberia (telegram). Instructions to warn Liberian Government to preserve utmost impartiality between belligerents. 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 1144]

NETHERLANDS

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 1 From the Netherland Chargé d’Affaires. North Sea and certain passes have been obstructed with submarine mines. 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]

Aug. 2 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Reports that German Army advanced through Luxemburg into France. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

125 Aug. 14 [Rec’d Aug. 28] From the Minister in the Netherlands. (1) European situation: Germany’s quick action proves conflict no surprise to her. Stubborn resistance of Belgium and action of English not anticipated. Dutch ports open doors for trade. Opportunity for United States to cooperate with other neutral countries for world peace. (2) Situation in Holland: Troops massed in south along frontier. Americans receiving necessary assistance; arranging financial relief of British subjects also. Refusal to transmit message in unknown cipher from Austrian. Government to Austrian Legation in Belgium. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170]

6 Sept. 1 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Instructions to ascertain whether port authorities at Rotterdam will remit port duties on American Red Cross ship. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

13 Sept. 6 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). No port charges will be made for the American Red Cross ship at Rotterdam. 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

39 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 2] From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Branch houses in Rotterdam of American firms and importers of American product’s protest against measures taken by belligerents regarding shipments. Willing to sign declaration that goods are not for belligerents. 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

33 Oct. 9 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Information received that Holland-America Line will not accept cargo unless consigned to Netherland Government, with permission of Government to ship. British will not prevent oil cake entering Holland. Instruction to furnish information concerning Netherland embargo on exportation. 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

44 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 11] From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherlands will receive oil cake consigned to Government. Holland-America Line will receive cargo consigned to Government. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

45 Oct. 12 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits list of articles of which Netherland Government prohibits exportation. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

152 Oct. 14 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Minister in the Netherlands. The fall of Antwerp has thrown 400,000 Belgian refugees upon the mercy of Netherland people. An attack on Antwerp by water would involve neutrality of Netherlands. 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

39 Oct. 15 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Requests explanation of telegram concerning shipments to Netherland Government; also information as to whether Netherland Government would prevent exportation of cotton shipped to Holland and destined for Germany. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580]

47 Oct. 16 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Every separate shipment must be consigned to Netherland Government with consent given by Netherland Consul General in New York. Exportation of cotton, fodder, and oil cake forbidden. Shipments of cotton in transit to Germany not forbidden but are at shippers’ risk. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580]

155 Oct. 20 [Rec’d Nov. 14] From the Minister in the Netherlands. Encloses extract from La Gazette de Hollande on subject of provisioning Belgium, quoting notes from the German Legation to the Netherland Minister for Foreign Affairs of August 15, and replies of the Netherland Minister of August 17 and October 3. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307]

44 Oct. 21 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Consul General states that consent of Netherland Government for shipments of goods must be obtained at The Hague. Obtain consent of the Government for such shipments. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

51 Oct. 22 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Permits for consignments of goods granted directly by Netherland Government to Holland-America Line. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

Oct. 23 To the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Instructions to report upon nature and number of telegrams passing office and upon arrangements being made to send commercial correspondence to and from Germany. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

47 Oct. 24 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Meat packers have regular trade in Holland. Requests reason why prepared meat products are not on list of goods that may be assigned to Netherland Government. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 24] From the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Requests instructions regarding transmission of commercial correspondence of belligerent countries through consular offices. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

48 Oct. 26 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Instructions to obtain information as to procedure to be followed by shippers to get permission of Netherland Government to consign goods to it. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

54 Oct. 27 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Meat products not among prohibited exports because plentiful in Netherlands. Other articles added to prohibited list. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

55 Oct. 27 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Permission to consign goods to Netherland Government obtained from Mr. Bock of Department of Commerce at The Hague. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Oct. 29 To the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Consulate should not be used in transmission of commercial telegrams between belligerent countries. 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873]

Nov. 1 From the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Permission asked to transmit commercial correspondence from belligerent countries to America. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

Nov. 2 To the Consul General at Rotterdam (telegram). Instructions not to forward commercial mail. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

52 Nov. 9 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Confusion regarding attitude of Netherlands towards shipments of goods on reexportation of which that Government has placed embargo. Instruction to send definite information after presenting matter to Netherland Government. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

71 Nov. 10 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Transmits information regarding clear and consistent attitude of Netherland Government towards shipping. 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

58 Nov. 17 To the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis to the Minister in Sweden and the Ambassador in Italy. Instructions to obtain a favorable statement on two points: Consignment of cotton for German ports via Netherlands, and shipments of cotton consigned to Netherland concerns for reexportation to Germany. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

170 Nov. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands. Forwards article from the Gazette de Hollande of November 17, containing plea for peace, proposing that Holland and United States unite in effort for mediation. 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

78 Nov. 19 From the Minister in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Foreign Office states that there is no objection to consignments of cotton in transsit to Germany or to transshipments if consigned to Netherland firms. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

81 Nov. 24 From the Secretary of the Legation in the Netherlands (telegram). Netherland Government, reserving right to import and distribute flour, will buy from United States. 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

177 Dec. 11 [Rec’d Dec. 26] From the Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands. Encloses report by the Rotterdam manager of work done by Commission for Relief in Belgium. 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

NORWAY

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 3 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). Norway to maintain strict neutrality. Mobilization for coast defense. Export of food prohibited. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Aug. 9 From the Norwegian Minister (telegram). Norwegian and Swedish Governments mutually agree to remain neutral and friendly toward each other. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Oct. 16 To the Minister in Norway (telegram). The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ministers in Sweden and Denmark, and the Ambassador in Italy. Make inquiries as to whether cotton destined for Germany can be shipped to Norway. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Oct. 20 From the minsister in Norway (telegram). Norwegian authorities do not object to cotton being shipped to Norway destined for Germany. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

Nov. 3 From the Minister in Norway (telegram). S. S. Bergensfjord , Norwegian American Line, seized by British ship, taken to Orkney, released after three days. Ships being taken to England for examination of their papers and cargo. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Nov. 4 [Rec’d Nov. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Norwegian-American Line can not take English Channel, owing to low water. Norwegian Government has requested British to change route. 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]

Nov. 6 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Norwegian Government protests against closing of North Sea. Norway depends upon trade with United States. Requests United States to protest. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Nov. 9 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Government has consented to allow steamers of Norwegian-American Line to take northern route. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

1 Nov. 10 To the Minister in Norway (telegram). United States will not protest to Great Britain against closing of North Sea. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

60 Dec. 28 [Rec’d Jan. 12, 1915] From the Minister in Norway. In the conference at Malmo the three Scandinavian Kings agreed upon strict neutrality and a uniform course of action with regard to entry of belligerent vessels into Scandinavian ports, to visitation and detention of merchant vessels, and to trade difficulties in general. Enclosure, communiqué from Norwegian Foreign Office. 159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

60 [Enclosure] Undated [Rec’d Jan. 12, 1915] From the Norwegian Foreign Office. Official Communiqué concening the Conference of Malmo. 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

PERSIA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Undated [Rec’d Nov. 3] From the Minister in Persia (telegram). Russian officers have seized Turkish and Austrian consuls and archives. Germans threatened and Consul assaulted. Requests instructions. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

Nov. 5 To the Minister in Persia (telegram). United States has not yet been requested to protect German and Austrian interests. Discretion must be used in extending protection to nations other than Americans. Attitude of strict neutrality to be maintained. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176]

Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 7] From the Persian Chargé d’Affaires. Persian Government has proclaimed neutrality. Good offices of United States solicited to help maintain neutrality. 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

2 Nov. 11 To the Persian Chargé d’Affaires. Reply to Persian Government; United States will lend its good offices in every possible way. 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247]

Dec. 19 To the Minister in Persia (telegram). Permission to act for Germany in Persia. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

PERU

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

100 [Enclosure] Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 28] From the Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs to the American Minister. Transmits a memorandum protesting against the intolerable conditions caused by the war, and proposes that all American countries unite in effort to limit the war area and to free neutral waters of belligerents. Copy of the memorandum has been sent to, Argentine, Brazilian, and Chilean Republics for cooperation. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]

Nov. 10 From the Minister in Peru (telegram). Memorandum deploring interruption of commerce between peaceful nations and proposing joint action to guarantee inviolability of trade routes. Sent also by Peru to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684]

Nov. 30 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the Peruvian Minister. Encloses memorandum from the Foreign Office, which is to be laid before the Pan American Union, suggesting that action be taken to safeguard the interests of neutrals of America. 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691]

Dec. 12 [Rec’d Dec. 14] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Memorandum of November 17 prepared by the Peruvian Government in reference to the protection of the foreign commerce of the neutral countries of America from damages caused by the war. 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

40 Dec. 18 To the Minister in Peru. Acknowledges receipt of correspondence and memorandum re urgency of agreement amongst neutrals tending to reduce injury to commerce in the war. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Peruvian Minister. Acknowledges receipt of correspondence and memorandum on subject of injury to neutral commerce in the war. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

Dec. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Acknowledges receipt of note transmitting copy of memorandum of Foreign Office. 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698]

PORTUGAL

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

25 Aug. 10 [Rec’d Aug. 25] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Portugal. In case of war with Portugal, Germany wishes. United States to take over German Legation. Instructions requested. Violence shown Germans leaving Portugal. Anti-German feeling strong, and war probable. Treaty exists with Great Britain whereby Portugal promises 10,000 troops to Britain when needed. 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Oct. 2 From the Minister in Portugal (telegram). Unofficially affirmed that Portugal, in accordance with English treaty obligations, will enter the war as soon as preparations are completed. 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

39 Oct. 9 [Rec’d Oct. 28] From the Minister in Portugal. Portugal will certainly enter war as soon as army is reorganized. 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Oct. 28 To the Minister in Portugal (telegram). If war has been declared by Portugal against Germany, send full report. 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Inquires if Portugal has declared war against Germany. 125n [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the Minister in Portugal (telegram). War not yet declared. Portuguese commission conferring in England. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

50 Nov. 2 [Rec’d Nov. 23] From the Minister in Portugal. Attitude of Portugal unchanged. If House of Deputies fails to declare war, Government will be placed in embarrassing position, owing to promises already made to Great Britain. 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

53 Nov. 6 [Rec’d Nov. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Portuguese commission continues to confer with English governmental and military authorities concerning conflict. When they return House of Deputies will convene in extra session. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

324 Undated [Rec’d Nov. 24] From the Minister in Portugal (telegram). Senate and House of Deputies authorize the executive power to intervene militarily in conflict as an ally of England. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

55 Nov. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 15] From the Minister in Portugal. Parliament authorizes King to aid Great Britain in war Appreciation of latter assured. Portugal may thus have privileges of a neutral country by secretly giving aid without declaring war. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

57 Dec. 3 [Rec’d Dec. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Parliament assembled to arrange for a division to leave for the seat of war. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

ROUMANIA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

28 July 30 [Rec’d Sept. 12] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Crisis between Austria-Hungary and Servia: Investigation into assassination. Austrian ultimatum presented to Servia; Servian reply; diplomatic relations severed; war declared. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). Roumania disregards agreement of 35 years ago because no provocation was given and no advice asked of her; action depends upon Bulgaria. Bombardment of Belgrade continues and forces advancing into Bosnia. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143]

29 Aug. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 19] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Austria jealous of greater Servia and welcomed cases belli; unfriendly to Greece because of Servian agreement for use of Aegean port; charges Russia with trying to get a hold in Balkans and of Constantinople. Embassy has taken over Austro-Hungarian interests. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

112 Aug. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 19] From the Minister in Roumania. Roumania to remain neutral, but troops augmented and country practically upon a war basis. Sends interview with Mr. Take Ionescu stating reasons why Roumania will remain neutral. 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

122 Aug. 19 [Rec’d Sept. 19] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Bulgarian neutrality remains unchanged; nevertheless army practically mobilized. Turkish mobilization causing misgivings. Train service between Turkey and Bulgaria interrupted. Bulgarian Government requests, without success, that Turkish troops on frontier be withdrawn. 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Minister in Roumania (telegram). Roumania urged to join Turkey in favor of Austria and Germany. This unlikely as Roumania is strong enough to act independently. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Sept. 4 [Rec’d Sept. 5] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ If Italy takes action against Austria-Hungary and Germany, Roumania will also. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184]

Sept. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 11] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Servian forces have taken Sem and surrounding country. Roumania about to enter war. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Sept. 14 [Rec’d Sept. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Popular demonstration against Austria-Hungary suppressed. Roumania will soon enter conflict. 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199]

Sept. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ War will be declared by Roumania. Popular demonstrations in favor of such action. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

133 Oct. 2 [Rec’d Oct. 27] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. King of Roumania pro-German; people in sympathy with France. Germany’s failure to subjugate France in short campaign and Russia’s conquests in Austria-Hungary change situation. Roumania ambitious to annex provinces peopled by Roumanians but held by Austria-Hungary. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (telegram). Policy of neutrality continues in Bulgaria. 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237]

35 Nov. 30 [Rec’d Dec. 22] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria. Situation in Servia gloomy. Four months Servian Army was successful against Austria-Hungary, then ran short of ammunition. Russia has forwarded ammunition over Danube. Servians kept on Bulgarian frontier to protect Macedonia (now new Servia.) Russia desires this land to be given to Bulgaria to secure her alliance. Servia objects. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

163 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ King of Roumania and leaders sympathize with Germany; think Roumania should have Transylvania; seeking an agreement with Bulgaria. A commission has been sent to the United States to secure ammunition. 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

141 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Bulgaria trying to remain neutral until she finds which way the war turns; anxious for territory belonging to Servia, Greece, and Roumania. Belligerents willing to promise this territory, but Balkan powers object. Sympathies of people with Russia. Government believes more can be obtained from Germany. Quotes extract from Prime Minister’s speech pro-claiming neutrality. 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Dec. 2 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (telegram). Turkish Government proclaimed holy war against Servia and her allies. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

RUSSIA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

July 25 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russian intervention inevitable in case of Austro-Servian conflict. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

July 26 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Mobilization of army ordered to begin immediately. 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

July 27 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Situation less acute. Chances of peace improved. Army clamoring for war. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28]

July 28 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austrian declaration of war against Servia causing excitement. Russian army mobilizing. Emperor strongly influenced to declare war. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

July 30 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Mobilization decree issued. German and Austrian Ambassadors ready to leave. 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

July 31 [Rec’d Aug. 1] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Country unanimous for war. Complete mobilization. Railways disorganized. Advising American tourists to leave. Unfortunate if we are again asked to look after interests of Russia’s enemies, as in the war with Japan. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53]

Aug. 1 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Russia will move immediately if operations against Servia do not cease. Country on war basis. Business crippled; stock exchange closed; gold unobtainable; paper depreciated; traffic closed except for troops. 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany declares war against Russia. Requests United States to take charge of German interests there. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Austrian Ambassador, though uninstructed, asks if United States will take charge of Austrian Embassy in Russia if he receives orders to leave. 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Aug. 1 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). United States has consented to take over German Embassy in Russia in case of war, with understanding that similar assistance may be given any other country that may request it. 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155]

Aug. 2 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Americans are being registered preparatory to being sent home. Trying to effect route from Finland to Stockholm. Consular reports sent through Embassy. 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Germany has declared war on Russia. 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

Aug. 2 [Rec’d Aug. 3] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Emperor delivered speech before court and military officers; received with enthusiasm by orderly crowds. Minister for Foreign Affairs promises to help foreigners leave country. Fifty thousand troops in Riga; harbor mined, fleet near by. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Aug. 3 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Request for financial assistance for American tourists. German Ambassador left no money to help Germans nor to pay Embassy employees. 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ United States will be allowed to act for Germany in Russia. Americans unable to leave yet. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

Aug. 3 [Rec’d Aug. 4] From the Consul General at Moscow (telegram). Many provinces under martial law. Germans assaulted. Business situation critical. Government bank safe. Lighthouses and navigation closed. 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]

Aug. 4 See Austria-Hungary 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Aug. 5 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Because the Russian Embassy at Berlin is said to have been destroyed by a mob, Russians have wrecked the German Embassy in St. Petersburg. Has registered a protest at the Foreign Office. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157]

Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 6] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Request has been made in the name of the United States for a formal apology to Germany for the destruction of Embassy and for reparation for loss of life and property. Authorities promise reparation and strict precautions against repetition in the future. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1157 and Doc. 1158]

Aug. 5 See Great Britain 824n [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

Aug. 6 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Peace offers come too late for Russia. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 6] From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Austria-Hungary has declared war on Russia. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

Aug. 6 [Rec’d Aug. 7] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Austria having declared war against Russia, United States to take charge of Austrian affairs. Need increase in Embassy staff. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Aug. 6 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 216n [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ See France 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

Aug. 7 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Asks permission to raise American flag over Austrian Embassy, if necessary to save life. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Re destruction of German Embassy. Department unable to take up matter with Russian Ambassador. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Aug. 8 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Instructions to inform Foreign Office that United States will take over Austrian interests in Russia. Asks if there would be any objections to raising American flag over Austrian Embassy. 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russian officers and soldiers entered Austrian Embassy with intention of taking automobiles. Protest made in name of United States, and they withdrew. Situation is grave. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Aug. 9 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Course approved. If Government insists on taking automobiles, the matter should be settled by diplomatic correspondence, not by force. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Aug. 10 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Government will not interfere with neutral vessels chartered by citizens’ committee. 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748]

Aug. 12 [Rec’d Aug. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Emperor requests President Wilson’s message in writing. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Foreign Office thinks that the raising of an American flag over the Austrian Embassy might complicate matters. Building is not in danger. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 14] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German and Austrian Consuls being arrested and imprisoned. Strong protests of no avail. Requests instructions. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Aug. 15 _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Instructions to do nothing more after protesting. 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Aug. 16 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Replies to President’s offer of mediation received from Germany, Austria, Great Britain, and France. Inquiry as to whether there will be any further reply from Czar. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Aug. 19 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Aug. 20 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia will observe Declaration of London if British Government does. 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Aug. 24 [Rec’d Aug. 25] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Russia thinks American warships in Turkish waters an excellent plan, but wishes to confer with England and France before recommending it. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Aug. 26 [Rec’d Aug. 27] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Emperor replies to President Wilson’s message: Appreciates humanitarian sentiments; the war thrust upon Russia; contemplation of peace premature; expresses thanks. 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 27] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia accepts Declaration of London with modifications adopted by England and France. 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Aug. 27 From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Requests permission for Russians to enter New York in transit to Archangel. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321]

Aug. 28 To the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Instructions given immigration authorities on Canadian border to allow admission of Russians to New York in transit to Archangel. 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906]

Aug. 29 From the Ambassador in Japan (telegram). Russian Ambassador denies any agreement between Japan and Russia concerning China. 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Sept. 4 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ See Germany 828n [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

11 Sept. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 11] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Condition of German and Austrian war prisoners is very bad. Government has done nothing to house and feed them. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1185 and Doc. 1186]

9 Sept. 10 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Papers report that Red Cross ship Hamburg has been detained at the request of British Ambassador, as most of crew was discovered to be Germans. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

12 Sept. 11 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re American purchase of German ships. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

Sept. 15 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Belgium 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

11 Sept. 16 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Protests must discontinue until instructed otherwise. 751

22 Undated. [Rec’d Sept. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Explanations re protests to Russian authorities concerning prisoners. 751 [Pg. 751 includes portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 24] From the Russian Ambassador (telegram). Russian Government has directed him to sign peace treaty. Will prepare draft and come to Washington. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Sept. 24 _ _ _ _ See Germany 831n [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

69 Undated [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (telegram). Russia authorities have been ordered to give broadest application to Article 29 of Declaration of London (contraband of war). 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Oct. 24 _ _ _ _ See Germany, No. 489 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Nov. 5 From the Ambassador in Russia (telegram). Russian Government has notified Embassy of closing of ports and waters around Russia by placing of mines. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

91 Dec. 4 _ _ _ _ _ See Austria-Hungary, No. 305, Nov. 25. 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

146 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Russia (telegram). Exemption from censure of diplomatic and consular correspondence guaranteed by Foreign Office. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

SERVIA

(See also Roumania)

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 5 _ _ _ _ See Great Britain 824n [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

12 Nov. 25 _ _ _ _ See Austria-Hungary, No. 305 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Dec. 24 From the Minister in Servia (telegram). Servian Government agrees to regulations respecting sealed official correspondence. 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

SPAIN

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 17] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Spain (telegram). Minister of State spoke of financial condition of stranded Americans; expressed desire for more intimate relations between Spain and United States; suggested that the two countries might work together for the advancement of peace and civilization. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Aug. 17 _ _ _ _ See Germany 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Aug. 23 [Rec’d Aug. 24] From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Spain desirous of strengthening cordial relations with United States and anxious to cooperate in securing European peace. Peace treaty between Spain and United States to be urged. Spanish sympathy with French and English; however will remain neutral. Department is asked to express to Spanish Ambassador thanks for assistance rendered American citizens. 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156]

Sept. 22 [Rec’d Sept. 23] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Attention is called to deplorable need of supplies in hospitals of France. Suggests that representatives in various European courts arrange with belligerent Governments as to what constitutes hospital supplies, and request that they be passed free from seizure as contraband. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Oct. 5 Memorandum by the Secretary of State. Spanish Government pleased to act with United States when time for mediation arrives; asked to guarantee that copper shipments would not be reexported. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Oct. 9 To the Spanish Ambassador. Conveys list of hospital supplies furnished by the Red Cross. 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, and Doc. 1342]

177 Nov. 10 [Rec’d Nov. 30] From the Ambassador in Spain. Encloses statement of Prime Minister: Spain has suffered no offense, the causes of the conflict being foreign to her; Spain desires to keep aloof from war; measures adopted for national defense; in emergency nation can depend upon patriotism of Congress to lead her in defending her honor. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

13 Dec. 7 From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Spanish Ambassador at Washington had been instructed to inquire if time were ripe for mediation; had met with cold response. Spain desires only to cooperate in any movement for peace. 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

15 Dec. 8 To the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). President appreciates offer of Spain but considers the time not ripe for mediation. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

15 Dec. 11 From the Ambassador in Spain (telegram). Spain anxious to cooperate with United States in any plans for mediation. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

SWEDEN

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

433 July 31 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden. Germany endeavoring to persuade Sweden to attack Russia. War unpopular with mass of Swedish people. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Aug. 1 From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Germany endeavoring to persuade Sweden to attack Russia. 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

Aug. 1 [Rec’d Aug. 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Sweden declares neutrality_ _ _ _ _ 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 9] From the Swedish Minister. Notification that mines have been planted in Swedish territorial waters. Navigators notified not to visit Sweden without pilot. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

Aug. 18 [Rec’d Aug. 19] From the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Forwards notes from German Minister in Sweden for transmission to French and Belgian Governments: Germany protests the hostile acts of French and Belgian populace; those not belonging to recognized armed forces will be shot if found taking part in war. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

Aug. 26 To the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (telegram). Communications from the German Minister have been read to the Counselor of the French Embassy and to the Belgian Minister. 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 1255 and Doc. 1256]

Undated [Rec’d Sept. 22] From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Swedish Government has agreed to peace treaty and is ready to sign at same time as France and England. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Oct. 16 _ _ _ _ _ See Norway_ _ _ _ _ 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Undated [Rec’d Oct. 17] From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Sweden will not prevent passage through country of cotton shipped to Germany, but will not allow export to Germany of direct shipments from United States to Swedish ports. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

Nov. 6 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Swedish Government protests against closing of North Sea. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

30 Nov. 10 [Rec’d Nov. 25] From the Minister in Sweden. Encloses circular issued by Swedish war-risk insurance commissioners, permitting insured vessels to take either route. 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

37 [Enclosure] Nov. 14 [Rec’d Dec. 7] From the Director General of the Swedish Foreign Office to the American Minister. Transmits note of November 12 from the Swedish Minister of Foreign Affairs to the German, French, British, and Russian Ministers, protesting against interference with trade by belligerents. 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 545]

2 Nov. 17 To the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Instructions to obtain a favorable statement on two points: Consignment of cotton for German ports via Netherlands, and shipments of cotton consigned to Netherland concerns for reexportation to Germany. 398n [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

2 Nov. 23 From the Minister in Sweden (telegram). Upon assurances that Great Britain will not interfere with cotton, Swedish Foreign Office will permit cotton consignments to pass through Sweden for Germany, or reexportation to Germany of cotton consigned to Sweden. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

7 Dec. 15 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Official notification that Kings of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, with their Ministers of Foreign Affairs, will meet to discuss means of lessening economic difficulties caused by war. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Dec. 28 To the Swedish Minister. Acknowledges note of December 18 enclosing note from Swedish Government to German, British, French, and Russian Governments protesting against interference with commerce contrary to principles of international law. 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

Undated [Rec’d Jan. 15, 1915] From the Swedish Minister. Swedish Government has issued a proclamation refusing to recognize the right of belligerents to restrict navigation of neutrals on high seas by mining commercial routes, and by compelling them to call at certain ports. Notes sent to England, France, Russia, and Germany. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Jan. 22, 1915 To the Swedish Minister. United States awaits text of Swedish proclamation; will give matter earnest consideration. 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]

SWITZERLAND

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Nov. 1 From the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Switzerland receives large quantities of goods from United States through Italy. This made difficult by Great Britain at present. Requests that instruction be given American Ambassador to Italy to try to facilitate this trade. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592]

Nov. 5 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Director Swiss People’s Bank complains that all telegrams relating to money transfers and grain orders are stopped. 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816]

50 Nov. 6 To the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Interference with cable messages should be taken up with belligerents. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 12] The Swiss Political Department to the Swiss Legation at Washington (telegram). President Wilson said to have expressed willingness to negotiate for peace. Swiss Government wishes to start preliminaries with other neutral governments for such a purpose. 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247]

Nov. 11 From the Minister in Switzerland (telegram). Business telegrams between Switzerland and United States still held up. Banks find it impossible to transact financial and commercial business with United States. Joint representations to London and Paris proposed by Switzerland. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 18] From the President of the Swiss Confederation to the Swiss Legation in Washington (telegram). Protests against suppression of telegrams. Proposal that United States and Switzerland take common steps in England and France to secure redress. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

Nov. 14 To the Swiss Legation. President does not believe the time has come for a renewal of the offer of mediation. 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Nov. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Re censorship of commercial cable messages between United States and Switzerland. 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, and Doc. 824]

TURKEY

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 5 [Rec’d Aug. 7] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Request for an American vessel on the Black Sea for protection of Beirut and Smyrna. Scorpion necessary for Constantinople. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Turkish Cabinet divided. Ministers of Marine and Finance favor France; Minister of War favors Germany; Minister of Interior for neutrality. Invasion of Caucasus probable. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 8 From the Ottoman Embassy. Ottoman Empire to observe strict neutrality. Mobilization for defense only. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Aug. 8 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Great disappointment that British Government deprived Turkey of dreadnought. Censorship of newspapers and telegrams. Missions, Girls College, and tourists without money. Requests for relief. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 8 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Cannot send ships to Beirut, Smyrna, and Black Sea. Scorpion to remain in Turkey. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Aug. 10 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Vice Consul at Smyrna. Encloses copy of letter of August 8 to the Ambassador in Turkey concerning the political situation in Smyrna: Banks closed; exportations stopped; unemployed joining army; foreigners in state of hysteria; Americans asking for warship; tendency of Turks to disregard capitulations. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkey purchased Goeben and Breslau. Ships’ officers to enter Turkish service. Request for gold to help Americans. 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Aug. 11 [Rec’d Aug. 16] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Ships should be sent to Syrian ports for the safety of Americans. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ General mobilization ordered. Moratorium proclaimed. Parliament adjourned. French and Austrian guard ships departed. 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Aug. 13 [Rec’d Aug. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Americans at Jaffa request a war vessel. Authorities threaten to requisition cargoes on foreign vessels. 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 18] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Americans in imminent danger. Urgent request for warships. Demands of Beirut and Smyrna justified. Anti-Christian feeling among Moslems. Goeben and Breslau damaged, Turkey unwilling to pay Germany price agreed upon. Triple Entente charge Germany with steering Turkey’s course so as to provoke Russia into declaration of war. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Aug. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Smyrna has also requested presence of war vessels. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199]

774 Aug. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 4] From the Consul General at Beirut. French Consul General threatened with hanging for protest against seizure of French merchandise. Turks planning to attack Egypt. Requisitioning of jute grain bags, to be filled with sand to form causeway across Suez. Archives of towns being sent to the interior, towns to be abandoned if attacked. The only thing that will save the situation is the presence of American warships. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209]

Aug. 15 [Rec’d Sept. 14] From the Consul at Mersina. Business of all kinds at a stand-still; supplies requisitioned for army; crops unharvested. Americans warned not to go to remote places but missionaries prefer to remain in mountains. Need for American warship. 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 1211]

Aug. 17 [Rec’d Aug. 18] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Representatives of Grand Vizier believed to be attempting a compact with Roumania and Bulgaria. Turkey anxious for provisions and printing paper from America or from India. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Aug. 19 [Rec’d Aug. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Quotes telegrams from Smyrna and Jerusalem: Massacre of foreigners threatened if city is bombarded; Christians and Europeans in danger; reign of military terrorism. Ambassador making arrangements for financial aid through private sources. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199]

Aug. 19 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). United States wishes to sound European powers as to advisability of sending ships to Turkish waters. 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201]

Aug. 21 [Rec’d Aug. 22] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Communicates plans for protection of foreigners in Turkey if emergency arises. 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Undated [Rec’d Aug. 25] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Britain and Russia wish Turkey to remain neutral; Germany wants her to be ready to prevent an invasion by Russia. Permission asked of Grand Vizier for 20 British merchant vessels to pass through Dardanelles; permission granted but ships prevented from passing through. Triple Entente request that Germans on Goeben and Breslau be returned to Germany; request disregarded. Turkish press creating strong pro-German feeling. Ambassador begs permission to be allowed to urge Turkey against war. 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160]

Aug. 26 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Under no circumstances must Ambassador offer suggestions to Turkey concerning her entrance into the war. If opinion and advice are asked, United States is very desirous that European conflict spread no farther, and that Turkey preserve neutrality. 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Aug. 27 [Rec’d Aug. 28] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). German Ambassador, controlling spirit of military party in Turkey, states that Germany intends to prevent Russia’s taking Constantinople. Dardanelles well fortified but will not be closed to commerce unless attacked. Turkey intends to burn Smyrna if attacked. English have no intention of attacking Smyrna but will force Dardanelles if closed to commerce. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Aug. 28 [Rec’d Aug. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ If S. S. North Carolina comes to Constantinople, permission must be secured to pass Dardanelles, or other arrangements made for receiving money. Fifty naval officers and 700 sailors arrive from Germany to enter Turkish Navy. 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Aug. 28 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). North Carolina ordered to Turkish waters with gold relief fund. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208]

Sept. 20 [Rec’d Sept. 21] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish cruisers enter Black Sea to demonstrate her supremacy. German Ambassador stated that if Roumania attacked Austria, Turkey and Bulgaria would move against Roumania. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Presents protests against abrogation of capitulations. Grand Vizier and Minister of War give assurance that American schools and missionaries will not be molested. German cruiser Breslau enters Black Sea. Others to follow. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Sept. 27 [Rec’d Sept. 28] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ English Admiral compelled a Turkish torpedo boat desiring to enter Mediterranean to return to Dardanelles, because of German officers on board. Turkey has closed Dardanelles. 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Sept. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Turkish Government has notified England that Dardanelles will will remain closed until English and French ships leave its mouth. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

Oct. 1 [Rec’d Oct. 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ New law intending to abrogate capitulations has gone into effect. Case of citizen Brewster defended. Minister of War enters brother, two sons, et al. at Robert College. Recommends that North Carolina visit Smyrna. Not advisable to have warship stay there after Sublime Porte’s request to the contrary. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215]

Oct. 5 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Gratification of United States over education of War Minister’s brother and sons at Robert College. Proposes Turkey sign peace treaty with United States. Most of great powers have done so. Form of Netherland treaty the one generally followed. Suggests bringing it to attention of Turkish Government. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

Oct. 7 From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Telegram concerning arbitration plan submitted to Foreign Office; promise given that it will receive attention. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

857 Oct. 8 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Consul General at Beirut. Transmits letter of October 1 from American missionary at Latakia, telling of plot to massacre the Christians; troops have taken steps to preserve order. The North Carolina will call at this port on way to Mersina. 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

Oct. 16 From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). No foreigners are to be arrested without the approval of the Minister of Justice. Sublime Porte is preparing regulations for foreign religious, charitable, and educational institutions. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215]

Oct. 19 [Rec’d Oct. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Warlike preparations in vicinity of Egyptian boundaries causing apprehension in England. Massing of Turkish troops at Caucasian frontier and Turkish fleet in Black Sea threatening Russia. British Ambassador fears assassination, reassured by Grand Vizier. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Oct. 24 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ French, British, and Russian representatives move documents and valuables to American Embassy, anticipating early departure from Turkey. Turkish Secretary of War declares country ready for any emergency. Minister of Public Instruction visited Girls College and Robert College for first time. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To prevent invasion of Egypt by Turks, British decided to destroy certain wells in the Sinai Desert. Turkey had induced Bedouins to try to prevent this destruction but upon request Bedouins recalled. No immediate danger of war between Turkey and Great Britain. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Oct. 29 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Bedouins advancing on Egypt; British demand that Turkey recall them. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235]

Oct. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 30] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British report Odessa raided. Russian gunboat sunk; two Russian steamships damaged; French ship damaged with loss of life. 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237]

Oct. 30 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Russian representatives demand passports; English and French Ambassadors preparing to leave also. Grand Vizier refuses audience with Russian Minister on account of illness. Minister of Finance stated that engagement took place without knowledge of Ottoman Government. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Oct. 30 [Rec’d Oct. 31] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Sublime Porte advised to issue passports promptly in order to avoid violence. Russian representatives detained until Turkish consuls in Russia are accorded safe-conduct. British and French granted safe-conduct. Port of Smyrna closed. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Oct. 31 [Rec’d Nov. 2] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Minister of Interior wished to know what action on part of Sublime Porte would pacify Russia. Reply: Dismissal of all German officers, sailors, and soldiers from Turkish employ. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Nov. 1 [Rec’d Nov. 2] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Train carrying British and French stopped by Minister of War, who insisted upon promise that Turkish subjects in England and Egypt be permitted to depart. English have sunk two Turkish vessels and Russians have crossed frontier near Erzerum. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242]

Nov. 5 [Rec’d Nov. 9] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ German Ambassador who controls German-Turkish Army officers, promises to grant free departure to English and French unless Turkish towns are bombarded. Americans safe. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 1233 and Doc. 1234]

127 Nov. 7 [Rec’d Dec. 3] From the Ambassador in Turkey. Transmits an account of the severing of diplomatic relations between Entente powers and Turkey, and of the present situation. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

4 Nov. 8 [Rec’d Nov. 9] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Commander of Army Corps at Damascus states that in case of bombardment of towns in Syria, French and British will be detained. For every Mussulman killed, three French or English subjects will be shot and property seized. No responsibility assumed in case of massacre of Christians. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236]

15 Nov. 10 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Quotes telegram from Athens stating Turkish post office refused official mail under seal and demanded that it be opened for inspection. 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

16 Nov. 11 [Rec’d Nov. 15] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Unless British and French Governments give assurance that unfortified towns in Turkey will not be bombarded, British and French Consuls and subjects will be held as hostages. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236]

22 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 16] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Arrangements made with Minister of War for forwarding official correspondence in sealed envelopes. 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

21 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 17] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Turkish authorities insist on searching all consulates. They have requested United States representatives to be present; this was refused. Awaits instructions. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 1177 and Doc. 1178]

18 Nov. 12 [Rec’d Nov. 17] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish authorities are seeking wireless apparatus used clandestinely to furnish information to Russia. British, French, and Servian offices entered in search. His protests have elicited apologies and the offices have been sealed. Horses and carriages were seized from British and French Embassies, and arms and ammunition found in the British Embassy. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180]

38 Nov. 15 [Rec’d Nov. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Proclamation of holy war of Islam might arouse religious fanaticism of Moslem masses, ending in an attack upon all non-Moslems. German Ambassador reminded of Germany’s responsibility in matter. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

132 Nov. 16 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey. British and French Embassies searched by police for wireless instruments; horses and carriages taken. Protest has been made to Minister of Interior, who apologized and laid blame on Minister of War. Orders given to have Embassies sealed. Persians paraded to Embassy and presented protest against aggressions of England and Russia. Three Turkish transports sunk in Black Sea; crew and passengers taken prisoners. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

133 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Demonstration in Constantinople for war, crowds visiting Sublime Porte, Sultan’s Palace, and German and Austrian Embassies. Little violence against Russian and British shops. Holy war desired in Germany in order to cause Moslem uprisings in Egypt and India. 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

37 Nov. 17 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Instructions to protest against the search of consulates under American protection. American consular representatives may be present unofficially to give testimony later. 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180]

47 Nov. 17 [Rec’d Nov. 21] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turkish Ministers of Interior and War state that blank shots were fired at commander of Tennessee when he attempted to visit Smyrna in a steam launch. Commander threatened to bombard fort. Authorities insist that Tennessee remove wireless and leave. Encloses several telegrams on the subject. Battleship has left for Chios. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

39 Nov. 18 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Inquiries as to the truth of the statement that a launch of the Tennessee was fired on by Turkish forts at Smyrna. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

53 Nov. 20 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To avoid misunderstanding, permission of Ottoman Government should be secured for American ship to visit ports, so local authorities may be notified. Instructions to urge upon Ottoman Government necessity of preventing loss of life of missionaries. 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

Nov. 21 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ His action re British, French, and Russian Embassies approved. Instruction to keep Department informed. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

63 Nov. 21 [Rec’d Nov. 25] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). It was unfortunate that Decker should have tried to enter closed port, and that they should have threatened to bombard port. Suggests that Tennessee patrol Mediterranean. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224]

70 Nov. 22 [Rec’d Nov. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Permission has been secured for the Tennessee to visit Vourla and await wireless. Bombarding Smyrna would have brought evil results to Christians. His friendliness with officials has a restraining effect. Solemn assurances of protection of missionaries have been given. 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224]

76 Nov. 23 [Rec’d Nov. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ If British will give assurances not to bombard unfortified ports unless attacked by armed Ottoman forces, then Turkish Government will allow all British subjects to leave Turkey. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1237 and Doc. 1238]

64 Nov. 24 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Requests more information concerning holy war of Islam. Warns Ambassador to maintain strict neutrality. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

58 [Enclosure] _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Turkish Minister of War to the American Ambassador (telegram). Re attempted visit to Smyrna of steam launch from the Tennessee. 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 1221 and Doc. 1222]

71 Nov. 25 _ _ _ _ _ _ See Austria-Hungary, No. 305_ _ _ 542n [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

89 Nov. 27 [Rec’d Dec. 5] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Turks accuse Russians, English, and French of beginning the war. Declaration of holy war, appealing to soldiers to defend sacred ground, tomb of the Prophet, and lives of Mohammedans. Incongruity of Turkish position evidenced by alliance with Christians and by having Armenian and Greek Christians in their army, yet making holy war against enemies of Islam. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

137 Nov. 28 [Rec’d Dec. 30] From the Ambassador in Turkey. Public and private schools, hospitals, and religious institutions of belligerents seized by police. Teachers, priests, and children allowed to leave. Action condoned by Germany. Dercos waterworks, operated with French capital, seized. Aidin Railway operated with British capital, and Damascus and Extensions Railway, operated by French capital, seized. The Islamic world ready for vengeance. 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

82 Nov. 30 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Department considers the Tennessee incident closed. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226]

90 Dec. 1 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Navy Department suggests that one of the battleships in Turkish waters be withdrawn. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226]

108 Dec. 3 [Rec’d Dec. 4] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). American Consul at Aleppo has telegraphed that American consular seals on British and French archives have been broken and the papers removed. Turkish officials becoming bolder. Requests instructions. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

112 Dec. 4 [Rec’d Dec. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Recommends leaving both ships in Turkish waters. Schools being closed; monks, nuns, and teachers expelled and grave danger threatening; no foreign schools wanted in Turkey. Dardanelles frequently bombarded. 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

110 Dec. 5 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Instructions to request an immediate return of British and French archives, with an explanation and assurances that violation of seal of United States will not be repeated. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

123 Dec. 5 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Re treatment of foreign institutions. 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

152 [Enclosure] Dec. 6 From the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy. Re the Tennessee incident_ _ _ _ 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

134 Dec. 10 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Grave dangers are involved in policy of holding non-combatant French and British subjects as hostages. Situation is aggravated by declaration of holy war. Urge Sublime Porte to release all non-combatants. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

143 Dec. 10 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). The Minister of Interior is indifferent to being held personally responsible for molestation of British subjects. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

141 Dec. 10 [Rec’d Dec. 11] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Wholesale deportation of French and English from Beirut to Damascus. Minister of Interior promises to stop it. Assurance given United States that those in American institutions will be unmolested. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246]

148 Dec. 12 [Rec’d Dec. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Djemal, Minister of Marine, antagonistic to Hollis; differences related. Turkish Government fast drifting into semi-anarchy. Difference of opinion as to whether two American ships are a help or a danger. Recommends that one ship be recalled and the other commander instructed that cruiser is there only for refuge and moral influence. It is time for Americans to leave. 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

149 Dec. 12 [Rec’d Dec. 13] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Positive promises of British and French not to bombard unfortified towns and to release Ayour Sabri and Zenun, Prince Omar, and Turkish Consuls at Bombay, Johannesburg, and Manchester and at Malta may secure the consent of the Turkish Government for repatriation of belligerents in Turkey. Armenians reported massacred near Erzerum. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1247 and Doc. 1248]

155 Dec. 13 [Rec’d Dec. 15] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Ottoman authorities at Hodeida arrested a French Consul and attempted to arrest a British Vice Consul, who took refuge in the Italian Consulate. Police forced Consulate, British Vice Consul surrendered. Italian war vessel arrived, took Italian Consul on board and demanded reparation. Italian Ambassador requests United States help in securing release of British Consul. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Dec. 15 [Rec’d Dec. 21] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ British Vice Consul reinstated. Sublime Porte will give satisfaction to Italy. French consuls will leave for France. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1185 and Doc. 1186]

151 Dec. 15 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Instructions to protest against disregard of capitulations. United States cannot accept modifications without previous agreement. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Dec. 16 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Department approves cooperation with Italian Ambassador for release of British Vice Consul. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

183 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Hollis telegraphs that deportation of French, British, and Russian male subjects from Lebanon to Damascus, and from Beirut, has begun. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1247 and Doc. 1248]

178 Dec. 18 [Rec’d Dec. 19] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). German Ambassador in Turkey considers deportation of French and English justified by military needs. Military commander at Damascus has issued order allowing belligerent males up to eighteen years of age and all females to leave Beirut. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1249 and Doc. 1250]

187 Dec. 19 [Rec’d Dec. 20] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Germany has absolute control of Turkish Navy and practically controls the Army. German officers suggested the deportation of English and French. Suggests warning German Empire of its responsibility if massacres in Turkey occur. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1249 and Doc. 1250]

182 Dec. 20 To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). President approves suggestion that Americans leave Turkey. Instructions to advise inland missions quietly and privately. 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

191 Dec. 21 [Rec’d Dec. 24] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Payas bombarded. Commandant of Syrian army threatens to shoot Englishmen if Alexandretta is bombarded. British Commander demands release of French and British, otherwise he will bombard Government buildings. Minister of Interior will release French and British subjects as soon as promise is given to release Ottoman subjects and not to bombard towns. 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1251 and Doc. 1252]

Undated [Rec’d Dec. 22] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Ottoman Government proclaims list of absolute and conditional contraband. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

197 Dec. 22 [Rec’d Dec. 25] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Message recalling missionaries sent by Peet. Interior mission schools functioning normally. Missionaries prefer to share the danger with those for whom they have worked so long. Some schools have been turned into hospitals. English women connected with schools are urged to leave. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 1231 and Doc. 1232]

206 Dec. 24 [Rec’d Dec. 26] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Ottoman Government communicates additional list of contraband articles. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

227 Jan. 5 1915. To the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Grey expresses gratitude to Ambassador. Omar Tousson and others will be released under certain conditions. 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 1252 and Doc. 1253]

273 Jan. 9, 1915 [Rec’d Jan. 10] From the Ambassador in Turkey (telegram). Statement of British Foreign Office construed as promise not to bombard unprotected towns. British subjects to receive full protection. Release of Omar Tousson and others expected. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

UNITED STATES INTERDEPARTMENTAL

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

Aug. 6 From the Acting Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Requests instructions as to duties of customs and other officers to prevent exportation of contraband. 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Acting Secretary of Commerce. Transmits copy of instructions sent to principal collectors of customs regarding permits for the clearance of foreign vessels. Special directions for New York office requiring careful inspection to prevent preparations for war on part of vessels while in that port. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Aug. 7 [Rec’d Aug. 8] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits copy of telegram sent to collector of customs, New York, re vessels carrying supposed reservists. 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888]

Aug. 7 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). It is not unlawful to export contraband of war, but shippers take the risk of its seizure on high seas. 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916]

Aug. 10 From the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Commerce to Collectors of Customs. Explicit instructions for most rigid inspection and examination of vessels before clearance is given. 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958]

Aug. 11 From the Acting Secretary of the Treasury. Barbarossa is taking on board large quantities coal, and utensils apparently for transferring the coal at sea. Large quantity of fuel oil on lighters alongside. Requests instructions for customs officers. 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Aug. 14 From the Postmaster General. Mail to foreign countries has been going forward by most expeditious steamers and routes available. Mail for Germany and Austria-Hungary going three or four times a week. No mail left on hand in New York. 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, and Doc. 859]

Aug. 17 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Assuming that Barbarossa is a private ship, Department has no grounds on facts stated for refusing clearance. 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Aug. 20 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Transmits telegram from the Collector of Customs at San Francisco, stating that the plan of John Rothschild & Co. to deliver coal to cruiser Leipzig at sea fell through. The coal was delivered to German ship Mazatlan, which has applied for change to Mexican registry. Information received that Mazatlan will deliver coal to German cruiser. Requests instructions. 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Aug. 20 From the Secretary of the Treasury to Collectors of Customs (telegram). Supplemental instructions regarding the prevention of violation of the neutrality laws. 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 1081 and Doc. 1082]

Aug. 21 From the Collector of Customs at San Francisco to the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Acting German Consul offered written statement that coal on Mazatlan will be delivered in Guaymas. He denied that United States had jurisdiction thereafter. Large cargo of perishables on board. Clearance to be given unless otherwise instructed. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991]

Aug. 22 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Case of Mazatlan submitted to the Neutrality Board. It is required that German Consul give written assurances that coal is not to be delivered to any German warship that has received coal within last three months; any ship receiving this coal will be debarred from coaling in United States within next three months. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Secretary of the Navy. Forwards copies of telegrams received and sent by Navy Department relative to enforcement of the President’s neutrality proclamation. 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 1082 and Doc. 1083]

Sept. 3 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Transmits telegrams requesting shipment of guns with ammunition through Alaska to Vancouver, unaccompanied by troops. Requests instructions. 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Speaker of the House of Representatives. Transmits request that Congress appropriate sum of one million dollars for expenses of diplomatic and consular officers and for relief of nationals of those countries. When banking facilities are restored amounts are expected to be reimbursed. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Sept. 5 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Permission to ship war munitions and equipment through Alaska refused. 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]

Sept. 28 Resolution of the Senate of the United States. Secretary of State requested to inform Senate if British are interfering with shipments of copper carried in neutral bottoms to Rotterdam. If so, what reasons are given by British for so doing. 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Oct. 8 From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury to Collectors of Customs. Re change in status of merchant vessel. Mere change of color to render her less visible will not change her status. 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Oct. 8 From the chairman of the central committee of the American Red Cross to the Assistant Secretary of State. Encloses list of supplies being shipped to European hospitals. Certain articles used for medical purposes are compounded of materials which in other forms would be contraband of war. 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 1340]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the American Red Cross. Requests to be informed as to what constitutes hospital supplies. 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

Oct. 13 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Cargo of coal on the Mazatlan ultimately reached the Leipzig. Encloses telegram from Collector of Customs in San Francisco quoting written agreement of German acting Consul General that the coal would not be delivered to any German war vessel. Requests instructions. 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999]

Oct. 15 From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. British Vice Consul at Newport News asks that clearance not be given Italian S. S. Amistà loaded with coal. Requests instructions. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003]

Oct. 17 To the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. Collector of customs believes that contract of German Consul General, re coal taken by Mazatlan, has been violated. 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000]

Oct. 22 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Approves the instructions of the Treasury Department to clear the Amistà unless satisfactory evidence that proposed clearance is not bona fide. Matter has been taken up with the British Embassy. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003]

Oct. 26 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Transmits cablegrams from Collector of Customs at Honolulu concerning capture of German schooner by Japanese battleship Hizen near Honolulu. Requests instructions regarding disposition of crew. 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 1054]

Oct. 27 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Re undesirability of exhibiting manifests of departing vessels to any person who may desire to examine them. 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ From the Secretary of the Treasury. Further cablegrams from Honolulu stating that steam launches from the Hizen have been in neutral waters without lights. Captain of Hizen desires to have sealed communication with Japanese Consul in Honolulu. Requests instructions. 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056]

_ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ To the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. Case of the Hizen to be taken up with the Japanese Ambassador. Communication between this vessel and the Japanese Consul in Honolulu not to be permitted. Question of the Chinaman from the Aeolus entering Honolulu must be referred to Department of Labor. 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056]

Oct. 28 From the Secretary of the Treasury. Order issued to collectors of customs to withhold publication of manifests until 30 days after clearance of each vessel. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

Oct. 30 From the Acting Secretary of Commerce. Encloses letter from the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. stating that the British Government has placed an embargo on crude rubber coming from the Far East to any American port; it can only be shipped through British ports. Urges that everything possible be done to lift embargo. 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

Nov. 1 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Cites case of Italian S. S. Amistà . Necessary to take precaution to ascertain by investigation of each vessel the name of the owner or charterer and the firm supplying cargo, as well as the name and address of consignee. 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 1008]

Nov. 7 From the Secretary of the Navy. Regulations and instructions for operation of radio stations prepared by Navy Department and sent to Department of State for approval; to be substituted for previous regulations. 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 1089]

Nov. 14 To the Secretary of the Treasury. Requests that collectors of customs be instructed to ascertain of an incoming vessel when she last left an American port and whether she has transferred any cargo to cruisers at sea. 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

Nov. 19 To the Secretary of the Navy. No objections to proposed new regulations governing radio service. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091]

Nov. 28 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Unnecessary for collectors to report on cargoes manifestly of no use to war vessels; also unnecessary to report where consignees are numerous. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Dec. 2 _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Unnecessary to send reports on vessels engaged in passenger traffic or in long-established trade between United States and foreign ports. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

Dec. 3 To the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. There is no objection to clearance of the Gladstone if assurance is given under oath that cargo will be discharged at port to which consigned. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032]

Jan. 8, 1915 From the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Maintenance of neutrality by the United States during 1914. vi [Pg. VI is part of Preface]

Jan. 11, 1915 To the Secretary of the Treasury (telegram). Efforts of collectors to report suspicious cases of war vessels in United States ports, is having good effect. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Jan. 20, 1915 To the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Review of the maintenance of neutrality by the United States during 1914. vii [Pg. VII is part of Preface]

URUGUAY

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

700 Aug. 13 From the Minister in Uruguay. Limit of territorial waters. 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

757 Oct. 26 [Rec’d Nov. 28] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Asserts that there is a chain of secret radiograph stations along South Atlantic coast. Many stations discovered and dismantled on the River Plate. 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 1106 and Doc. 1107]

761 Oct. 28 [Rec’d Nov. 28] _ _ _ _ _do_ _ _ _ _ Transmits Executive decree forbidding the establishment and operation of wireless stations on land or on vessels in territorial waters. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

VENEZUELA

No. Date From and to whom Subject Page

288 Sept. 29 [Rec’d Oct. 14] From the Minister in Venezuela. Venezuela bitter against England because of her determination to prolong the conflict. War a greater hardship to South American commerce than to Europe. Proposition that South American countries appeal individually to Europeans at war. 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

300 Dec. 14 [Rec’d Dec. 16] From the Venezuelan Minister. European conflict affects interests of all nations. Task of defining neutral rights should be entrusted to a congress of neutrals. United States, on account of her exceptional relations with other nations, should take initiative in calling the meeting. Memorandum regarding rights of neutrals transmitted from the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 694]

5 Jan. 13, 1915 To the Venezuelan Minister. Acknowledges receipt of note enclosing memorandum suggesting a congress of neutrals. It will receive the consideration of the Government. 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

1 The correspondence of private individuals, corporations, etc., is not included in this list.

Pre-War PapersPre-War Papers

Contents

Negotiations relative to the conclusion of treaties for the advancement of general peace (Documents 1-23)

Negotiations relative to the conclusion of treaties for the advancement of general peaceNegotiations relative to the conclusion of treaties for the advancement of general peace1

1 For the statement of the American Peace Plan and documents showing the progress previously made with it, see Foreign Relations, 1913, pp. 8–12; 1914, pp. 171, 331, 1068. As additions to the list, given in the first telegram below, of countries with which treaties were signed before the outbreak of the war, are to be noted: Norway, June 24 ( ibid., 1914, p. 971); Peru, July 14 ( ibid., 1915, p. 1279); Uruguay, July 20 ( ibid., p. 1307); Brazil and Chile, July 24 ( ibid., 1916, pp. 43, 46). For papers on the related subject of preparations for a third Hague Peace Conference, see ibid., 1914, pp. 4, 10.

[1] The Secretary of State to the Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs (Streit)

Department of State, Washington, June 15, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/403

[2] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/531f

[3] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, July 18, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 10 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/429

[4] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/531t

[5] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/616a

[6] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 15, 1914. [Received 9 p.m.]

File No. 711.0012/462

[7] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 711.0012/531y

[8] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 21, 1914. [Received August 22, 9 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/468

[9] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/532m

[10] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, September 8, 1914. [Received 10:05 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/491

[11] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, September 15, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/532r

[12] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, undated. [Received September 22, 1914, 11 p.m.]

File No. 711.0012/515

[13] The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Newport, Rhode Island, undated. [Received September 24, 1914, 11 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/517

[14] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 711.0012/524a

[15] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, September 29, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/532t

[16] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 1, 1914. [Received 10:35 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/525

[17] Memorandum of the Secretary of State

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 711.0012/656

[18] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 711.0012/540a

[19] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 7, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]

File No. 711.0012/538

[20] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, October 9, 1914. [Received October 12.]

File No. 711.0012/552

[21] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 711.0012/568a

[22] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, November 5, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 8 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/575

[23] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, November 16, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 711.0012/593

The Secretary of State to the Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs (Streit) File No. 711.0012/403

[Document 1]

The Secretary of State to the Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs (Streit)

Department of State,
Washington, June 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

At the request of the American Minister at Athens, I have the honor to inform you that the President’s peace plan has been accepted in principle by thirty-four countries as follows: Italy, Great Britain, France, Brazil, Sweden, Norway, Russia, Peru, Austria, the Netherlands, Bolivia, Germany, Argentina, China, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Denmark, Chile, Cuba, Costa Rica, Salvador, Switzerland, Paraguay, Panama, Honduras, Nicaragua, Japan, Persia, Ecuador, and Venezuela.

The following-named countries have entered into treaties endorsing the principles and details of the plan: Salvador, Guatemala, Panama, Honduras, Nicaragua, Netherlands, Bolivia, Portugal, Persia, Denmark, Switzerland, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Venezuela, Italy.

Copies of these treaties are being forwarded to you by mail.

Draft of treaties is agreed upon with Great Britain, France, Norway, and Uruguay and will be signed in a short time.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 711.0012/531f

[Document 2]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, July 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

Seventeen treaties have been signed providing for investigation in all cases. Am expecting to sign four more next week including Brazil, Argentina, and Chile. The form of the British and French treaties has been agreed upon and will be signed upon the same day, but before signing the British treaty must be submitted to the self-governing colonies for ratification. This will probably require a month. I shall mail you copies of the British and French treaties. We are very anxious to have Germany join with us in one of these treaties, she having already accepted the principle. The German Ambassador is now visiting in Germany. Please see him when he reaches Berlin and go with him to the Foreign Office and suggest the propriety of considering at once the details of the treaty so that Germany can sign on the same day with Great Britain and France. The British and French treaties are substantially like the Netherlands treaty of which you have a copy. We are willing, however, to make any desired change in the details. It will be very gratifying indeed if the German treaty can be signed simultaneously with the British and French treaty. Use your best endeavors to this end.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/429

[Document 3]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, July 18, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Asked Count Bernstorff who is at country place to accompany me Foreign Office about peace treaty. Received reply: “Sorry will not be in Berlin for some time. Am afraid no use taking steps about peace treaty.”

I again took the matter up Von Jagow, Minister for Foreign Affairs, but regret to report absolutely no chance Germany signing for reasons stated in my previous despatch.1 All parties unanimous. Von Jagow congratulated us on the success of your Mexican policy.

Gerard

1 The telegraphic despatch referred to, dated February 19, 1914 (File No. 711.0012/280), follows: American Embassy,
Berlin , February 19, 1914. Wish that I could report that there was some chance of peace treaty like Salvador or Netherlands but there is no probability whatever of Germany signing. Have not only tried regular authorities but have made other repeated efforts and talked with professors, members of Parliament, etc. Find public opinion here against treaty, not on the ground that they are unfriendly to the United States but because if they signed with us they might be asked to sign by some European nation and if they refused that nation refusal would seem hostile and to sign would be to throw away the advantage Germany has as the result of great sacrifices in being European nation readiest for immediate and decisive blow in war.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 711.0012/531t

[Document 4]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1914.

[Telegram]

Eighteen treaties ratified yesterday. Is Great Britain disposed to sign treaty when approval of Colonies received or does she prefer to wait until the war is over? It would seem desirable to sign as soon as possible in order to cover any dispute that might arise as result of the war. Please report prospect as several other treaties awaiting action of Great Britain and France. Am inquiring of France.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 711.0012/616a

[Document 5]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1914.

[Telegram]

Eighteen peace treaties ratified yesterday. Is French Government disposed to consider signing treaty agreed upon when Great Britain is ready or must it await the conclusion of the war? It seems desirable that it should be signed as soon as possible in order that both countries may have the benefit of it in case any dispute should arise as result of the war. Has any answer been made to our representations in regard to interpretation of section relating to report?

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/462

[Document 6]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 15, 1914.
[Received 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

376. Yours August 15 [14] about treaty cannot secure authoritative answer till Monday or Tuesday when I will inform you definitely. I am sure that war has not changed disposition of the British Government but I fear it has put insuperable physical difficulties in the way of signing treaty before Congress adjourns.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 711.0012/531y

[Document 7]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Eighteen treaties providing for investigation in all cases were ratified last Thursday, Netherlands form being one most favored by Senate. Four more signed and will be ratified within few days. British and French treaties agreed upon and will be signed same day, but day cannot be fixed as British treaty is being submitted Colonies for approval. If German Government will authorize its Ambassador to sign similar treaty its ratification can be secured before Congress adjourns. If verbal changes are desired shall be glad to consider them, as we are willing to make any reasonable concession in details provided principles are retained. War makes us especially anxious to negotiate treaties with European countries, so that the treaties will cover any disputes that may arise between us and European governments during war. Possibility of dispute is remote, but still possibility. These treaties provide for investigation in all cases before hostilities begin. It would be a great triumph in diplomacy if it could be so arranged that treaty with Germany could be signed on same day as British and French, or before or after. If a favorable opportunity presents itself, please bring matter to attention Foreign Office.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, except the last two sentences, to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary and the Ministers in Belgium, Spain, and Greece.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/468

[Document 8]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 21, 1914.
[Received August 22, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Sorry to report no hope peace treaty.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 711.0012/532m

[Document 9]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

47. British Ambassador has been authorized to sign the treaty providing for investigation in all cases. British and French treaties were to be signed the same day. French treaty is ready, this Government having accepted and made all changes suggested in recent telegram. Spanish Ambassador has also received instruction to sign treaty which is now being prepared. Please urge upon the Government the advisability of authorizing Ambassador Jusserand to sign on day to be agreed upon between him and the British Ambassador. Twenty-two treaties have already been signed. The British and French treaties are now ready. The Spanish treaty will be ready to-morrow. Duplicate is being sent to the Embassy at Bordeaux.

Bryan

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/491

[Document 10]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, September 8, 1914.
[Received 10:05 a.m.]

[Telegram]

49. Your 47, September 4. Garrett telegraphs that French Foreign Office is in communication with British Foreign Office regarding date for signing treaty.

Herrick

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 711.0012/532r

[Document 11]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)1

Department of State,
Washington, September 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

We have just signed treaties with Great Britain, France, Spain and China.2 These with the twenty-two previously signed connect this Government with more than two thirds of the population of the globe by peace treaties which provide for investigation in all cases before hostilities can be commenced. Please say to the sovereign to whom you are accredited that this Government will be pleased to make a similar treaty with him.

W. J. Bryan

1 The same to the Ambassadors in Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1914, p. 304; 1915, p. 380; 1914, p. 1082; 1915, p. 41.

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/515

[Document 12]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, undated.
[Received September 22, 1914, 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Just had meeting with Foreign Minister and am delighted to inform you that Swedish Government has now agreed to peace treaty in form you desire and will instruct Minister at Washington to sign at same time that treaties with England and France are signed as suggested in your telegram September 8.1 Foreign Minister said I might cable this to you and that formal notification would come later. He handed me copy of treaty which embodies what you desire, copy being sent by mail; if you desire can telegraph text immediately.

Morris

1 The treaty was signed on October 13. Foreign Relations, 1915, p. 1290.

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/517

[Document 13]

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Newport, Rhode Island, undated.
[Received September 24, 1914, 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I have great pleasure in informing you that the Imperial Government, wishing to give a proof of its good-will and friendship to the Government of the United States, has directed me to negotiate and sign a peace treaty with you.2 I will come to Washington as soon as I have prepared the draft.

Bakhméteff

2 The treaty was signed on October 1. Ibid., p. 1283.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 711.0012/524a

[Document 14]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 27, 1914, 10 p.m.

[Telegram]

272. Treaties with Great Britain, France, and Spain ratified. Treaties with Russia, Sweden, and Greece have been agreed upon and will be signed in a few days. If Germany and Austria will agree to similar treaties the success of the plan will be complete. Both governments have endorsed the principles. Please lay these facts before the Foreign Office and [say] that we shall be much gratified to take up for consideration the drafting of such a treaty. Will agree to any reasonable change in matter of detail.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 711.0012/532t

[Document 15]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, September 29, 1914.

[Telegram]

We have now signed twenty-six treaties providing for investigation in all cases. These include treaties with Great Britain, France, and Spain, which have just been ratified without opposition. Treaties are being prepared with Russia, Sweden, and Greece. Your country and Austria have already approved of the principle. It would make our joy complete if your Government and Austria would enter into treaties similar to those already signed. We shall be pleased to consider any changes your Government may desire to make in matter of detail.

Aside from our desire to have your country included among those to whom we are joined by these treaties I would be personally much gratified to have my name linked with yours in such an agreement.

Will you not please bring the matter to attention of your Government and use your great influence to secure their consent to such a treaty?

W. J. Bryan

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/525

[Document 16]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 1, 1914.
[Received 10:35 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegram received with thanks. I am returning to Washington to-morrow and will ask you to be good enough to let me have a copy of the last treaties which I will send home by an opportunity.

Bernstorff

Memorandum of the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/656

[Document 17]

Memorandum of the Secretary of State

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

German Ambassador called in response to my suggestion that he exert his influence in behalf of the negotiation of a treaty similar to those signed with the twenty-seven other countries. Gave him copies of the British, French, Russian, and Netherlands treaties. He expressed great interest in the subject and said he would send them to Berlin and do what he could to induce his Government to join in a similar treaty.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 711.0012/540a

[Document 18]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

Am much gratified to learn of arrangements made for education of war minister’s brother and sons at Robert College. It is an excellent sign. I am wondering whether it would be possible for you to secure Turkey’s agreement to a treaty similar to those which have been signed with other countries. We have now signed twenty-seven treaties, the last five being with Great Britain, France, Spain, China, and Russia. Germany and Austria have endorsed the principle and we are hoping to secure treaties with them soon.

Treaties with Greece and Sweden have been authorized and will be signed shortly. While I prefer to have the treaty signed here so that it can be presented immediately for ratification, I would not insist upon it if the Turkish Government preferred to have the treaty signed there. I think I have sent you copies of the Netherlands treaty which is the form most generally followed. The differences in the treaty are only slight, the general principle being the same in all. If you have a copy of the Netherlands treaty please bring it to the attention of the Government and say that we are willing to agree to any reasonable change in detail. If the Government desires to see copies of the British, French, and Russian treaties shall be pleased to send them.

W. J. Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/538

[Document 19]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 7, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My telegram of September 7.1 Your telegram October 5, 2 p.m. Contents thereof concerning arbitration communicated to the Foreign Office. Latter says on account of extra work due to the question of capitulations they have been unable to give it desired attention but will do so now.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/552

[Document 20]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, October 9, 1914.
[Received October 12.]

My dear Mr. Secretary of State: I had the honor to receive the copies of the four peace treaties signed recently at the State Department and I shall avail myself of the earliest opportunity to submit them to my Government. At the same time I shall call Count Berchtold’s attention to your wish to associate my name with yours on a similar agreement to be entered into by our two respective countries.

Hoping to be able to comply with your request, I am [etc.]

C. Dumba

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) File No. 711.0012/568a

[Document 21]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State,
Washington, October 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Secretary Bryan has just signed the thirtieth treaty in the series providing for investigation of all questions. Five of these treaties are with France, Great Britain, Spain, China, and Russia. Germany and Austria have endorsed the principle and we are hoping to sign with them soon. Please sound Japanese Government and see whether they will consider joining with us in a similar treaty. If so have them authorize Ambassador Chinda to sign. Prefer to have treaty signed here. Have you received copies of these treaties? If not cable Peking to mail you copies of Netherlands treaty.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/575

[Document 22]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, November 5, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegram of October 16, 6 p.m. I have again spoken to the Minister for Foreign Affairs about peace treaty but have failed to secure any expression from him. From the trend of his remarks I infer that he is not ready to adopt the policy of such treaties. He is also inclined to the belief that the United States and Japan have conflicting views in regard to China. There is also always present strong dissatisfaction about California legislation intensified by fear that hostile legislation will be passed. We can hardly hope for a favorable response at least until that fear is removed.

Guthrie

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/593

[Document 23]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, November 16, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 12]

My dear Mr. Secretary: Referring to your telegram of August 17, 7 p.m.,1 expressing the hope that the Belgian Government would be prepared to sign a treaty similar to that already negotiated with the Netherlands Government, I beg to transmit herewith enclosed for your information copy of the correspondence on the subject with the Belgian Government.2

While previous to the war the Belgian Government had shown interest in these treaties, it was, upon the outbreak of hostilities and during its subsequent movement from place to place, so overtaxed and harried, that, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs said, he had not the time for the calm and careful consideration which he would feel obliged to give to a matter of such a character.

In view of the circumstances I have not insisted further and shall not again take up the matter unless you desire me to do so.

I am [etc.]

Brand Whitlock

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed: substance of note of October 2 from the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs is given in the ensuing paragraph.

Part I: The Outbreak and Spread of the War — Projects of MediationPart I: The Outbreak and Spread of the War — Projects of Mediation1

1  See Foreign Relations, 1914, PP. 24–6, for the following:

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State, June 28, 1914 (telegram); the President to the Emperor, June 29, 1914 (telegram); the Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador, June 30, 1914.

The Emperor to the President, June 30, 1914 (telegram).

The Emperor to the President, August 2, 1914; the President to the Emperor, October 20, 1914.

Contents

The crisisThe crisis

[24] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, July 26, 1914, noon.

File No. 763.72/2

[25] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, July 26, 1914, noon.

File No. 763.72/3

[26] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, July 27, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 11:05 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/4

[27] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, July 27, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/5

[28] The Vice Consul General at Budapest (Mallett) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Budapest, July 13, 1914. [Received July 27.]

File No. 763.72/6

[29] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, July 24, 1914. [Received July 27.]

File No. 763.72/20

[30] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, July 28, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received 9:55 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/15

[31] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, July 26, 1914. [Received July 28.]

File No. 763.72/10

[32] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, July 27, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received July 28, 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/12

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/2

[Document 24]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, July 26, 1914, noon.

[Telegram]

Diplomatic and political circles here consider situation most serious and Russian intervention inevitable in case of Austro-Servian conflict. Ministry held a conference last night and issued official communiqué stating that the Russian Government is greatly disturbed by Austro [-Servian] conflict, situation to which it cannot remain indifferent. Ministers have been summoned by the Emperor.

Wilson

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/3

[Document 25]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, July 26, 1914, noon.

[Telegram]

Minister of War tells me that he considers war between Austria and Russia almost inevitable and same opinion seems generally current in diplomatic and political circles. Russian Government has ordered complete army mobilization to begin immediately.

Wilson

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/4

[Document 26]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, July 27, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 11:05 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Situation though still acute less so than yesterday and chances of peace improved, though army clamoring for war.

Wilson

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/5

[Document 27]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, July 27, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I have reason to believe matters will be arranged without general European war.

I have postponed my [departure?] until August 12.

Gerard

The Vice Consul General at Budapest (Mallett) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/6

[Document 28]

The Vice Consul General at Budapest (Mallett) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Budapest, July 13, 1914.
[Received July 27.]

The impression prevails at present in Budapest that a war between Austria-Hungary and Servia is unavoidable, and that hostilities will begin soon after the crops are harvested.

Although the Budapest newspapers have been forbidden by the military authorities to publish any news in regard to mobilization, it is known nevertheless to quite a number of persons in Budapest that two or three army corps are being mobilized at present near the Servian frontier in Hungary and in Bosnia.

The newspapers have also been forbidden to publish anything in regard to a military cordon, which will be established along the frontier between Servia and Austria-Hungary. The purpose of this military cordon is to prevent desertions of Servians who are in the Austro-Hungarian Army and to prevent the entrance into Bosnia of Servians. The Hungarian Minister of War has issued an order forbidding the sale of horses to Servians or to any foreigners.

F. E. Mallett

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/20

[Document 29]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, July 24, 1914.
[Received July 27.]

[Translation]

No. 171/res.]

Excellency: By direction of my Government I have the honor to make the following communication to your excellency:

In view of the results of the investigation of the assassination at Sarajevo of His Imperial and Royal Highness Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, and of the systematic stirring up of the Slav population of the Monarchy in the south now carried on for years by the Kingdom of Servia, the Imperial and Royal Government finds itself constrained to demand of the Royal Servian Government certain guaranties that further agitation be prevented.

The Imperial and Royal Envoy at Belgrade has therefore delivered a note to the Royal Servian Government, on the 23d of this month, asking it to accept a number of demands in this connection within forty-eight hours.

Accept [etc.]

C. Dumba

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/15

[Document 30]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, July 28, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received 9:55 a.m.]

[Telegram]

News of Austrian declaration of war against Servia just been known and causing great excitement and apprehension. Russian mobilization has been going on quietly several days though decree not published officially as reported in Embassy’s telegram of July 27 [26], noon. The decree now expected momentarily. Strongest influences in highest circles being brought upon Emperor to declare war and I greatly fear Russian intervention inevitable. Am informed by German Embassy that this move will result in German intervention. It is believed here that England and Italy will try not to be drawn in unless forced by later complications.

Wilson

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/10

[Document 31]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, July 26, 1914.
[Received July 28.]

[Translation]

No. 178/res.]

Excellency: In continuation of my note No. 171/res. of July 24, I have the honor by direction of my Government most respectfully to make to your excellency the following communication.

The answer of the Royal Servian Government to the Imperial and Royal Government’s note is unsatisfactory. The Imperial and Royal Envoy at Belgrade thereupon declared the diplomatic relations to be broken off and left the city of Belgrade with the staff of the Legation. The Royal Servian Government is said to have ordered the mobilization of the Servian Army as early as 3 p.m. of July 25.

For our part the partial mobilization of the armed force was ordered.

Accept [etc.]

C. Dumba

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/12

[Document 32]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, July 27, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received July 28, 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

War certain and probably localized Balkans. Germany morally supports Austria but Italy neutral, Montenegro and Roumania will aid Servia, France not participate but Russian attitude unknown. Vienna anxious and hoping for short conflict. Bourse temporarily closed. Monarchy under martial law. Austrian troops for days been moving southward. War loan three hundred million crowns planned.

Penfield

The first suggestion of mediation by the United States (July 28)—The opening of hostilitiesThe first suggestion of mediation by the United States (July 28)—The opening of hostilities

[33] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, July 28, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/—

[34] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, July 28, 1914, 11:44 p.m.

[35] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, July 28, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received July 29, 10:12 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/14

[36] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, July 29, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 11:10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/13

[37] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, July 29, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/19

[38] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, July 30, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 1:01 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/22

[39] The Consul at Gibraltar (Sprague) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Gibraltar, undated. [Received July 30, 1914, 4:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/24

[40] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, July 31, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received July 30, 4:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/26

[41] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, July 30, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 4:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/3

[42] The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (Bundy), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Kingston, July 30, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 7:35 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/27

[43] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, July 13, 1914. [Received July 30.]

File No. 863.0011/15

[44] The Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Hamburg, July 30, 1914. [Received July 31, 9:10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/29

[45] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, July 31, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received, 2:36 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/34

[46] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors, Ministers, and Principal Consular Officers in European Countries

Department of State, Washington, July 31, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72/42a

[47] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, July 31, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 5:17 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/36

[48] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, July 31, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 5:54 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/4

[49] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, July 31, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 6:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/39

[50] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, July 31, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received 9:50 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/40

[51] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, July 31, 1914, midnight.

[52] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, July 31, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 1, 10:55 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/44

[53] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 1, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 3:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/48

[54] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 1, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/50

[55] The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, August 1, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 6:35 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/47

[56] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 1, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 6:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/51

[57] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 1, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 9 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/52

[58] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 1, 1914. [Received 9:02 p.m.]

File No. 704.6261

[59] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 763.72119/4

[60] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 1, 1914, 2 a.m. [Received 11:01 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/38

[61] The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, August 1, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 2, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111/1

[62] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 2, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 10 a.m.]

File No. 704.6200

[63] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 1, 1914. [Received August 2, 11:35 a.m.]

File No. 704.6361

[64] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 2, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 1:25 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/55

[65] The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, August 1, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received August 2, 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111N39/74

[66] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 2, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received 2:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/60

[67] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, August 2, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 2:49 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/57

[68] The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Russian Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, August 2, 1914. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/56

[69] The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Athens, August 2, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/54

[70] The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, August 2, 1914. [Received 10:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/53

[71] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 2, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 3, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/61

[72] The Vice Consul General at Budapest (Mallett) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Budapest, August 2, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received August 3, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/73

[73] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 2, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received August 3, 9:15 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/66

[74] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, August 3, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 10:15 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111N39/4

[75] The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Antwerp, undated. [Received August 3, 1914, 1:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/75

[76] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 3, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 1:25 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/77

[77] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 3, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 2:47 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/81

[78] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 3, 1914. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111N39/3

[79] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, August 3, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/83

[80] The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, August 2, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received August 3, 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/5

[81] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/5

[82] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 3, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/92

[83] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 3, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/95

[84] The Consul General at Moscow (Snodgrass) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Moscow, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/93

[85] The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, August 3, 1914. [Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/101

[86] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 3, 1914, midnight. [Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/99

[87] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 4, 1914, 2 a.m. [Received 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/94

[88] The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, August 3, 1914. [Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/86

[89] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 3, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/98

[90] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 4, 1914, noon. [Received 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/104

[91] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 763.72111N39/3

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/—

[Document 33]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, July 28, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

To be communicated to the President:

Situation in Europe is regarded here as the gravest in history. It is apprehended that civilization is threatened by demoralization which would follow a general conflagration. Demonstrations made against war here last night by laboring classes; it is said to be the first instance of its kind in France. It is felt that if Germany once mobilizes no backward step will be taken. France has strong reliance on her army but it is not giving way to undue excitement. There is faith and reliance on our high ideals and purposes, so that I believe expression from our nation would have great weight in this crisis. My opinion is encouraged at reception given utterances of British Minister for Foreign Affairs. I believe that a strong plea for delay and moderation from the President of the United States would meet with the respect and approval of Europe and urge the prompt consideration of this question. This suggestion is consistent with our plea for arbitration treaties and attitude toward world affairs generally. I would not appear officious but deem it my duty to make this expression to you.

Herrick

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 34]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, July 28, 1914, 11:44 p.m.

[Telegram]

Is there in your opinion any likelihood that the good offices of the United States if offered under Article 3 of the Hague convention would be acceptable or serve any high purpose in the present crisis?

Bryan

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/14

[Document 35]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, July 28, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received July 29, 10:12 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Minister of Foreign Affairs requests following declaration of war be cabled:

To end subversive intrigues issuing from Belgrade directed against the territorial integrity Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, Imperial and Royal Government July 23 sent to Royal Servian Government note in which were formulated series of demands, for acceptation of which delay of forty-eight hours was granted Royal Government. Servian Government not having replied to note in a satisfactory manner, Imperial and Royal Government is under necessity in protecting its rights and interests, of having recourse to the force of arms.

Austria-Hungary having just addressed to Servia formal declaration in conformity with Article 1 of the convention October 18, 1907, relative to opening of hostilities, therefore considers itself in a state of war with Servia.

Minister for Foreign Affairs declares that Austria will conform itself in the scene of hostilities on condition that Servia proceeds analogously to the stipulations of convention of The Hague, October 18, 1907 and of London, February 26, 1909.

Penfield

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/13

[Document 36]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, July 29, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 11:10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

250. Your undated telegram received this morning. I informally requested Sir Edward Grey yesterday that if the good offices of the United States could at any time or in any possible way be used, please to inform me. He expressed his thanks and said he would do so. I am renewing the same suggestion to-day.1

Page

1 See the Ambassador’s telegram of July 31, 5 p.m., post, p. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/19

[Document 37]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, July 29, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Stock Exchange action to-day deferring settlements for thirty days has had a quieting effect on money market. General feeling here seems more hopeful of confining hostilities to present belligerents. The belief that England will support Russia and France in any eventuality encourages the feeling that Germany will not take any provocative action.

Herrick

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/22

[Document 38]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, July 30, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 1:01 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Mobilization decree issued. Most embassies and legations are informing their governments that they consider war inevitable and I hold same opinion. German and Austrian Embassies are packed and ready to leave any moment.

Wilson

The Consul at Gibraltar (Sprague) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/24

[Document 39]

The Consul at Gibraltar (Sprague) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Gibraltar, undated.
[Received July 30, 1914, 4:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Garrison mobilized.

Sprague

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/26

[Document 40]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, July 31, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received July 30, 4:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am credibly informed the British gunboats of Hankow and supposedly smaller naval vessels elsewhere in China have been dismantled and their crews sent to Weihaiwei where the more powerful vessels are being concentrated with a view to possible hostile action by Germany.

MacMurray

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/3

[Document 41]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, July 30, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 4:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Think Germany’s efforts toward peace fruitless and general European war certain.

Gerard

The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (Bundy), to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/27

[Document 42]

The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (Bundy), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Kingston, July 30, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 7:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Jamaica forts manned, regiments hurried to Kingston to-day.1 German cruiser Dresden cruising off three-mile limit. Governor has suppressed all the reports pertaining to military operations. Official report not verified.

Bundy

1 For further information regarding British military and naval preparations of this date, see the consular despatches from Georgetown (British Guiana), Cardiff, and Cork, which reached the Department on August 14, post, pp. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132].

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 863.0011/15

[Document 43]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, July 13, 1914.
[Received July 30.]

No. 147]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you, adverting to the calamitous tragedy in the Imperial family of this realm, communicated to you by cablegram on the day of the assassination,1 that the transfer of the heirship to the thrones of Austria and Hungary has now become a reconciled fact throughout the Monarchy, and official and social life is methodically adjusting itself to the new order of things.

The late Archduke Francis Ferdinand’s strength of character was never so thoroughly appreciated in his lifetime as it now is. And the consensus of opinion, even including that of persons who were not particularly friendly to him, is that a heavy blow was dealt to the future of the realm by the assassins at Sarajevo. The murdered Archduke had had long years of training for the task believed to be before him. He was the practical head of the army, and the moving spirit in the creation of the modern navy. Soldiers and sailors believed in him. His closest friend was the German Kaiser, and he knew well the statesmen and rulers of Europe.

The assassins of the Archduke Francis Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg have confessed that the plot was matured at Belgrade, and the terrible event which has thrilled Europe is only another illustration of how well justified is the anxiety always present in the minds of European politicians and diplomatists about the unstable conditions prevailing in the Balkans and even in Austria-Hungary itself.

It is noticeable that the quotation of home securities on the Vienna and Budapest bourses has steadily fallen since the day of the tragedy; and this decline in market values is but keeping pace with the slackening of almost all domestic industries. From every quarter of the Monarchy comes news of curtailed activity in practically every branch of industry, and commercial bankruptcies seem to becloud the horizon. Fortunately the crops this year are exceptionally good.

Unfounded rumors of the aged Emperor’s health are heard in Vienna nearly every day, especially in quarters having to do with finance. The popular opinion is that this latest tragedy in the Imperial family has affected the health of the beloved ruler, now in his eighty-fourth year, and that his activities have been lessened in consequence. But in conversation yesterday with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, just returned from a day’s conference at Ischl with the Emperor, I was assured that His Majesty was in better health than for months, that his appetite was that of a robust person, and that he had a grasp on the administration of the Dual Monarchy as clear and forceful as ever.

The new heir to the throne, the Archduke Charles Francis Joseph, has certain talents that are requisite for rulership, and it is predicted that when the time comes for him to take up the responsibilities of continuing the work of his great-uncle he will be found adequate to the task. The criticism that one hears most often is that he is immature and unskilled in dealing with affairs of great importance, and this is largely true. He is in his twenty-seventh year, and the present Emperor came to the throne when he was but eighteen. But, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs said to me yesterday, “It was then a different Austria.” It can be stated authoritatively that the new heir to the throne is to be taken in hand by the Emperor who, with the help of assistants already chosen, will train him for the great work of the future.

Charles Francis Joseph has been thoroughly schooled as a soldier and for years performed his duty as an officer expecting and receiving no favors. When a lieutenant or captain he marched and worked with his men, and it was his wish for his colleagues to regard him only as a comrade. A large part of his military service has been performed at Prague and other Bohemian posts. Until recently Archduke Charles has been a major in the Thirty-ninth Regiment of Infantry, but a few weeks since he was advanced to a lieutenant-colonelcy. He holds honorary rank in the military establishments of Prussia, Saxony and Bavaria. The King of Saxony is his uncle.

Archduke Charles was married in 1911 to the Bourbon Princess Zita of Parma, who is four years his junior. This young lady, almost certain to ascend the thrones of Austria and Hungary as the Emperor-King’s consort, is a superior person in many ways. Her mentality and charm of manner are recognized by all who know her. Her command of languages is equal to that of her husband. Both speak perfect German, French and English, while Italian is the Archduchess’s mother tongue. Their home life is simple and domestic in an unusual degree. They have two children. The elder is a boy, Archduke Francis Joseph Otto, born on the 20th November, 1912. The younger is a girl born in the present year.

I have [etc.]

Frederic C. Penfield

1 See Foreign Relations, 1914, p. 24.

The Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/29

[Document 44]

The Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Hamburg, July 30, 1914.
[Received July 31, 9:10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Imperator will not sail.

Morgan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/34

[Document 45]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, July 31, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received, 2:36 p.m.]

[Telegram]

In my opinion Russia’s mobilization makes war inevitable. Probable Germany will ask United States to take over embassies and interests Russia, France, and perhaps others. Do you assent? Thousands of Americans in Germany. Food prices already doubled. Suggest your sending navy despatch boat Hamburg for emergencies and load that boat and another with food supplies for Americans only. Also consider question of sending German boats with American passengers from German ports under international agreement might bring gold from American friends to Americans stranded here.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors, Ministers, and Principal Consular Officers in European Countries File No. 763.72/42a

[Document 46]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors, Ministers, and Principal Consular Officers in European Countries

Department of State,
Washington, July 31, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Circular telegram]

Telegraph Department daily as to military, political and financial situation without waiting for official confirmation of reports. State basis of information and opinion as to credibility.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/36

[Document 47]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, July 31, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 5:17 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Emperor this afternoon orders general mobilization all armed forces Austria-Hungary including Landsturm. This is extremest military muster of realm. Situation growing in seriousness.

Penfield

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/4

[Document 48]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, July 31, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 5:54 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My July 29, 1 p.m.1 I am just come from a talk with Sir Edward Grey. He again expressed his great gratitude for the suggestion of offering the good offices of the United States in case they could be used. After the failure of his proposal of an ambassadorial conference to prevent Austria from going to war with Servia, he made proposals looking to the localization of hostilities and he has yet received no responses. Grey asked me if the United States has offered its good offices at Vienna or Saint Petersburg or Berlin, about which, of course, I have no information. Perhaps you will inform me of proposals or other actions of our Government if it does anything.

There is great gloom here this afternoon. As Grey expressed it, “It looks as if Europe were in the clutch of blind forces.”

Page

1 See the Ambassador’s telegram No. 250, ante, p. 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/39

[Document 49]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, July 31, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 6:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Government refused recommendation of financiers for a moratorium on the ground of confession of weakness to Germany. Allard Bank closed on failure to meet engagement of one million dollars in gold expected from Russia, Germany, and England. Their application to the Bank of France for money to tide them over was refused on account of their German connections. Other banks have practically suspended payment. There is a persistent rumor from reliable sources that France will order mobilization to-night.

Learning that Embassy at London is authorized to issue emergency passports to continental travelers, I shall do likewise unless ordered to the contrary.

Herrick

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/40

[Document 50]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, July 31, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received 9:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

German Ambassador informs me that he has just received instructions from his Government to ask French Government whether they will maintain neutrality in Europe and requests answer by one o’clock to-night. He anticipates immediate reply in the negative. He believes that German Ambassador at Washington has asked the United States to take charge of German Embassy and consulates in France in event of negative reply. German Ambassador here would expect to have American flag raised over German Embassy.

Most important to have immediate instructions.

Herrick

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) [Document 51]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, July 31, 1914, midnight.

[Telegram]

We have received no request from German Embassy. If request is made we shall of course accede to it but with the understanding that it will not prevent our acting for other nations in case they also request. We still hope most sincerely that a general war may be averted.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/44

[Document 52]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, July 31, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 1, 10:55 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Situation becoming steadily more hopeless. Complete mobilization now in progress. Whole country, all classes, unanimous for war. Last week’s serious political strikes ended. Owing to mobilization railways disorganized and in case of war passenger service will probably be entirely suspended. Am therefore advising numerous American tourists to leave while it is still possible. Rumored here that Embassy will be asked to look after interests in case of war. Respectfully hope Department may think it wise to discourage this before official request received. In view of present none too cordial relations dating back to America being charged with Japanese interests, it would have most unfortunate effect for us to again act for Russia’s enemy.

Wilson

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/48

[Document 53]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 1, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 3:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Formally asked by Foreign Minister if United States will take over German embassies in France and Russia and any other countries with which Germany may be at war. Asked you this question yesterday by cable but received no answer.

Call your attention again to need of despatch boat to keep communication open which should bring gold for Americans here from their friends and that you arrange to send ships to take off Americans here. German ships now New York might come by international arrangement. Suppose I shall be asked to take over embassies here and will assent unless you instruct contrary. Informed by Foreign Minister Russia when asked to recall mobilization order refused alleging could not for technical reasons. My opinion, based on preparations British Embassy to leave and other information, England will be in war. Universal opinion here Japan will attack us. Bourse closed; gold hard to get; provisions doubled in price.

Gerard

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/50

[Document 54]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 1, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Situation seems to me unchanged though British, French and Italian Embassies appear to have very faint hope that Austria may accept conference. German Ambassador had special audience with the Emperor yesterday but Bavarian Minister tells me situation was not changed. Associated Press correspondent has rumor that Russia has informed Austria that she will move immediately unless operations against Servia end before 4 p.m. to-day. I doubt rumor but consider war almost inevitable within short time. Reports from all parts of the country show determination of all classes to support Government fully, mobilization under way and recruits show great enthusiasm. Business seriously crippled by calling out so many men, stock exchange closed, gold unobtainable and paper much depreciated. All railway and steamship traffic closed except for troops. About eighty Americans mostly tourists have reported at Embassy unable to leave country and are very uneasy as some have passages engaged at early date and others will run short of money if situation long continued. They are all perfectly safe here as whole country is calm and order perfect. No mail arriving or leaving and I shall use cable freely.

Wilson

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/47

[Document 55]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, August 1, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 6:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Member of German Legation informs me confidentially Germany endeavoring to persuade Sweden to readjust1 in case of general war. Sympathies here with Germany.

Caffery

1 Garbled in transmission: should read “attack Russia.” See the Chargé’s dispatch No. 433 of July 31 (received September 4), post, p.88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/51

[Document 56]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 1, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 6:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

General mobilization called this afternoon. Some changes effected in Cabinet. Will send details later. Now see no hope of avoiding hostilities.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/52

[Document 57]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 1, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your July 31, 5 p.m.1 . No absolutely conclusive [developments?] but all to-day’s news points to Russia and Germany becoming involved. Communication becomes more difficult from Germany and the telephone from Paris is cut off. Increasing crowds of Americans are flocking from the Continent. The canceling of all German transatlantic ships causes the detention here of many travelers. There will be many cases of want presented to the Embassy forthwith. Have you instructions for their assistance?

There is yet no financial stringency. Brown Shipley report they can not longer negotiate checks on American or Continental bankers.

British Admiralty expect a general war and British troops are being concentrated on the North Sea coast.

Page

1 See circular telegram, ante, p. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6261

[Document 58]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 1, 1914.
[Received 9:02 p.m.]

[Telegram]

About 6 p.m. German Ambassador presented German declaration of war against Russia at Foreign Office. He then sent for me and asked me to take charge of Embassy premises and German interests. I replied I could do so only on instructions from the Department, which are hereby requested. Bavarian Minister unless instructed to contrary will transfer all his official property to German Embassy in order that this Embassy may also take charge of them. A force of clerks and servants will remain at German Embassy. Ambassador and staff expect to leave to-morrow and have asked for American flag in case of necessity. This I shall not give, taking for granted that the Department has already granted German request, which I am told was made Washington two days ago.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72119/4

[Document 59]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

[Telegram]

Suggestion made to the British Government through you has not been communicated to any other government but the President asked you to let us know if there is the slightest intimation that such a suggestion might be effective elsewhere.1 He is anxious to do everything in his power to avert war.

Bryan

1 See the Ambassador’s telegram No. 258, August 3, 6 p.m., post, p. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/38

[Document 60]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 1, 1914, 2 a.m.
[Received 11:01 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Orders for mobilization of French Army issued to-night.

Herrick

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1

[Document 61]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, August 1, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 2, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to the Department’s telegram of July 31, 5 p.m.2 Universal impression here among diplomatic, press and other circles that Italy will remain neutral. It is difficult to see how Italy, despite any possible existing treaties, could declare war in support of Austria, her traditional enemy among the people and her political rival in the Adriatic and Balkans. No mobilization of army yet. Subsidized [mobilized?] fleet reported gathering at Gaeta. Financial situation here appearing better and stronger than in other large European capitals. Italian Government bonds have declined very little so far.

Jay

2 See circular telegram, ante, p. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6200

[Document 62]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 2, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Shall I accede to Germany’s request that United States take over German embassies in countries with which Germany may be at war? This is third day I have asked an answer to this question. Shall I take over any embassies if requested? Informed by French Ambassador last night that only chance of peace was offer of some sort by the United States in the nature of good offices. Plain people here seem to want war, demonstrations continual. General mobilization ordered here yesterday, everything military runs smoothly. Inform Congressman Plumley his son-in-law well. Informed Spanish Embassy will be asked to take over French and Russian here. Americans cannot cash checks, American Express Company and others.

Gerard

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6361

[Document 63]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 1, 1914.
[Received August 2, 11:35 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Have just seen Austrian Ambassador who has received no instructions from Vienna as to declaration of war or breaking of diplomatic relations and thinks telegraphic communication is interrupted. He expects to receive his passports any moment. In the absence of any instructions he has asked me unofficially and on his own responsibility if this Embassy will take charge of Austrian Embassy pending definite instructions from his Government. Though without information, he thinks his Government must have acted in concert with Germany at Washington in this matter. Have replied I can do nothing without definite instructions, which I hereby request. Ambassador has promised to keep me fully informed of all developments.

Wilson

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/55

[Document 64]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 2, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 1:25 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Situation here marked by great uncertainty and apprehension. Difficult secure any information on which to base definite estimate of probable developments. Great financial timidity among classes which has caused runs on all the banks. They are meeting payments and assert that there will be no failures if runs cease within the next few days. Many shops and business houses refuse to accept bank notes although they appear to be well supported. Small coin withdrawn from circulation which causes great difficulty in ordinary transactions. It is hoped that this will be remedied to some extent to-morrow by issue of clearing-house certificates in small denominations. Exchange very high. Banks giving from four francs to four francs fifty for American dollars. Unless I secure unusual information on general situation I shall confine my telegraphic reports to matters affecting Belgium alone.

Whitlock

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/74

[Document 65]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, August 1, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received August 2, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Sweden has declared neutrality.

Caffery

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/60

[Document 66]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 2, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received 2:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to the Embassy’s telegram of August 1, 3 p.m.1 In reply to inquiries Foreign Office expects to have route Finland to Stockholm open in a few days, thus permitting foreigners and Americans to leave Russia. However, actual beginning of war may prevent this and Americans may be held indefinitely. Am registering all Americans so that they can be quickly notified if Embassy finds means to send them away. In the meantime they are entirely safe, as most perfect order reigns throughout whole country.

Hear that consuls cannot send telegrams abroad and have instructed them to report daily to the Embassy which will forward reports.

Mobilization going on with greatest enthusiasm and good order. Private horses, vehicles and motors being requisitioned. On account of mass of telegrams and doubt as to routes communicating to and from Embassy liable to delay.

Wilson

1  Ante, p. 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55].

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/57

[Document 67]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, August 2, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 2:49 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Telegraphic reports that German army advanced through Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, occupied government buildings on the way into France via Metz.

Van Dyke

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/56

[Document 68]

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Russian Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, August 2, 1914.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I have just been informed by my Government that Germany has declared war on us.

Bakhméteff

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/54

[Document 69]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Athens, August 2, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Greece has not declared neutrality and her attitude depends on that of Bulgaria and Turkey, which in spite of Bulgaria’s pacific assurances causes considerable uneasiness. No mobilization as yet. Venizelos has returned and cabinet council under the presidency of the King is now being held.

Export of gold is forbidden. Banks will no longer change notes into gold and Government expected shortly to close the Bourse.

Servian Legation announced last night that while bombardment of Belgrade still continues the Austrians have not yet entered Servian territory.

Whitehouse

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/53

[Document 70]

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, August 2, 1914.
[Received 10:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am instructed by my Government to inform you that since first of August Germany is in state of war with Russia.

Haniel

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/61

[Document 71]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 2, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 3, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Although reports from authentic sources state that hostilities have commenced on German frontier, it appears that neither France or Germany wants to be the first to make a declaration of war. Consequently German Ambassador here has not asked for nor been given his passport although his departure was expected yesterday. Therefore funds I provided for German Ambassador as reported have enabled him to provide for many of his compatriots.

Herrick

The Vice Consul General at Budapest (Mallett) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/73

[Document 72]

The Vice Consul General at Budapest (Mallett) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Budapest, August 2, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received August 3, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Entire Austro-Hungarian Army, seventeen corps, mobilized. Hostilities have commenced against Servia energetically and extensively. [?] bridge partially destroyed. Pontoons are being sent to [?]. Servia opposes unexpectedly stubborn resistance. No progress by Austro-Hungarian Army. No hopes are entertained for localization of conflict. French, Russian, and Roumanian Consuls General to Hungary inform me confidentially that they have been instructed that they should be [ready?] to depart from Hungary at short notice. Prices of commodities advanced by 50 per cent. [Moratorium?] instituted in banking and commerce. Bank interest 10 per cent. All passenger transportation suspended. Situation extremely bad.

Mallett

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/66

[Document 73]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 2, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received August 3, 9:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

German Ambassador and staff left this morning. Austro-Hungarian Ambassador still here and without any instructions, though fully prepared to leave and place his interests in my hands. In accordance with instructions August 1, 10 p.m., have asked Foreign Office for permission for Embassy and consulates to take over German interests and when granted shall, with the Department’s approval, raise American flag over German Embassy. Have notified consuls. Emperor came to St. Petersburg to-day from summer residence and received court and high military officers at palace and delivered speech. French Ambassador also present. Emperor then appeared at window before enormous crowd in [midst of?] immense enthusiasm. City most orderly but streets filled with great crowds marching with Emperor’s portrait and singing national anthem.

Situation of Americans unchanged though Minister for Foreign Affairs has assured Swedish Minister and myself that he will use every effort to get foreigners out promptly. Other missions refuse to make any representations in this matter. I have hopes this will be accomplished within a few days. I have visited and written to Foreign Office requesting action for Americans.

No news concerning military operations or movements. Stock exchange closed indefinitely. Unconfirmed rumor that all valuables are being removed from St. Petersburg in case of disorders following military reverses. Official communiqué published regarding Russian-German negotiations ending in declaration of war. St. Petersburg under martial law. Consul at Riga telegraphs harbor mined, 50,000 troops in city, Russian fleet lying off harbor. Government holding German and Swedish ships but considering releasing British and others. Good order prevails. No opposition to war. Political conditions appear favorable. Many German subjects wish to leave but cannot. Banks not paying checks.

Wilson

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/4

[Document 74]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Christiania, August 3, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 10:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

On August 1 Norwegian Cabinet issued a proclamation that Norway will maintain strict neutrality in war between Austria-Hungary and Servia. Yesterday morning Cabinet issued an order to mobilize at once the entire navy and two brigades for coast defense. Export of grain and flour, potatoes, coal, coke and mineral oils temporarily prohibited. Storthing has been called for August 8.

Schmedeman

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/75

[Document 75]

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Antwerp, undated.
[Received August 3, 1914, 1:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Germany asked permission enter Belgian territory which was refused, whereupon martial law declared. Antwerp City in state siege. Situation very grave. Demands immediate relief, protection, provisions, transportation. Thousands of Americans in Antwerp and Belgium.

Consul General

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/77

[Document 76]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 3, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 1:25 p.m.]

[Telegram]

French1 representative last night presented ultimatum expiring this morning demanding privilege of sending troops across Belgian territory. Belgian Government refused this morning. It is reliably reported that German forces have already invaded Belgium. Rumors that engagement at Visé with considerable fatalities.

Whitlock

1 The following note, dated October 31, 1919, was attached to this telegram: “Mr. Whitlock says this should read ‘German’ for ‘French’ as the first word. A mistake was made—‘we were up all night’, he says.”

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/81

[Document 77]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 3, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 2:47 p.m.]

[Telegram]

In case of need am I authorized to draw for funds to assist Americans to leave Russia? If so, how and amount? Many have only tourists’ checks which they find difficulty in cashing. Does German Government expect me to assist financially needy Germans wishing to leave? If so, must be furnished with funds. Ambassador left none, not even to pay employees remaining. Neither private nor Embassy funds sufficient to make advances. Duma, Council of the Empire, summoned for 8th instant. Grand Duke Nicholas appointed commander in chief. Consul at Batum telegraphs all messages in cipher forbidden. General enthusiasm for war his district large. Banks refuse to buy foreign drafts. He has been confidentially advised that all civilians including consuls may be notified to leave Batum. Business stopped.

Wilson

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/3

[Document 78]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 3, 1914.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram—Translation]

Belgian group Interparliamentary Union requests that I transmit for your information following communication sent by Belgian group to each national group in countries still neutral:

The committee of the Belgian group of the Interparliamentary Union, assembled at Brussels on August 3, 1914, by reason of the international situation and, in particular, of the threat to Belgium to violate her neutrality, begs you to ask the Government of your country to take energetic steps in behalf of the safeguarding of peace and respect of treaties.1

Whitlock

1 Answered August 4, 6 p.m., post, p. 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91].

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/83

[Document 79]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, August 3, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Mobilization rapidly going forward with most men moving towards Russia. Public enthusiasm unbounded. Members of Imperial family and grandees working for Red Cross. Funds being rapidly raised, various bankers and commercial houses subscribed hundred thousand crowns each, equally distributed. Important Hungarian nobles giving generously to war. Austrian Government makes known there is extensive subversive element in Empire endangering safety, and patriots urged report same to War Ministry. Have caused banks pay sufficient get many Americans away. Sending many cables for Americans. When cases distress appear will relieve. Nothing serious thus far. Advising consuls Trieste, Fiume give all help Americans with banks and ships.

Penfield

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/5

[Document 80]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, August 2, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received August 3, 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

At Foreign Office this morning I was informed officially that Italy will remain neutral. The reason given is that her obligations only require her to support her allies for defense and not for aggression, also that she was not previously consulted by Austria. A Cabinet council was held last night and fully approved policy of Minister for Foreign Affairs. It is reported that exports of flour, meats, and other foods are to be prohibited. The Government by decree of yesterday ordered all stock exchanges in Italy closed until further notice. No popular excitement here as yet.

[File copy not signed]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/5

[Document 81]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

258. Your August 1, 10 p.m.1 My very definite opinion is that there is not the slightest chance of any result if our good offices be offered at any continental capital. This is confirmed by the judgment of the British Foreign Office. We may have a chance after the war has reached a breathing space.

Page

1  Ante, p. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/92

[Document 82]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 3, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Minister for Foreign Affairs informs me United States will be allowed to act for Germany and asks me to say that he grants this gladly as he is sure it will be carried through in most friendly neutral spirit. Have instructed consuls to act accordingly. I shall not raise flag on German Embassy in spite of Ambassador’s request. In view of perfectly calm situation it is unnecessary. Seems likely that Americans and other foreigners may be unable to leave for some time as likelihood of passenger traffic being opened soon less favorable than yesterday. A decree yesterday to Army and people declares: “I solemnly declare that I will not conclude peace until the last soldier of the enemy has left our soil.” Austrian Ambassador still here and claims to be without news from his Government and that he does not expect to leave for [Vienna] immediately.

Wilson

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/95

[Document 83]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 3, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

259. The Foreign Office informs me that the Czar gave his personal assurance to the German Emperor and to the British Government that not a Russian soldier should pass the Russian frontier unless Russia were attacked. Germany’s answer to that assurance was her declaration of war. The British Foreign Office believes that the German and Austrian plan of a general war was definitely made some time ago and is now deliberately carried out, this being considered the best moment for German success.

The Italian naval and military attachés say that Italy was not even consulted by Austria and Germany and that Italy would be glad of their defeat. All opinions here therefore point to Germany as the determined aggressor.

The Austrian Embassy to-day discussed with us the early taking over of their Embassy on the supposition, which they took for granted, that they would presently leave London.

During the whole forenoon such crowds of Americans filled the Embassy that their questions could be answered only by a sort of public address delivered at intervals. Individual attention to them was impossible. Most of them wish some hope of turning letters of credit into cash and some way to get home. The indications are that thousands more will come with the same inquiry.

A large meeting of Americans, perhaps 2,000, at a hotel to-day appointed committees to see what arrangements can be made with banks to-morrow. The bank holiday to-day is extended over three days.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at Moscow (Snodgrass) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/93

[Document 84]

The Consul General at Moscow (Snodgrass) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Moscow, August 3, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

General preparation all military districts. Troops from Siberia likely replaced by civilians pressed into service. Many provinces including Moscow under martial law. Number German subjects assaulted. Banks refuse issue foreign drafts. Right given to delay protesting bills until after the close of the war. Notes discounted great difficulty. Government bank considered safe. Business situation is critical. Number automobiles from St. Petersburg with gold for Government bank arrived to-day. Czar pressed give equal rights all subjects particularly Poland, Finland, Gulf Finland, the Black Sea. Lighthouses closed, also the navigation. Former official press private reliable.

Snodgrass

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/101

[Document 85]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, August 3, 1914.
[Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Decree relative to exportation foodstuffs and other necessities now promulgated. Two classes, roughly 200,000, called to colors August 8, but this not considered as mobilization. Naval attaché reports Italian fleet at Gaeta and Taranto previously arranged for maneuvers, also that Navy has one million lira available for munitions of war and are [doing?] utmost to secure same.

Owing to strict censorship of and interruption telegraphic communication little outside news obtainable in Italy.

Jay

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/99

[Document 86]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 3, 1914, midnight.
[Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

From information which I trust Department will respect as confidential until ultimatum is made public here or in some other capital, I learn that Germany sought to justify demand for consent to begin military operations in Belgium by asserting knowledge that French intended violating Belgian neutrality. Belgian reply was categorical refusal. Although time fixed by ultimatum expired this morning and German patrols are on Belgian soil, no other overt act appears to have been committed. German Minister remains and negotiations are said to have been renewed. As a result of this mystifying delay, Government organ speaks in less despairing tone and it is suspected that Government may temporize if possible until England makes known her position. Strong popular anti-German feeling manifested here. King opens special session of Parliament to-morrow morning.

Whitlock

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/94

[Document 87]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 4, 1914, 2 a.m.
[Received 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Martial law proclaimed in France yesterday, Chamber convoked for to-morrow. I received keys of German Embassy and took charge of German subjects and German interests this evening with approval of French Government. German Ambassador left Paris to-night. Rumors of sporadic raids by French aeronauts in German territory and violation of Belgian neutrality by Germans. Four trains a day still running to Dieppe and two steamers to New-haven; expect many Americans to leave for England by this route to-morrow. Financial situation difficult. No payments made on letters of credit or traveler’s checks. Moratorium decrees that banks may decline payment to depositors of more than 5 per cent of their accounts.

Herrick

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/86

[Document 88]

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, August 3, 1914.
[Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I am instructed by my Government to inform you that France since first of August has attacked several times German territory. Germany is therefore now in state of war with France.

Haniel

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/98

[Document 89]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 3, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 4, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Information reaches me from an army source that the Britannic land forces are mobilizing to the last man including territorials and that an expeditionary force will be sent to the Continent. Immense crowds are marching the streets to-night in the region of the War Office and the Parliament buildings. The prevailing opinion is that the British Government will be in the war very quickly.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/104

[Document 90]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 4, 1914, noon.
[Received 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The King, in fatigue uniform of Lieutenant General ready to take the field at the head of his army, opened parliament this morning amid scenes of tremendous enthusiasm. Prime Minister read correspondence with Germany, the tenor of which was indicated in my August 3, midnight. To this was added a note received this morning from German Minister announcing that Germany would [insist on?] her demands. Government considers this equivalent to declaration of war. I am informed in strictest confidence that King of England in personal message to King of the Belgians, not yet made public, has given formal assurances of support in the event of German invasion.

Whitlock

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 763.72111N39/3

[Document 91]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Regret telegram from parliamentary group arrived after war declared.

Bryan

The offer of good offices (August 4–5)—The spread of hostilitiesThe offer of good offices (August 4–5)—The spread of hostilities

[92] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 763.72119/5

[93] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 7:55 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/10

[94] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 4, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received 11:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/116

[95] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 5, 1914, 2 a.m. [Received August 4, 11:59 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/115

[96] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 5, 1914. [Received 12:40 a.m.]

File No. 768.72/114

[97] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 4, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 5, 1:15 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/130

[98] Memorandum of the Office of the Secretary of State

Department of State, Washington, August 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/368

[99] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 5, 1914, 9 a.m. [Received 3:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/147

[100] The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, August 5, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111N39/9

[101] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 6, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 11:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/6

[102] The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State

Italian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 4, 1914. [Received August 6.]

File No. 763.72111N39/6

[103] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 6, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/189

[104] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, August 6, 1914, 7:36 p.m.

File No. 124.551/9a

[105] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 6, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 7:40 p.m.]

File No. 701.0055/1

[106] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, undated. [Received August 6, 1914, 11:20 p.m.]

File No. 701.0055

[107] The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Russian Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, undated. [Received August 6, 1914, 11:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/192

[108] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 6, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 7, 6:10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/7

[109] The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, August 7, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received 6:10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/198

[110] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 6, 1914, 9 p.m. [Received August 7, 6:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/221

[111] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 701.0055/1

[112] The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, August 7, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received August 8, 4:50 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/248

[113] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, August 7, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 8, 5 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/9

[114] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 7, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 8, 5 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/8

[115] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 7, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received August 8, 5 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/10

[116] The Ottoman Embassy to the Secretary of State

Ottoman Embassy, Washington, August 8, 1914.

File No. 763.72111N39/17

[117] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 9, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received 5 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/252

[118] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 9, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 12:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/253

[119] The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State

Norwegian Legation, Seal Harbor, Maine, August 9, 1914. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111N39/18

[120] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, August 10, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/310

[121] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 10, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 11:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/306

[122] The Guatemalan Minister (Méndez) to the Secretary of State

Guatemalan Legation, Washington, August 9, 1914. [Received August 10.]

File No. 763.72119/11

[123] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, undated. [Received August 11, 1914, 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/334

[124] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, undated. [Received August 11, 1914, 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/12

[125] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 10, 1914. [Received August 12.]

File No. 763.72/344

[126] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 11, 1914. [Received August 13.]

File No. 763.72/365

[127] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 12, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received August 13, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/369

[128] The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, August 13, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 3:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/397

[129] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 13, 1914. [Received 5:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/380

[130] The Consul at Georgetown, British Guiana (Chamberlin), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Georgetown, British Guiana, July 30, 1914. [Received August 14.]

File No. 763.72/428

[131] The Consul at Cardiff (Lathrop) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Cardiff, Wales, July 30, 1914. [Received August 14.]

File No. 763.72/399

[132] The Consul at Cork (Queenstown), Ireland (Frost), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Cork, July 31, 1914. [Received August 14.]

File No. 763.72/421

[133] The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, August 1, 1914. [Received August 14.]

File No. 763.72/385

[134] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 14, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 15, 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/433

[135] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 13, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 16, 3:35 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/442

[136] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 7, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 16, 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/439

[137] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 8, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 16, 10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/468

[138] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 11, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received August 16, 10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/447

[139] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State, Washington, August 16, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 763.72119/13a

[140] The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Athens, August 3, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 17, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/452

[141] The Chargé d’Affaires in Spain (Dearing) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, San Sebastian, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 17, 9:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/472

[142] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, August 11, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received August 17, 11:55 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/486

[143] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 13, 1914. [Received August 17.]

File No. 763.72/460

[144] The Secretary of State to the Guatemalan Minister (Méndez)

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914.

File No. 763.72119/11

[145] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 17, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received August 18, 7 a.m.]

File No. 124.551/10

[146] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 17, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 18, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/489

[147] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 18, 1 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/491

[148] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914.

File No. 124.551/10

[149] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, August 19, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/522

[150] The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, August 3, 1914. [Received August 19, 1914.]

File No. 763.72111N39/2

[151] The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Athens, August 20, 1914. [Received August 21, 6:30 a.m.]

File No. 711.0012/467

[152] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, August 21, 1914.

File No. 124.551/10a

[153] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, August 21, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 22, 2:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/570

[154] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, August 22, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 4:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/345

[155] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, August 23, 1914, noon. [Received 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/580

[156] The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, San Sebastian, August 23, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received August 24, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/15

[157] The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State

Belgian Legation, Washington, August 20, 1914. [Received August 24.]

File No. 768.72111/357

[158] The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, July 31 1914. [Received August 24.]

File No. 763.72111/350

[159] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 24, 1914, 12 noon. [Received August 25, 9 a.m.]

File No. 124.551/12

[160] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, undated. [Received August 25, 1914, 10:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111/348

[161] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 124.551/12

[162] The Chargé d’Affaires in Portugal (Bailey) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, August 10, 1914. [Received August 25.]

File No. 763.72/672

[163] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, August 26, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/348

[164] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 22, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received August 26, 2:55 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/631

[165] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy, Rome, August 25, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received August 26, 8:05 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/355

[166] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 26, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received August 27, 1:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/16

[167] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 27, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received August 28, 3:30 a.m.]

File No. 124.511/24

[168] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 27, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received August 28, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/656

[169] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 763.72/631

[170] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, August 14, 1914. [Received August 28.]

File No. 763.72/667

[171] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 124.511/24

[172] The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State

Belgian Legation, Washington, August 28, 1914. [Received August 29.]

File No. 763.72/709

[173] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 28, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received August 30, 10 a.m.]

File No. 367.11/199

[174] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 30, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/678

[175] The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, August 7, 1914. [Received September 1.]

File No. 763.72/725

[176] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 20, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received September 2, 12:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/722

[177] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, September 2, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received September 3, 1:20 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/751

[178] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 3, 1914, 4 a.m. [Received 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/19

[179] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, September 3, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 763.72/788

[180] The Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/357

[181] The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, July 31, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 763.72111/373

[182] The Consul at Saloniki (Kehl) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Saloniki, July 31, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 867.00/642

[183] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, September 4, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received September 5, 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/376

[184] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 18, 1914. [Received September 8.]

File No. 763.72/830

[185] The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State

Belgian Legation, Washington, September 5, 1914. [Received September 8.]

File No. 763.72/816

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) File No. 763.72119/5

[Document 92]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

The President directs me to ask you to personally deliver to His Majesty the Emperor the following communication from the President to His Majesty:

As official head of one of the powers signatory to the Hague convention, I feel it to be my privilege and my duty under Article 3 of that convention to say to you in a spirit of most earnest friendship that I should welcome an opportunity to act in the interest of European peace, either now or at any other time that might be thought more suitable, as an occasion to serve you and all concerned in a way that would afford me lasting cause for gratitude and happiness.

W. J. Bryan

1  The same to the Ambassadors in Russia and Germany and, on August 5, to those in Great Britain and France. On August 5, also, copies of the telegram were handed by the Secretary of State to the representatives of these governments, who had been specially invited to call at the Department for the purpose.

The replies of the different governments, are printed in the order of their receipt, as follows:

France: received August 7, 6:10 a.m., p. 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]. Austria-Hungary: received August 8, 5 a.m., pp. 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116].

Great Britain: received August 8, 5 a.m., p. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116].

Germany: received August 15, 7:30 p.m., pp. 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135].

Russia: received August 27, 1:45 p.m., pp. 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 78–9 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168].

In connection with this offer, see also the communications from:

Guatemala: received August 10, p. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123].

Italy: received August 11, 5:30 p.m., p. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125].

Spain: received August 17, 9:30 a.m., pp. 63–4 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/10

[Document 93]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 4, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 7:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

At opening Reichstag Chancellor announced Germany was compelled to violate neutrality Belgium come what may. Also that if England remained neutral no attack by German fleet would be made on north coast France or French merchant marine. Not molesting French merchant marine to be in return for similar agreement as to German merchant marine. Credit of five hundred milliards plus three hundred million marks voted without opposition and with great enthusiasm. No foreigners are permitted to leave Germany until mobilization over. No military news of importance. French Ambassador leaving and is sent out via Austrian Crowds in streets excitable and make many attacks on alleged Russians. I think war with England question of hours.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/116

[Document 94]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 4, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received 11:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

263. The Counselor of the German Embassy has informed Mr. Laughlin that the German Ambassador will give Germany’s answer to England’s ultimatum to-morrow and that he expects to leave London on Thursday morning, when the German Embassy will be turned over to me.

The German Naval Attaché has just told Commander Symington that he regards war with England as certain and that he has so telegraphed his Government. He remarked that every hour that Germany could now gain was of very great value and that for this reason Germany might temporize with England somewhat.

The Austrian Ambassador called on me this morning and made all arrangements to turn over his Embassy to me, expressing his expectation to leave London very soon.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/115

[Document 95]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 5, 1914, 2 a.m.
[Received August 4, 11:59 p.m.]

[Telegram]

269. It is everywhere understood that war with Germany begins at midnight to-night although no formal declaration will be made till to-morrow morning.

Rumors reach me from apparently trustworthy sources, which however now unconfirmed, that a large English force will be landed in Belgium between midnight and to-morrow morning and that the French and English fleets have united in the North Sea and that a naval battle with the German fleet is expected at any time.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72/114

[Document 96]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 5, 1914.
[Received 12:40 a.m.]

[Telegram]

271. I have received at this moment, 1:40 a.m., August 5, a note from the Foreign Office dated August 4 informing me that a state of war exists between Great Britain and Germany.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/130

[Document 97]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 4, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 5, 1:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

265. Sir Edward Grey has just informed me that his Government has this afternoon sent an ultimatum to the German Government expiring at midnight to-night. The ultimatum is that Germany must withdraw her demands made of Belgium and respect the treaty insuring the integrity of Belgium. (The hour of the expiration of the ultimatum was given in strict confidence to me.)

Sir Edward explained at length the designs of Germany. If Belgium were acquired, then of course Holland would be, then Denmark. The Swedish Minister had informed him to-day that Germany had made overtures to his country to join the German side. The Germans had made proposals to England to secure English neutrality which England regarded impossible. Sir Edward said: “All governments must rest on mutual agreements and the sacredness of treaties is all that separates us from unorganized society. England’s position becomes impossible if we accede to the violation of the treaty insuring Belgium’s neutrality.”

During his long explanation made in the most impressive way tears came into his eyes as he declared that he was heart-broken to think that what he had so long and earnestly striven for had now failed. “It gives one the feeling of a life [of] wasted effort.”

He asked me to convey this information to the President and he hoped that he might ask the attitude and courtesies of neutrality on our part. He accepted with thanks your offer to take over British interests in Berlin and Vienna when the time comes.

American Ambassador

Memorandum of the Office of the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/368

[Document 98]

Memorandum of the Office of the Secretary of State

Department of State,
Washington, August 5, 1914.

The Belgian Government on the afternoon of August 5, 1914, presented the following:

Germans have penetrated upon Belgian territory; neutrality violated. Inform Government of United States that Belgium will resist by force.

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/147

[Document 99]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 5, 1914, 9 a.m.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Seat of Government may be transferred to Antwerp within the fortifications. In that case diplomatic corps may follow. Has Department any instructions for me on this subject?

Whitlock

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/9

[Document 100]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, August 5, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The neutrality of Denmark proclaimed August 4.

Magruder

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/6

[Document 101]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 6, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 11:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 4, 7 p.m.1 Have asked audience through Minister for Foreign Affairs stating reason. He replied offer comes too late for Russia, should have been made earlier. Austria only country where it can help now. Audience with the Emperor uncertain on account of numerous engagements and approaching departure for Moscow where he will remain some time.

Wilson

1 See footnote, ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/6

[Document 102]

The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State

Italian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 4, 1914.
[Received August 6.]

[Translation]

No. 1166]

By order of my Government, I have the honor to bring to your excellency’s knowledge that, in the face of the actual conflict among several European powers, Italy, being in a state of peace with all the contending parties, intends to remain neutral, consequently pledging herself to observe the duties that according to the laws in existence and the principles of international law arise from such state of neutrality.

While informing your excellency of the above, I avail [etc.]

Borghetti

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/189

[Document 103]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 6, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

284. I have just heard a credible rumor that Austria has informed Germany that Austria will not join Germany in hostility to Great Britain. This fits in with what the Austrian Ambassador told me yesterday. I am now trying to verify this rumor.

Another rumor in diplomatic circles is that there is a likelihood that Italy may join France and England.

I hear that great Jewish bankers of the Continent, as well of Great Britain, are being forced to give their help to England, France and Russia. It seems to me of the very greatest importance that no belligerent power should have wireless stations on our shores and that no belligerent ships should leave our ports under guise of merchantmen.

All Europe is in the swiftest and most desperate war in history and events happen hourly that we are accustomed to think of as possible only in months.

The quickest action everywhere in the world is necessary.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 124.551/9a

[Document 104]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, August 6, 1914, 7:36 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 5, 9 a.m. Move Legation if desirable.

Bryan

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 701.0055/1

[Document 105]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 6, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 7:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Diplomatic corps convened for this evening to discuss subject of my August 5, 9 a.m. Care of Americans requires my constant attention. The Tennessee 1 is about to arrive at Ostend, therefore I feel that I can render more real service by remaining here. I should like Department’s views.

Whitlock

1 Warship bringing gold for the relief of American citizens.

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 701.0055

[Document 106]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, undated.
[Received August 6, 1914, 11:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Diplomatic corps to-night decided in principle that in event of Court’s moving to Antwerp it will follow, but that Legations will remain in Brussels. In many, perhaps most instances, chiefs of mission will remain in Brussels, especially those representing neutral powers, who, like Spanish Minister and myself, are or may be entrusted with protection of interests of belligerent powers. Many will remain to assist their colonies. In such cases they will be represented at Antwerp by secretaries or attachés with the work we have to do. It will be inadvisable if not impossible for Mr. Gibson or myself to leave here if transfer should be made soon. Unless instructed to the contrary I shall explain situation to Minister for Foreign Affairs and endeavor to arrange some practical means of communication perhaps through Consul General at Antwerp until such time as Mr. Gibson or I may be able to go.

Whitlock

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/192

[Document 107]

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Russian Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, undated.
[Received August 6, 1914, 11:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I have the honor to inform your excellency that Austria-Hungary has declared war on Russia.

Bakhméteff

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/7

[Document 108]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 6, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 7, 6:10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to your August 5, 11 a.m.1 Following is translation of reply to President’s message which I delivered personally to-day to the President of the Republic:

In reply to the message which you have kindly charged the eminent Ambassador of the United States to convey to me on your behalf, I am happy, Mr. President, that the present circumstances give a new proof of that love of peace with which France is ever inspired. For its preservation, the Government has made every sacrifice compatible with its dignity and its honor. Notwithstanding repeated provocations and numerous violations of territory, it has refused to be the aggressor. It was attacked at the same time that the territory of neutral powers was being violated.

I highly appreciate the thought, which in this instance as in others, has inspired the head of the great American Republic. You may be certain that the French Government and people will see in this act a new evidence of the interest you bear in the destiny of France.

Herrick

1 See footnote, ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/198

[Document 109]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, August 7, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received 6:10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Denmark has mined channel connecting North Sea and Baltic and is secretly mobilizing army.

Magruder

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/221

[Document 110]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 6, 1914, 9 p.m.
[Received August 7, 6:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Austro-Hungarian Ambassador at five evening informed Minister of Foreign Affairs of Austria’s declaration of war against Russia. He then asked me to take charge of Austrian interests and in accordance with Department’s instructions I accepted and have asked permission of Minister of Foreign Affairs. Have notified consuls to act accordingly.

Department’s August 5, 8 p.m. No ships leaving Wasa or other ports for Sweden. Some Americans have left for Stockholm overland via Tornea long and severe journey. Hope to arrange in a few days for transport [?] of the rest of the Americans, about 200, who are very impatient. Embassy staff in spite of temporary [assistance] entirely unable to properly handle immense amount of Embassy work. Even without Austria this will become greater daily. Hope Department will be able to send assistance. Situation quiet here and no street disturbances due to very strict measures.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 701.0055/1

[Document 111]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 6, 5 p.m. Use your judgment on matter referred to

Bryan

The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/248

[Document 112]

The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, August 7, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received August 8, 4:50 a.m.]

[Telegram]

A decision of the Egyptian Council of Ministers was announced yesterday to the effect that the British Army of Occupation in Egypt renders the country liable to be attacked by the enemies of Great Britain in consequence of which war measures have been adopted and the British forces have been instructed [intrusted?] with the defense of Egypt. Country is quiet and at present Americans are in no danger.

Knabenshue

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/9

[Document 113]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, August 7, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 8, 5 a.m.]

[Telegram]

At Schönbrunn this morning I personally presented to Emperor the message of President Wilson.1 Interview was attended by every evidence of appreciative interest. Emperor inquired about Mexican situation and I made bold enough to say my Government has averted a war that had been already entered upon.

The following message to President placed in my hands by His Majesty:

I thank the President of the Republic of America for his friendly message which corresponds entirely with the peaceful sentiments which have guided me during my entire reign. Austria-Hungary will certainly accept with gratitude and in accord with its allies the mediation of your Government at such time as the honor of the flag will permit and when the objects of the war shall be attained.

Penfield

1 See footnote, ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/8

[Document 114]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 7, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 8, 5 a.m.]

[Telegram]

298. I have just come from a long conversation with Sir Edward Grey. He explained at length why England went to war only because war was forced upon her and therefore without any object except to keep her faith and to preserve her place among the nations. She will welcome mediation whenever a favorable time comes. If the war be brief, the chance may come quickly. If it prove a long-drawn, equal struggle, a chance may come when this fact becomes apparent. Sir Edward was most appreciative of the President’s offer and requested me to convey the British Government’s thanks.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/10

[Document 115]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 7, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received August 8, 5 a.m.]

[Telegram]

299. Your August 5, 11 a.m.1 I have delivered directly to the King the message of the President. His Majesty expressed most earnestly his thanks and requested me to convey them to the President. He talked long and appreciatively and he expressed the hope that an occasion would come when the President’s offer of mediation might be accepted.

Page

1 see footnote, ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

The Ottoman Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/17

[Document 116]

The Ottoman Embassy to the Secretary of State

The Imperial Ottoman Embassy has the honor to inform the Department of State that the Imperial Ottoman Government has decided to observe strict neutrality in the European conflict now being waged.

The general mobilization which was ordered at the same time is in the nature of a purely precautionary measure destined to insure the safety of the Ottoman territories.

Ottoman Embassy, Washington, August 8, 1914.

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/252

[Document 117]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 9, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received 5 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I have received a telegram apparently from my colleague at The Hague in French and German without cipher code or other evidence of authenticity saying that German Minister there had asked him to send to me for communication to Belgian Government the text of a proposal of German Government in which that power after promising [praising?] Belgian military spirit and conduct offers in order to prevent further effusion of blood to agree to any condition which would allow Germany to hold Liége as a base of operations provided that Belgium will detach herself from France and cease to oppose Germany’s further operations against that nation. The proposal solemnly assures Belgium that if she complies Germany will bind herself to respect integrity of Belgian territory. It is in effect a repetition of the ultimatum that Belgium rejected. The telegram says that our Ambassador at Berlin approved the suggestion that I present the proposal.

The proposal was so remarkable that I have telegraphed my colleague at The Hague asking whether the telegram is authentic, stating my disinclination to present proposal which in its present form is open to repudiation.

While not prepared to assume the grave responsibility of presenting so important a proposal without Department’s authority or proof of authenticity, I have ventured in a purely personal and confidential way to allow the Minister for Foreign Affairs and his immediate advisers to read original copy of the telegram as received by me and from their remarks I am convinced that the formal communication of this proposal would be deeply resented by the Belgian Government.

I cannot too strongly impress upon the Department my profound conviction that the formal communication of the proposal would deeply offend national susceptibilities in this tense hour. While preserving of course the strictest neutrality and holding ourselves ever ready to render all possible service in the rôle which we shall be called upon ultimately to assume in arranging a peace, I am persuaded that our prestige [and] power for good in Belgium would be seriously impaired by any semblance of identification with so cynical a proposal.

It will be observed that this is not in any sense a proposal on which an honorable mediation could be undertaken. It is not a proposal for peace but of new alliances for war.

Whitlock

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/253

[Document 118]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 9, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 12:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My August 9, 2[1] a.m. I learn definitely, though quite informally, this morning that the Belgian Government would reject proposal if presented.

Whitlock

The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/18

[Document 119]

The Norwegian Minister (Bryn) to the Secretary of State

Norwegian Legation,
Seal Harbor, Maine, August 9, 1914.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram—Translation]

By order of my Government I have the honor to make to your excellency the following communication:

War having broken out among several foreign powers, the Norwegian and Swedish Governments have mutually declared their firm intention to maintain, each for itself, to the last extremity, during the state of war thus brought about, their neutrality toward all the belligerent powers. The two Governments have also exchanged formal assurances with a view to precluding the possibility of either Government taking hostile measures against the other by reason of the state of war existing in Europe.

Bryn

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/310

[Document 120]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, August 10, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Austria-Hungary declared war against Montenegro 9th instant.

[File copy not signed].

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/306

[Document 121]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 10, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 11:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My colleague at The Hague informs me that memorandum referred to in my August 9, 6 [1] a.m. was authentic.1 I learn quite confidentially from the Foreign Office, however, that text has been presented to the Belgian Government by an individual requested to do so by the Netherlands Government. Answer indignantly rejecting it is now being prepared.2 We are thus spared further embarrassment and the subject is disposed of so far as we are concerned.

Whitlock

1  Ante p. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

2 see the Belgian Minister’s note of September 5, post, pp.97–8 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

The Guatemalan Minister (Méndez) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/11

[Document 122]

The Guatemalan Minister (Méndez) to the Secretary of State

[Translation]

The Guatemalan Minister is in receipt of the following telegram from the President of Guatemala:

Approach with judgment and prudence the enlightened Government to which you are accredited, as well as the other Latin-American representatives, to promote acceptance of the idea that all the nations of this American continent, under the leadership of the United States of America, which is always to be found in the van, should endeavor to bring the European war to the earliest possible end by proposing the conclusion of peace, if not possible immediately, at least when the first favorable opportunity offers.

Manuel Estrada Cabrera

The Guatemalan Minister will be pleased and honored to receive the valuable suggestions of his excellency the Secretary of State on the important subject of the foregoing telegram, which he considers to be a felicitous echo of the Most Excellent President Wilson’s humane and generous initiative in his message to the sovereigns and heads of the belligerent states of the 5th of August, 1914.

Guatemalan Legation, Washington, August 9, 1914.
[Received August 10.]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/334

[Document 123]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, undated.
[Received August 11, 1914, 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Austro-Hungarian Government to-day gave French Ambassador passports.

Penfield

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/12

[Document 124]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, undated.
[Received August 11, 1914, 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

For some time told by Minister of Posts and Telegraphs and by the Department that no cipher cablegram could go. Sending this on chance. In a conversation with Minister for Foreign Affairs I suggested unofficially that the President might be able some time to render mediatory service in behalf of peace. He said this time would probably come, though it was not yet arrived, when the President could be of great service and then he would be very glad to exchange views. There is a rumor that San Giuliano will resign on account of illness.

Nelson Page

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/344

[Document 125]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 10, 1914.
[Received August 12.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: I was surprised to read in the press the declarations which the representatives of Germany and Austria saw fit to make to your excellency as to the way hostilities were started. It seems to me that in communicating their declarations to the press the representatives of those two powers did not realize the objectionable features of such polemics arising in a great neutral country between the representatives of foreign powers at war. This has not heretofore been the practice of diplomacy. I shall not make it mine, and believe, in the present instance, that no attack is worthy of retort. I should, however, consider myself guilty of dereliction if, after becoming aware of incorrect statements made to the head of the foreign policy of this country, I should not rectify them in accordance with the facts as they have come to me from my Government.

The assertions of the Chargé d’Affaires of Germany at Washington agree in substance, anyway, with the written declarations of the Ambassador of that power to the French Minister of Foreign Affairs. When, on the 4th of August, Mr. de Schoen asked for his passports and announced that the German Empire considered itself to be in a state of war with France, he alleged that the German executive and military authorities had positive knowledge of hostile acts said to have been committed on German territory by French military aviators charged with flying and throwing bombs over German territory; the Ambassador added that aviators were also reported as having violated Belgium’s neutrality by flying over her territory.

The French Minister of Foreign Affairs immediately disputed those unfounded charges and called attention to the fact that he had, as early as August 2, addressed a note to the German Government in which he protested against the characteristic violations of the French frontier that were being committed, for two days, by detachments of German troops. On the same day, the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, in his instructions to the Ambassador of the Republic at Berlin requesting him to ask for his passports, directed him to enter formal protest against the violation of the neutrality of Luxemburg by German troops, made known by the Prime Minister of Luxemburg, and against the ultimatum delivered to the Belgian Government by the Minister of Germany at Brussels to force on that Government the violation of Belgium’s neutrality and demand facilities on Belgian territory for military operations against France.

The foregoing, as well as events subsequent to the beginning of hostilities between Germany and France, makes it plain that the Berlin Government maneuvered with the intention of shifting upon France, in the face of all evidence to the contrary, the responsibility for the act of aggression, and the very act itself, with the sole purpose of influencing and determining the action of the Rome Government and diverting to its own advantage the opinion of the world.

Be pleased [etc.]

Clausse

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/365

[Document 126]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 11, 1914.
[Received August 13.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: The Government of the Republic has positive knowledge, despite the declarations of the Austro-Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and of the Ambassador of Austria at Paris to the contrary, that Austrian troops have entered Germany on their way to the French frontier. These troops enabling the Berlin Government to use the forces whose place they take in German territory had to be considered by my Government as unquestionably operating against France, in point of law and of fact.

The Ambassador of the Republic at Vienna has consequently been ordered to ask for his passports. The Ambassador of Austria-Hungary at Paris has likewise asked for his passports and every arrangement has been made by my Government to insure his departing under the usual conditions of international courtesy.

I have the honor to bring these events to your excellency’s knowledge.

Be pleased [etc.]

Clausse

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/369

[Document 127]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 12, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received August 13, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 4, 7 p.m.1 Emperor leaving for Moscow requests President’s communication be presented in writing through Minister for Foreign Affairs. Shall I comply?2

Wilson

1 See footnote, ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

2 Answer, “Yes,” telegraphed August 13, 8 p.m.

The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/397

[Document 128]

The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, August 13, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to your cipher telegram August 12, 4 p.m.,3 was informed to-day by the British Chargé d’Affaires that Great Britain has declared war against Austria. Communications have ceased between Egyptian Government and German diplomatic representative and consuls and similar action will be taken with regard to Austrian representatives.

Knabenshue

3 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/380

[Document 129]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 13, 1914.
[Received 5:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

350. The Foreign Office has just notified me formally that a state of war exists between Great Britain and Austria.

American Ambassador

The Consul at Georgetown, British Guiana (Chamberlin), to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/428

[Document 130]

The Consul at Georgetown, British Guiana (Chamberlin), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Georgetown, British Guiana, July 30, 1914.
[Received August 14.]

No. 13]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith in duplicate the Official Gazette (Extraordinary) of British Guiana of to-day’s date, containing a proclamation issued by His Excellency Sir Walter Egerton, Governor and Commander in Chief in and over the Colony of British Guiana, Vice Admiral of the same, calling out the active and reserve force of Demerara.

This step was taken in view of the European situation, and it is understood that instructions were received by His Excellency Sir Walter Egerton from the Secretary of State, London, ordering the instant mobilization of the local forces. Officers of police and artillery were immediately summoned to Government House when the orders for mobilization were announced.

I have [etc.]

G. E. Chamberlin

[Enclosure]

Proclamation printed in the Official-Gazette (Extraordinary) of British Guiana, Georgetown, July 30, 1914

By His Excellency Sir Walter Egerton, Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief in and over the Colony of British Guiana, Vice-Admiral of the same, &c., &c., &c.

whereas there is reason to apprehend that this Colony may be invaded:

I, therefore, by virtue of the powers in me vested by section 126 of the Militia Ordinance, No. 12 of 1891, do hereby call out every member of the Active and Reserve Force of Demerara, for actual military service, and direct them to assemble at Fort William Frederick, Georgetown, and to remain so assembled, and to march and to act according to orders for the period of one week or until further orders in this behalf are given.

Given under my Hand and the Public Seal of the Colony at the Guiana Public Buildings, Georgetown, Demerara, this 29th day of July, 1914, and in the Fifth year of His Majesty’s Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING!

By His Excellency’s Command.

G. C. De Rinzy ,
Commandant

The Consul at Cardiff (Lathrop) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/399

[Document 131]

The Consul at Cardiff (Lathrop) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Cardiff, Wales, July 30, 1914.
[Received August 14.]

No. 138]

Sir: I have the honor to advise the Department that the British Admiralty have to-day sent a representative to Cardiff who has informed all shippers of high-grade Admiralty coals to the effect that the Government demands first option on all shipments. A certain number of cargoes have already been taken over under this order, and are being laden for Government account in vessels chartered by the Admiralty on time limit. The price of the coal is about $5.30 per long ton, and shippers are being indemnified against private claims for breach of contract. The chartering terms are $3.27 per gross registered ton, per month, for vessels up to 2,200 tons, and $3.03 for larger vessels. These coaling ships will, of course, follow the fleet, the whereabouts of which the British papers are not permitted to state.

The customs authorities have been prohibited from extending information as to the destination of these collier vessels, and as to quantities of coal carried. Local newspaper reports have been censored and print no details as to Government purchases or shipments of coal.

I have [etc.]

Lorin A. Lathrop

The Consul at Cork (Queenstown), Ireland (Frost), to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/421

[Document 132]

The Consul at Cork (Queenstown), Ireland (Frost), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Cork, July 31, 1914.
[Received August 14.]

No. 13]

I have the honor to transmit herewith in triplicate a report entitled, “Military and naval activity in the south of Ireland,” with a triplicate enclosure issued by the British Admiralty transferring Queenstown Harbor to military authority.1 As the essential facts in this connection will undoubtedly form a part of press despatches to America, and as no American vessels call here ordinarily (except such steamers as will be notified by their companies) I have not thought fit to cable the Department. This despatch may be regarded as a partial response to Consular Instruction No. 300, of April 27, 1914.1 Urgency to catch transatlantic mails has prevented a more thorough report at this time.

I have [etc.]

Wesley Frost

[Enclosure]

MILITARY AND NAVAL ACTIVITY IN THE SOUTH OF IRELAND CONSUL WESLEY FROST, CORK (QUEENSTOWN)

Naval activity has been pronounced in this region for some months in connection with the prevention of the landing of arms for the Nationalist Volunteers and other irregular armed forces. By royal proclamation of December 1913, “gun-running” was prohibited, and since that time the Irish coastal waters have been patrolled incessantly by naval vessels. Queenstown is the seat of the British Admiralty for Ireland, and ordinarily eight cruisers are stationed here, partly used as training-ships for raw recruits. Four torpedo-boats are also here regularly, and scout cruisers, or mine-sweepers (official designation), appear frequently. Among the vessels either stationed here regularly or appearing here occasionally are the following: Endymion, Grafton, Diamond, Theseus, Gibraltar, Falmouth, Hawk, Thunderer, Orion, Monarch, and Conqueror. The cruisers are second or third class, I think, without exception.

The police duty in connection with “gun-running” has kept the harbor virtually empty of these vessels for several weeks past, rarely more than one or two being seen, where formerly there were from five to ten regularly anchored. The Admiralty repair docks for Ireland are located at Haulbowline Island in the harbor, employing from 1,200 to 1,300 men. The recent naval mobilization at Cowes and Southampton drew a proportion of vessels from Queenstown, also. As to the prevention of the landing of arms it is to be noted that in spite of the officious zeal of the naval vessels, daily “gun-running” coups are credibly reported. In fact during the past two days the newspapers have contained accounts of at least eight separate landings of artillery or ammunition. The success of this contravention of the proclamation is interpreted not as an impeachment of the efficiency of the naval vessels, but as an evidence that the British Ministry are not really anxious to enforce the proclamation.

QUEENSTOWN (CORK HARBOR) UNDER MARTIAL LAW

The disquiet in connection with the Irish troubles, however, has suddenly been rendered inconspicuous by the international situation arising from the Austro-Servian War. On yesterday, July 30, 1914, the Admiralty took over the harbor of Queenstown (Cork Harbor), with all its approaches and numerous ramifications, from the civil authorities, the Lord Mayor of Cork and his harbor commissioners. The royal troops throughout this consular district are being shifted very radically and actively, and the reserves in some lines of the service have undoubtedly been called out. The newspapers have been urgently requested by the military and naval authorities not to publish news of military movements, etc., without first obtaining official authentication.

The summer encampments of regular troops in the district around Fermoy and Mitchelstown in County Cork have been during the past two days broken up with the utmost celerity. The regiments stationed there included the South Staffordshires, York and Lancasters, Royal Fusiliers, Rifle Brigade, the 12th, 33d, and 38th Companies of the Royal Engineers, and companies or corps of the Army Service Corps and the College of Surgeons Training Corps. The troops usually stationed at Limerick were hastily recalled to that city. Troops have been sent to Valentia Island, County Kerry, and to Kinsale, County Cork. All along the south and west coast the Coast-Guards have been called to Chatham (on the Thames, England), their places being taken by Royal Irish Constabulary or pensioners. A number of trainloads of troops have been dispatched toward Dublin. A contingent of several companies has come to Queenstown to reinforce Forts Carlisle and Camden at the Harbor entrance, and also in garrison for Spike Island.

Aside from Queenstown the chief center on the southern coast is Castletown Berehaven, in Bantry Bay, County Cork, where Bere Island is fortified, and has during the past two days been reinforced with hundreds of troops, and by the presence of the warship Wyndham . Several hundred shells for the big guns there have been received, and special corps of electrical engineers for the searchlights and telegraphic apparatus are en route from London. It is considered that Berehaven will control and protect the transatlantic shipping in the event of a general European war. It should be noted by American naval authorities, however, that the popular opinion is here that in case Germany ever seeks to use Ireland as a base she will land at Killary Bay, between County Galway and County Mayo, which is unprotected in a naval sense but offers excellent harborage and easy control of railways to Dublin.

At Queenstown the searchlights on Forts Carlisle, Camden, and Westhaven have been kept playing over the approaches and harbor throughout the last two nights, and field equipment and ammunition is being deposited on all the little creeks and estuaries by tugs requisitioned from local steamship companies. The troops have been issued metal name discs, and books stating how they may make wills on the field of battle and other similar information, these discs and books not having been issued since the Boer War.

The martial control of Queenstown Harbor involves rigorous supervision of all traffic, as will be seen from the notice to mariners issued yesterday by Admiral Sir Charles Coke, senior naval officer on the coast of Ireland, from the Admiralty House, Queenstown, of which copies are forwarded herewith.1 No movement of vessels whatever is permitted during fog or during the hours of official night, of which latter an elaborate table for every day of the year is included in the notice. Pilotage is compulsory for incoming vessels. An examining steamer is constantly stationed at the harbor entrance, flying a special flag, and naval patrol boats are policing the interior waters of the harbor, some of them requisitioned from the Clyde Shipping Company. Any of these boats is authorized to fire upon vessels disregarding their warnings or instructions. The White Star S. S. Cedric , which anchored in the harbor mouth at 8:15 a.m. this morning, was warned to retire and reapproach flying proper signals, but this instruction was waived. Every possible consideration will be shown to transatlantic liners. Just at this writing the City of Cork Steam Packet Company’s S. S. Inniscarra , 1,420 tons, has attempted to ignore the warning of the examining steamer, and has been brought to by a number of shots. She has been taken possession of by a force of marines, and is proceeding through the harbor under their charge. Notice has been given that the signal lights on Spit Light and Bar Rock are liable to be discontinued without further warning.

In official circles all this activity is taken to be primarily a precautionary measure to insure readiness in case of actual emergency, but secondarily (and of almost equal importance fan opportune demonstration of Britain’s efficiency in rapid mobilization, and in a measure a mere practice drill.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/385

[Document 133]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, August 1, 1914.
[Received August 14.]

No. 796]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the situation which has arisen within the last few days in Europe is being watched with the greatest anxiety in Denmark. There is great agitation in Copenhagen and a general demand that the Government shall immediately mobilize the army. The Ministry, however, in order that Germany may not be unduly antagonized, seems disinclined to take such a step. Nevertheless it was decided, at a state council held last night, to mobilize the troops most necessary for the defense of Copenhagen, namely 1,400 sailors and 1,300 men of the coast artillery.

Late last night, the Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish Governments simultaneously issued similar declarations of neutrality, the Danish declaration being worded as follows:

As war has been declared between Austria-Hungary and Servia, the Royal Government declares, under date of July 31, that it has decided to observe a strict neutrality as far as Denmark is concerned. With regard to the neutrality requirements which must be observed, reference is made to the Royal decree of December 20, 1912.

Both houses of Parliament have been summoned to meet to-night in order to consider the situation and for the purpose of enacting legislation having in view the enforcement of Denmark’s neutrality.

I have [etc.]

Alexander E. Magruder

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/433

[Document 134]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 14, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 15, 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The following was communicated personally to me by the Emperor in writing:

For the President personally.

1. His Royal Highness Prince Henry was received by His Majesty King George V in London who empowered him to transmit to me verbally that England would remain neutral if war broke out on the Continent involving Germany and France, Austria, and Russia. This message was telegraphed to me by my brother from London after his conversation with His Majesty the King and repeated verbally on the 29th July.

2. My Ambassador in London transmitted a message from Sir Edward Grey to Berlin saying that only in case France was likely to be crushed England would interfere.

3. On the 30th my Ambassador in London reported that Sir Edward Grey in the course of a private (sic) conversation told him that if the conflict remained localized between Russia—not Servia—and Austria, England would not move, but if we mixed in the fray she would take quick decisions and grave maneuvers; in other words, if I left my ally Austria in the lurch to fight alone England would not touch me.

4. This communication being directly counter to the King’s message to me I telegraphed to His Majesty on the 29th or 30th, thanking him for kind message through my brother and begging him to use all his power to keep France and Russia, his allies, from making any warlike preparations calculated to disturb my work on mediation, stating that I was in constant communication with His Majesty the Czar. In the evening the King kindly answered that he had ordered his Government to use every possible influence with his allies to repudiate taking any provocative military measures. At the same time His Majesty asked me I should transmit to Vienna the British proposal that Austria was to take Belgrade and a few other Servian towns and a strip of country as a main mise to make sure that the Servian promises on paper should be fulfilled in reality. This proposal was in the same moment telegraphed to me from Vienna for London quite in conjunction with the British proposal; besides I had telegraphed to His Majesty the Czar the same as an idea of mine before I received the two communications from Vienna and London. As both were of the same opinion I immediately transmitted the telegrams vice versa to Vienna and London. I felt that I was able to tide the question over and was happy at the peaceful outlook.

5. While I was preparing a note to His Majesty the Czar the next morning to inform him that Vienna, London and Berlin were agreed about the treatment of affairs, I received a telephone message from His Excellency the Chancellor that in the night before the Czar had given the order to mobilize the whole of the Russian army which was of course also meant against Germany, whereas up till then the southern armies had been mobilized against Austria.

6. In a telegram from London my Ambassador informed me he understood British Government would guarantee neutrality of France and wished to know whether Germany would refrain from attack. I telegraphed to His Majesty the King personally that mobilization being already carried out could not be stopped, but if His Majesty could guarantee with his armed forces the neutrality of France I would refrain from attacking her, leave her alone and employ my forces elsewhere. His Majesty answered that he thought my offer was based on a misunderstanding and as far as I can make out Sir Edward Grey never took my offer into serious consideration. He never answered it. Instead he declared England had to defend Belgium neutrality, which had to be violated by Germany on strategical grounds news having been received that France was already preparing to enter Belgium and the King of the Belgians having refused my petition for a free passage under guarantee of his country’s freedom. I am most grateful for the President’s message.1

Wilhelm
Gerard

1 see footnote, ante, p. 42. [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/442

[Document 135]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 13, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 16, 3:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

General mobilization has been ordered. Moratorium established. Notwithstanding this all banks continue making cash payments in amounts. Parliament adjourned till November. French and Austrian guardships have departed.

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/439

[Document 136]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 7, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 16, 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Turkish Cabinet divided. Minister[s] of Marine and Finance favor France; Minister of War influenced by German military commission favors alliance with Germany. Sentiment developing in favor of an invasion of the Caucasus. Minister of the Interior counsels moderation and neutrality. It is feared that Turkey, taking advantage of general conditions, may abrogate capitulations.

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/468

[Document 137]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 8, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 16, 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Local Turkish press expresses with considerable emphasis great disappointment at British Government’s having deprived Turkey of dreadnought. Censorship established on newspapers and telegrams and it is threatened that Embassy telegrams in cipher will not be accepted. Treasurer of American missions and of Constantinople Girls College is without available funds and desires privilege to have trustees in Boston [informed?]. He requests you are authorized to send him £6,000 on cruiser and is anxious to know immediately if he can expect this relief. In assisting send me sufficient funds so that with your approval I can also assist missionary and educational institutions. Navigation, latest information, is increasing and gold shipment is imperative to provide for needs of American institutions, Scorpion and stranded travelers, as Constantinople banks have abandoned all hopes of receiving help from financial centers and fear sequestration of their gold by Ottoman Government.

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/447

[Document 138]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 11, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received August 16, 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Turkey [purchased?] Goeben and Breslau. They have already passed through Dardanelles. German Ambassador informs me Admiral and other high officers of Goeben will enter Turkish service. German military mission to be duplicated by naval mission. This completely changes situation here. Most likely will precipitate Turkish Government into participation of general war. Are you sending any warships to Europe and if so to what localities? As gold is required everywhere to help American citizens, why not have one ship bring financial relief to all and then remain where most needed?

Morgenthau

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) File No. 763.72119/13a

[Document 139]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State,
Washington, August 16, 1914, 11 p.m.

[Telegram]

Have received answers from the German Emperor, Austrian Emperor, King of Great Britain and President of France to President’s, offer mediation. Your message reported answer given by Foreign Office but stated that the Czar was out of the city. Do you know if the President’s message has been delivered to him? You might discreetly ask whether any further answer is to be expected.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/452

[Document 140]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Athens, August 3, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 17, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Order of mobilization expected to-morrow or next day. Fleet is now near the Dardanelles. Government has enough coal, but private supplies only sufficient for fifteen days. Austrian and Italian steamers have been requisitioned by their respective Governments, but Greek line is still running to Brindisi.

Whitehouse

The Chargé d’Affaires in Spain (Dearing) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/472

[Document 141]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Spain (Dearing) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
San Sebastian, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 17, 9:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Minister of State during an interview yesterday afternoon regarding financial situation of stranded Americans, entered into the general subject of financial relations between Spain and the United States and expressed a hearty desire that they should be made more extensive, more intimate and more mutually helpful.

Digressing somewhat but giving it as his reason for so expressing himself, Minister said substantially the following:

He thought United States and Spain were the only great nations that could remain strictly neutral during the present European conflict, which, he intimated, would be long and leave the combatants exhausted. He expressed the opinion that the great duty to restore peace and of upholding and advancing civilization would devolve upon the United States and Spain. He is, therefore, anxious that every advantage of the present opportune moment should be taken to strengthen and to extend relationships of all kinds between the two nations. I concurred in a general way, which is almost diplomatically dutiful, in the Minister’s expression of opinion [that] industrial troubles which seem to be impending on account of unemployment [are] due to some extent to the lack of shipping facilities and a certain demoralization of commerce, particularly fruit exportation and cotton importation, and said that [I] would then transmit his views to my Government. The Minister’s remarks, while in most general terms and apparently somewhat impromptu, seemed to me significant. I think the Department would be justified in discerning in them a hint that Spain would be receptive of any proposal for the possible collaboration in such efforts as the United States may make to bring about peace in Europe. The Minister expressed a hope for frequent exchange of views with the Embassy, said he was glad the Ambassador was returning and incidentally but at some length indicated [Spain would keep aloof] from present struggle but would finally be aligned with the nations of the Triple Entente against Austria and Germany.

Dearing

1 Received in very confused order. Reconstructed by transposition of some passages

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/486

[Document 142]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, August 11, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received August 17, 11:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am informed from a reliable source that at the last conference between King and ministers with leaders of political parties the agreement of thirty-five years ago between Roumania and Austria-Hungary was brought up. This agreement is similar to that between Austria and Italy and provides that in case Austria-Hungary is provoked, Roumania must join Austria-Hungary. Because no provocation was given and no advice was asked before war was declared against Servia, Roumania considers itself free to act. Roumania’s action depends on that of Bulgaria. Bombardment of Belgrade continues and forces are advancing into Bosnia.

Vopicka

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/460

[Document 143]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 13, 1914.
[Received August 17.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: The French Government on yesterday made to the Austro-Hungarian Government the following declaration:

After declaring war on Servia and thereby first initiating hostilities in Europe, the Austro-Hungarian Government, without any provocation from the Government of the French Republic has put itself in a state of war with France. (1) After Germany had successively declared war on Russia and France, Austria-Hungary intervened in the conflict by declaring war on Russia which was already fighting on France’s side. (2) According to many trustworthy reports, Austria-Hungary has sent troops to the German frontier under conditions which constitute a direct menace to France.

In the presence of those facts taken together the French Government finds itself constrained to declare to the Austro-Hungarian Government that it is about to take every measure that will enable it to meet those acts and menaces.

As the French Ambassador was no longer at Vienna and the Ambassador of Austria-Hungary had departed from Paris, the above-quoted declaration was handed yesterday, August 12, by Sir Edward Grey to the Ambassador of Austria-Hungary at London. On delivering it, Sir Edward Grey told him that Great Britain joined therein and that a state of war between England and Austria-Hungary consequently existed beginning at midnight. All the foregoing measures were taken in the most perfect accord between France and England.

I have [etc.]

Clausse

The Secretary of State to the Guatemalan Minister (Méndez) File No. 763.72119/11

[Document 144]

The Secretary of State to the Guatemalan Minister (Méndez)

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914.

The Secretary of State of the United States of America presents his compliments to the Minister of Guatemala, and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his memorandum of August 9, which he has read with pleasure, quoting a telegram in which His Excellency the President of Guatemala requests the Minister to approach the Government of the United States and the Latin-American representatives accredited to it, with a view to the proposal by all the nations of the American continent, under the leadership of the United States and at the first favorable opportunity, of the conclusion of the European war.

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 124.551/10

[Document 145]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 17, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received August 18, 7 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Government will be removed to Antwerp to-night or to-morrow. As I shall be charged with protection of British interests in addition to care of German interests and our own work, I shall remain in Brussels, in accordance with views expressed in your August 7, 7 p.m. I shall arrange for communication through the Consul General at Antwerp and as events permit shall make visits of courtesy to Antwerp. Belgian Government for this purpose will informally recognize Consul General at Antwerp in a pseudo-diplomatic capacity. The Spanish Minister, charged with French and Russian interests, will likewise remain here and we shall maintain close relations and act in harmony. Several other ministers will also remain here.

The Austro-Hungarian Minister, thinking of going to Antwerp, asks me to take charge of his Legation, but as his Government is allied with Germany and still maintains diplomatic relations with Belgium his situation does not present itself to me as clearly within the category of a belligerent interest requiring protection. The matter is still under discussion.

Whitlock

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/489

[Document 146]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 17, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 18, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Minister of the Interior and Speaker of Chamber have gone to Bucharest. Grand Vizier told me that they had gone in his place to meet representative of Greece to come to arrangement but it is believed generally that object of visit is to enter into some compact with Roumania and Bulgaria. Minister of Commerce inquired whether Americans could be induced that [to?] ship provisions and printing paper, supply of which is exhausted; that Turkish Government being ready to obligate themselves, they will not requisition any part of the cargoes without paying cash for what they take. They greatly fear a dire famine unless relief comes from America or comes from India in English vessels.

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/491

[Document 147]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 18, 1 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Am still waiting reply to my cipher telegram of August 11, 11 a.m.1 Received to-day telegrams from Consul General at Beirut stating that President Bliss, American College, desires my impressing strongly on Secretary of State grave immediate necessity for the protection of American life and property and that announcement of early arrival of American ships would have wonderfully tranquilizing effect.

Consul General states: “Situation very critical, colleagues urge that only the presence American warships can assure preservation of order. Please advise when can expect.”

Americans in all parts of the Empire fear for their safety. Consider demands of Beirut and Smyrna for battleships fully justified in view of strong anti-Christian feeling fanned among lower classes of Moslems. British Chargé d’Affaires promised me in case of emergency to request his Government to send British war vessels to Beirut and Smyrna until American ships can arrive. Will you request this direct from the British Government?

Russian and French Embassies resent that Goeben and Breslau still flying German flag. They charge Turkey with failure to maintain neutrality. In journalistic circles it is said that Goeben and Breslau are both damaged and Turkey is not willing to pay Germany the sum agreed upon. Representatives here of the Triple Entente charge that Germany is deliberately steering Turkey’s course so as to provoke Russia into a declaration of war.

Morgenthau

1  Ante, p. 62. [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 124.551/10

[Document 148]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 17, 5 p.m. Department approves your course of action.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/522

[Document 149]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, August 19, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Italy seems quietly but earnestly preparing for eventualities. Strong general feeling apparent favoring her taking sides against Austria.

American Embassy

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111N39/2

[Document 150]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Denmark (Magruder) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, August 3, 1914.
[Received August 19, 1914.]

No. 797]

Sir: With reference to my despatch No. 796 of August 1, 1914,1 dealing with the European crisis, I now have the honor to report that, at the meeting of Parliament referred to in the aforesaid despatch, the following laws were enacted: I. Amendment to the Criminal Code of 1866, providing that all acts tending to aid or abet military investigation of other countries in Denmark shall be punished by fine, imprisonment or imprisonment at hard labor for a period not exceeding two years, unless existing laws impose more severe punishment therefor.

II. Law providing that all violations of Denmark’s neutrality shall be punishable offenses.

III. Law authorizing the Minister of Finance to issue Government notes up to the amount of kr. 25,000,000 and further providing that such notes shall be repaid one year after date of issue together with interest at 5 per cent.

IV. Law authorizing the Minister of Finance to transfer to the treasury the state reserve funds and further authorizing the Government to revoke this law by royal decree as soon as it shall appear that the necessity for its existence has ceased.

V. Law authorizing the National Bank of Copenhagen to suspend the redemption of notes in gold until October 1, 1914.

VI. Law authorizing the Minister of Commerce, if he shall deem such action advisable, to issue a decree permitting banks and savings banks to limit payments on their accounts to the sum of kr. 300 a week, except where such payments are in the form of transfers from one account to another or in the form of checks payable to the public treasury. (A decree to this effect was issued on August 2.)

VII. Law authorizing the Minister of Defense to prohibit vessels from entering or leaving the harbor of Copenhagen without a pilot.

The foregoing laws were approved by His Majesty the King yesterday, August 2.

The situation, as far as Denmark is concerned, continues to be viewed with great anxiety. The Government has reluctantly ordered a partial mobilization which has recalled 20,000 reservists to the colors, bringing the total number of men under arms in Denmark up to 35,000.

From a reliable source, I am confidentially informed that the British Government has secretly advised the Danish Government to remain as quiet as possible, assuring it that, should Germany take any offensive steps against Denmark, a British fleet will be in Danish waters within sixteen hours.

I have [etc.]

Alexander R. Magruder

1  Ante, p. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.0012/467

[Document 151]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Athens, August 20, 1914.
[Received August 21, 6:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your August 17, 7 p.m.1 Greek Government willing to sign such a treaty with us provided it is clearly understood that there will be no attempt to make these treaties general, as it could not consent to a similar treaty with any other power. Will take the matter up with the Minister as soon as copy of the Netherlands form for which I have telegraphed Embassy at Rome reaches me, copies sent by Department to the Greek Government never having arrived.

Greek Government also anxious to be kept informed of any regulations made by our Government concerning neutral commerce, merchant vessels of belligerents etc., so that it may conform its attitude as closely as possible to ours.

Minister again assured me that Greece would remain neutral unless Turkey or Bulgaria moved and that having had formal assurances from them he hoped for the best. Public opinion on the contrary is bellicose and regards eventual action by Greece as both necessary and certain.

Whitehouse

1 See footnote, ante, p. 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 124.551/10a

[Document 152]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, August 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

President thinks it very important that American Legation should be removed immediately to Antwerp in order that our representative may be in immediate touch with the Belgian Government.

Bryan

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/570

[Document 153]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, August 21, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 22, 2:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Talaat Bey and President of Chamber are here to induce Roumania to join Turkey in favor of Austria and Germany. It seems unlikely that Roumania will join Turkey as Roumania evinced she is strong enough to act independently.

Vopicka

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/345

[Document 154]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, August 22, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 4:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Political situation here seems unsteady. Appearance of awaiting only decisive action along German borders. Also seems [that while] Government firmly maintaining neutrality, people warmly friendly to France. Meantime making great preparations quietly; about 240,000 men in addition to regular army of 200,000 called out; reported sent to defend northeast border covering Vicenza, Venice and Littoral. Government arranging for supplies; its factories for shirts, etc., rumored running night and day; agents sent to America to buy coal and stores. Apparent danger is Balkans flaming; Roumania at present quiet but dangerous; Turkey showing great unrest; no report confirming promise to disarm Goeben, Breslau; danger of Islam rising. British anxious to hear arrival of 20,000 Indian troops ordered sent to Egypt. Assembling conclave Cardinals may have some effect towards quieting Italy. British Ambassador confirms that Japan’s action definitely limited to China seas, not to enter Pacific except to protect her steamships. Japan seeking medical stores. I referred Japanese Ambassador to America. Albanian situation extremely dangerous.

American Embassy

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/580

[Document 155]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, August 23, 1914, noon.
[Received 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Please send following to office of Naval Intelligence, Navy Department, from Naval Attaché:

Italy steadily preparing with expectation of good excuse arising in Balkans to declare war on [Austria?]. Italian fleet concentrated Taranto. Abruzzi appointed Commander in Chief. Austrian naval vessel Zenta sunk. Reported French-English fleet basing near Corfu.

American Embassy

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/15

[Document 156]

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
San Sebastian, August 23, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received August 24, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Immediately upon my arrival last night I held an extended interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs as intimated in Mr. Dearing’s telegram August 15, 4 p.m.1

Minister for Foreign Affairs is most solicitous to strengthen the cordial relations between the United States and Spain. He reiterated most positively these sentiments and further expressed his earnest desire that the United States and Spain act in close accord looking to the establishment of peace. He expressed Spain’s earnest wish to cooperate with the United States if an opportunity presented itself for the use of our good offices and earnestly urged that Spain might rely on our cordial support if such an opportunity presented itself to her; expressed great horror at the conditions obtaining to-day in Europe and his wish to bring about a cessation of hostilities. There can be no doubt that he expressed the sentiments of his Government. I expressed myself personally as in accord with those sentiments. He expressed further, and independently of the immediate situation, his desire to bring about closer commercial relations between the two countries and added that such union would be productive of great common good.

I cannot but feel that the sincerity of his attitude is further illustrated by Spain’s recent decision to participate in the Panama-Pacific Exposition and that he desired strengthening of the already cordial diplomatic relations. [If this] can be established it will not only greatly facilitate commerce between the two countries but will tend to continue our trade relations with South American Republics. This is a great opportunity for our Government which should not be lost, and therefore suggest, if the Department deems it advisable, that I be instructed to make some expression to the Minister for Foreign Affairs showing our country’s readiness to cooperate with Spain in any efforts towards peace or for humanitarian ends.

Dearing has very recently again brought to the attention of Minister for Foreign Affairs the proposed peace treaty between Spain and United States which matter I shall urge at the first opportunity. Dearing represented that Spain could give no more material proof of her desire to strengthen her relations with United States than her execution of this treaty. I am asking early interview with His Majesty who returns to San Sebastian [the] twenty-sixth, when I shall bring this to his attention.

Spanish sympathy is evidently with the French and English, though she will positively maintain her neutrality. Minister for Foreign Affairs strongly referred to the fact that the United States and Spain, while not the only neutral powers, were practically the only nations whose positive neutrality is so clearly defined and disinterested as to make them acceptable a probable instruments for peace.

The Department is earnestly requested to express to the Spanish Ambassador in Washington the appreciation of our Government of the courtesies extended by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to this Embassy in its recent, heavy tasks and especially in enabling it to secure advance transportation for Americans without funds and to obtain ready money for destitute Americans. This work could not otherwise have been done as efficiently as it was by the Chargé d’Affaires, his office and our consuls in Spain.

Willard

1  Ante, p. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141].

The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72111/357

[Document 157]

The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State

Belgian Legation,
Washington, August 20, 1914.
[Received August 24.]

[Translation]

I have the honor to inform your excellency that the King’s Government has instructed me to bring the following to your excellency’s knowledge.

By the treaty of April 19, 1839, Prussia, France, England, Austria, and Russia declared themselves guarantors of the treaty concluded on that day between His Majesty the King of the Belgians and His Majesty the King of the Netherlands. The treaty provides that “Belgium will form an independent and perpetual neutral State.” Belgium has met all her international obligations: she has performed her duties in a spirit of loyal impartiality; she has spared no effort to maintain and enforce her neutrality.

It therefore caused painful emotion to the King’s Government to learn that the armed forces of Germany, a power which guaranteed our neutrality, have entered the territory of Belgium in violation of the engagements that have been assumed by treaty.

It becomes our duty indignantly to protest against an outrage upon the law of nations which could not have been provoked by any act of ours.

The King’s Government is firmly resolved to repel by every means at its command the attack made on its neutrality and calls to mind that under Article 10 of the convention of The Hague of 1907 respecting the rights and duties of neutral powers and persons in case of war on land, the fact of a neutral power resisting, even by force, attempts to violate its neutrality cannot be regarded as a hostile act.

Be pleased [etc.]

E. Havenith

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/350

[Document 158]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Italy (Jay) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, July 31 1914.
[Received August 24.]

No. 131]

Sir: I have the honor to report as follows upon the present situation in Italy in respect to the war now existing between Austria-Hungary and Servia.

The issuance of the ultimatum to Servia last Friday by the Cabinet of Vienna came as a complete surprise to the Italian Foreign Office. It was at first believed that the ultimatum had been issued with the approval of the German Government, and the Italian press was inclined to resent the fact that their Foreign Office should not have also been consulted, considering this as a reflection upon the dignity and importance of Italy as the third member of the Triple Alliance. Since, however, it now appears that even Germany was not consulted by Austria, this feeling has been succeeded by one of relief that Italy should not have been obliged to express an opinion, and that by thus not committing itself, Italy has been left with freer hands.

The people of Italy, as you are of course aware, still regard Austria as their enemy, following in this respect the traditions of the past generation, and the hope is ever present that some day she will recover Italia irredenta, i. e., the Italian-speaking provinces of Austria on the Adriatic.

Italy is, however, bound to Germany and to Austria by the treaties which form the Triple Alliance, and her special role, in a general European war, would be to attack France, which country would necessarily have had to join Russia against Germany and Austria.

Nevertheless, it is generally believed here, and this belief is reflected in the entire press of Italy, with the single exception of a Roman paper known to be in the pay of Austria, that were a general war to break out, Italy should, and would, remain neutral, notwithstanding her treaty obligations.

It would appear to be clearly against her interests to have Austria emerge victorious from a general war as the dominating power in the Balkans, and therefore there are those who believe it is possible, under certain circumstances, that Italy would not hesitate to prevent such a consummation.

The general impression, moreover, is that were the Government to attempt to carry out Italy’s reported obligations as a member of the Triple Alliance by declaring war, the people as an entire nation would refuse to fight, even indirectly, on behalf of Austria.

This belief, I may add, is fully shared by those members of the Diplomatic Corps in Rome with whom I have talked, and who are unanimously of the opinion that Italy will confine herself to the maintaining of an attitude of armed neutrality.

The Italian people do not want war and in consequence absolutely no enthusiasm has been aroused, even in the most patriotic and nationalist circles, by the prospects of war; rather on the contrary a feeling of anger exists against Austria for having put Italy in an embarrassing position.

Whereas the papers report great popular demonstrations in favor of the Triple Alliance in Berlin and Vienna, nothing of the kind has occurred in Italy, and it is a significant fact that the Austrian Embassy in Rome is not only not the object of enthusiastic demonstrations but still actually requires its usual police protection.

Italy has not yet mobilized; but she will presumably be obliged to do so, even if adopting an attitude of neutrality.

The Socialist and Republican parties have held meetings in various parts of Italy denouncing war and calling upon the laboring classes to refuse to fight. This, however, seems unnecessary owing to the fact that, as I have explained, there is little prospect of Italy taking an active part in any general European war which might lead to the aggrandizement of Austria.

I have [etc.]

Peter A. Jay

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 124.551/12

[Document 159]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels,1 August 24, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received August 25, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I have to-day received by a citizen who got through from Ghent a letter from the Vice Consul at Ghent transmitting substance of two telegrams telephoned by the Consul General at Antwerp to Ghent: One, August 20 [19], approving my course of action;2 another, August 21, expressing the President’s desire that the Legation be moved immediately to Antwerp.3 I shall make every effort to carry out the President’s wishes at the earliest moment, but it is absolutely impossible to move the Legation under the existing circumstances. Brussels is surrounded by armies engaged in active operations and Antwerp with its ring of forts on the defensive is at present inaccessible. I call the Department’s attention to my August 6, 5 p.m.,1 and to Department’s August 7, 7 p.m.2

Acting under the discretionary powers granted I decided that my duty lay here in Brussels. The Spanish Minister reached the same conclusion as did the Ministers of seventeen other neutral powers. The representatives who went to Antwerp were the French, Russian and British Ministers whose nations were involved as belligerents and some others who went for personal reasons. Already entrusted with German interests here, I subsequently took over the British Legation and the protection of a large resident British colony. Owing to the disinterested position of the United States I have been able to render service, the extent and value of which must of course be estimated by someone else. It may not be amiss to say that for these services I have been thanked by the German commanding General, by representatives of the British colony, by the Interparliamentary Union and by an official of the Belgian Foreign Office on behalf of the King. As I reported to the Department in a telegram which evidently has not been received, the Spanish Minister and I made representations to the burgomaster before the occupation of Brussels which in connection with other considerations led him to abandon his intention of attempting a futile defense of his city which might have brought on a bombardment with all its terrible consequences. This service of course could not have been rendered had we been in Antwerp and under the circumstances the Department will not, I trust, consider me indelicate in saying that if I were to leave Brussels in this hour and take refuge in Antwerp, my action might be construed in an unfavorable light and would, I am sure, be regretted by those whom I have been trying to help. It would leave wholly without diplomatic representation or protection a large number of our own and other foreign citizens. I took the precaution, as reported in my August 6, 5 p.m., to arrange with Belgian Government all questions of protocol and courtesy and under these two heads are included all the actual duties that I could have discharged in Antwerp for the present. With Brussels occupied by the German troops and with the telegraph wires cut, communication with the Department may for a few days be difficult. The position of our Legation in this conflict is unique and happily so detached that being entirely without apprehension as to our personal safety we have been able to render certain humane service, scrupulously observing meanwhile all the requirements of our neutral position. I can assure the Department that our relations with the Belgian Government were never better than they are now and as soon as I can arrange to transfer the representation of German and British interests and turn over to some colleague the custody of Legation building and archives and the protection of the American colony and interests here and devise means of reaching Antwerp, I shall move the Legation thither.

Whitlock

1 This telegram was taken by Mr. Hugh S. Gibson through the German lines and despatched from Antwerp.

2  Ante, p. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150].

3  Ante, p. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154].

1  Ante, p. 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107].

2  Ante, p. 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/348

[Document 160]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, undated.
[Received August 25, 1914, 10:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

British and Russian Ambassadors have stated to me that their respective Governments wish Turkey to remain neutral during the present war and German Ambassador states that his Government wants Turkey to avoid war but be sufficiently mobilized to prevent Russia from invading her during the present war. Russian Ambassador when requested on Saturday to stop using wireless apparatus on stationnaire sent it to Odessa to avoid making an issue of the question. British Ambassador has requested repeatedly Grand Vizier to secure permission for twenty British merchant vessels to pass through Dardanelles. Although the Grand Vizier gave orders permitting it, his orders were disobeyed. British Ambassador is chafing strongly but continues to use persuasion instead of threatening with force. Triple Entente has requested that the German sailors on the Goeben and Breslau be returned to Germany or Austria and has promised them safe conduct and although these ships have been here fourteen days, most of the German sailors are still on board and about 200 of them have been distributed amongst Turkish torpedo boats. I greatly fear that contention about these crews may prove a cases belli. The Turks are construing the present cautious and hesitating manner of Triple Entente, which is so different from their former attitude, into signs of weakness and I know that the Turks are being encouraged in that belief by the members of German military commission. British Ambassador informs me that if Goeben enters Mediterranean with the German crew, British war vessels will attack her. Through severe censorship entire press is now under control of the military and is being constantly used to create strong pro-German feeling. Sentiment among Turkish Cabinet as to the maintenance or cessation of neutrality is now closely balanced. I have just been informed that my advice at present stage might have considerable weight. Our interests here are best served by the preservation of Turkey’s neutrality. Would it meet the Department’s approval to have me urge Minister of War and Minister of Interior to remain neutral? I believe a strong presentation to them of their financial, commercial, and military unpreparedness and of the damaging consequences of their antagonizing Triple Entente who are in complete control of the Mediterranean and therefore can capture Smyrna, Beirut, Alexandretta, Mersina, Jaffa, and Haifa in a short time would convince them to remain neutral.

Morgenthau

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 124.551/12

[Document 161]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914, 3 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 19, 6 p.m.1 Department must be guided by your judgment as to whether it is advisable to move Legation from Brussels to Antwerp.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Portugal (Bailey) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/672

[Document 162]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Portugal (Bailey) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, August 10, 1914.
[Received August 25.]

No. 25]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that the German, Minister, Mr. Friedrich Rosen, accredited to this post, called on me yesterday and in the course of a confidential interview said that, in the event that the Portuguese Government should join the Triple Entente in a declaration of war against Germany, he had been instructed by his Government to turn over the archives of the German Legation and entrust protection of German citizens, and their interests in Portugal to our Legation. Not being able to cable in cipher the substance of this confidential interview to the Department, I respectfully request, in case this should be received previous to a declaration of war by Portugal, that the word “Yes” or “No” be cabled to me which will indicate the course to be followed by this Legation.

It is the opinion of the German Minister, as well as many others here, that the Portuguese Government will declare war. There is a very strong anti-German feeling among the Portuguese people as is plainly evidenced by the many enthusiastic, excitable demonstrations on the part of the masses in favor of England and France against Germany. The attitude of the press here also has a tendency to inflame the masses in favor of war. As related to me by an eyewitness, on the 5th instant, when about 400 German citizens of the Portuguese colony met in Lisbon on the eve of their departure for Germany, they were hissed and jeered and frequently pelted with stones by an excited, unruly Portuguese mob.

While the Portuguese Government has at present assumed an attitude of neutrality, the Senate and House of Deputies were called to meet in extra session on the 7th instant to discuss certain necessary measures growing out of the international situation, and it is feared by many, owing to the excitable temperament of the Portuguese members of these two bodies, that a declaration of war is not only possible, but highly probable before its adjournment. When the Portuguese Congress convened on the 7th instant, the leaders of the different parties declared their support of the Government and their solidarity with England. A resolution was adopted conferring full powers upon the Executive in the present crisis.

On August 6, the Portuguese Government ordered the formation of a division of the Portuguese naval squadron, composed of The cruisers Almirante Reis, Vasco Da Gama, S. Gabriel and Adamastor , the torpedo boat Douro, the torpedo boats Nos. 2 and 3, the steamer Vulcano, and submarine boat Espadarte, which will proceed to practice naval maneuvers. Vice Admiral José Joaquim Xavier de Brito has been made commander of this division.

In view of the existence of an old treaty between England and Portugal, the date and terms of which I am at present unable to ascertain, whereby, in case of war between England and any other power or powers the Portuguese Government agrees to assist England to the extent of at least 10,000 well-armed and equipped troops, the Portuguese Government will unquestionably declare war against Germany in the event that England makes a request that the terms of the treaty be fulfilled.

I am sending this despatch by the captain of a British merchant steamer to be posted on his arrival in the United States.

I have [etc.]

James G. Bailey

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72111/348

[Document 163]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, August 26, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your undated telegram Received August 25. Under no circumstances offer any suggestions officially or unofficially to the Turkish Government or to any Turkish official relative to the question of Turkish neutrality in the present war. If, however, the Turkish Government, on its own initiative, should ask your opinion and advice, you will say that the Government of the United States, solely in the interest of humanity and from no political consideration, is desirous that there should be no further spread of the European conflict and most earnestly hopes that Turkey, inspired by the same motive, will find that her national interests do not prevent her from preserving neutrality.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/631

[Document 164]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 22, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received August 26, 2:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Foreign Office in a formal note refer to Article 11 of the Congo Act of February 26, 1885, relative to the neutralization of the colonies lying within the conventional free-trade zone; they point out that all of Chapter 3 of the act, which deals with neutrality, owes its existence to the initiative of the United States representative at the conference. In view of the deep interest taken by the American Government in the question of neutralization at the time, the Imperial Government ventures to invoke the good offices of the American Government to the end that, Germany being willing to agree to neutralization, the consent of the other belligerents may be secured to the neutralization of the several colonies situated in the free-trade zone.

The Foreign Office state that, according to the reports so far received, England has committed two hostile acts within the free-trade zone: the bombardment of Dâr-es-Salaam and the seizure of the German steamer Wissman on the Nyasa Lake.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State. File No. 763.72111/355

[Document 165]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State.

American Embassy,
Rome, August 25, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received August 26, 8:05 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Greek Minister Called to ask unofficially information about rumored offer of mediation services. German Ambassador called about private matter but I unofficially referred to President’s reported desires to aid peace. He says doubtless soon everyone would be grateful for an offer of mediation. All however think it early yet. He thinks German victory reported substantially decides war. He says Germany would, of course, not claim territory of France proper but possibly colonial transfers. Says bitter feeling only towards Japan. Evidently some idea growing of possible concert later on among non-belligerents to ask if offer of mediation will be acceptable. Italian Government denies that rumored mobilization will be ordered. Above sent simply as information for what may be worth.

American Ambassador

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/16

[Document 166]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 26, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received August 27, 1:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 4, 7 p.m.1 Minister for Foreign Affairs in a note states that he has submitted to the Emperor the message of President Wilson:

Appreciating the humanitarian sentiments which dictated this step His Majesty has deigned to command me to transmit to the President his sincere thanks. Russia did not desire war and did everything to avoid it but from the moment this war was imposed upon her she cannot fail to defend her rights by force of arms. Under these circumstances it seems for the moment premature to contemplate the possibility of peace. Nevertheless I beg you to be so good as to be the interpreter to Mr. Woodrow Wilson of the thanks of His Majesty. Sazonow.

Wilson

1 See footnote, ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 124.511/24

[Document 167]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 27, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received August 28, 3:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I learn from what I believe a trustworthy source, that the Germans have broken through the lines of the Allies south of Lille and probably at Sedan and that the French Government is contemplating the step of moving to Bordeaux, should it become necessary. I am not able to confirm this intelligence, since, from the beginning of hostilities, greatest secrecy has been maintained regarding the progress of military operations.

The Spanish Ambassador told me yesterday that he had asked his Government for instructions in case seat of government were moved from Paris. Although this contingency may be still remote, it must be reckoned with and I should be glad to know the Department’s desires, although I feel, that, in view of the large number of Americans in Paris, besides the other interests represented by the Embassy, I should remain here regardless of the movements of my colleagues.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/656

[Document 168]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 27, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received August 28, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

British Ambassador, whose Smyrna consular despatches were much more alarming than ours, requested my cooperation to prevent trouble in Smyrna. Grand Vizier having been unsuccessful in restraining Governor General and it being impossible to reach the Secretary of War on account of an operation, I called upon German Ambassador who, with the assistance of German military mission, and on account of presence of Goeben in Marmora, is generally recognized at present as the controlling spirit of the military party here. German Ambassador reiterated that Germany wants Turkish neutrality but intends to prevent Russia from taking Constantinople which Germany thinks is the prize that Russia will demand if victorious; Dardanelles are, in the opinion of the Admiral of the Goeben, as well fortified as Cuxhaven and impregnable against English and French fleets in Mediterranean; Dardanelles will not be closed for commerce unless attacked. German Ambassador admitted that Turkey intends to burn Smyrna if attacked. I made strong representations to him that the threats of burning Smyrna must be stopped as fanatical Moslems might really do it without being ordered. An American war vessel in Smyrna Harbor undoubtedly will exert restraining influence. German policy is to discourage trouble and assist preventing it as they want Constantinople kept intact and German Ambassador claims that presence of Goeben in Marmora and control exerted over army by military commission positively assures continuance in office of present Cabinet and will prevent any massacres or internal revolutions. German Ambassador authorized me to repeat all this to British Ambassador, who in turn authorized me to state that Great Britain has no intention of attacking Smyrna but would force Dardanelles if closed against commerce. Interchange of German and British messages through me and my assuring both that neither wanted trouble has relieved the tension. German Ambassador displays great cordiality for Great Britain but decided antipathy against Russia.

Morgenthau

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72/631

[Document 169]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 22. As the United States did not ratify the Congo Act of February 26, 1885, relative to the neutralization of the colonies lying within the conventional free-trade zone, it cannot be considered a party to this treaty, and therefore is not in a position to take the action in this matter requested by the German Government.

Bryan

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/667

[Document 170]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, August 14, 1914.
[Received August 28.]

No. 125]

Sir: I take the occasion of the probable sailing of the Holland-America Line S. S. Noordam from Rotterdam on August 15, to send you the following report, giving fuller details than it is possible to send by cable.

I. THE EUROPEAN SITUATION

After the declaration of war by Austria upon Servia on July 25, the conflagration spread with amazing swiftness. All the great nations professed a desire for peace. But the war spirit flashed through Europe like a forest fire.

The extraordinary speed with which Germany violated the neutralities of Luxemburg and Belgium, and the rapidity with which she has massed her forces on Belgian territory, threatening the northwestern part of France, do not indicate that the conflict was a surprise to her. But I know from the best sources that she did not expect the stubborn resistance which Belgium has offered. Nor was she prepared to accept the firm attitude of Great Britain in support of the Belgian neutrality, without attempting to weaken that attitude by diplomatic offers.

The question of the sanctity of neutral rights lies at the root of the conflict in its world aspect. No international agreements will be secure, no hopes of the establishment of peace through justice will be fruitful, no prospect of a pacific cooperation of Europe will remain on the horizon, if the guaranteed neutralities of sovereign states are swept away like burnt paper, on the plea that “necessity knows no law.”

The position of America is universally recognized. She stands outside of the present sphere of conflict. But she has a real interest, not only for her own sake, but for the sake of humanity, in the respect of the neutrality of Holland. The Dutch ports are now the most important open doors for the peaceful trade and intercourse of the Western world. To close or to obstruct them would be to give another check to civilization.

The attitude and action of America in this great European crisis, both in taking care of her own citizens and in aiding the peaceful citizens of other countries, have produced a most favorable effect. The foreign policy of the Administration at Washington has made an impression of fairness, firmness, and a strong will to maintain the right. The United States will be in a position to act as a mediator for the restoration of peace when the time comes.

That time, in the judgment of the best friends of peace here, has not yet arrived. When it does come, it would in my judgment be of great advantage for the United States to have the cooperation of those European powers which have succeeded in maintaining their neutrality. The principal states remaining neutral thus far are Holland, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway.

II. THE SITUATION IN HOLLAND

The mobilization of the army still continues. The reserves have been called to the colors. The popular feeling is quiet but very strong. New troops are drilling daily in the open square in front of this Legation. There is no disorder or confusion. The troops are massed along the frontier, particularly in that narrow portion of the province of Limburg which lies between Belgian and German territory. The Dutch fear that in case of a quick retreat or a sudden advance by the German forces a violation of this part of Limburg may occur. The German Government has given solemn assurance that it intends to respect the neutrality of Holland. But Holland dreads another case of that “necessity which knows no law.”

The arrangements made by the Government and the banks here to relieve the internal tension of money, and the measures to prevent an exorbitant rise in prices or a scarcity of food, have been successful. American certificates of consular registration have not been refused. (See your cable instruction of August 11.) Americans in this country have been perfectly safe, and entirely comfortable—except the nervous ones.

Remarkable courtesy and hospitality have been shown by private Dutch citizens to our people. All the hotels in The Hague have acted very well, except one, which made excessive charges and demanded an exorbitant rate of discount. I sent for the manager to come here and called him down distinctly. He refunded the money, and has since brought forth fruits meet for repentance.

The Holland-America Line has dispatched its boats regularly August 1, 8, and 15—and has been at great pains and expense to fit up two of these boats with extra accommodations for passengers. I personally inspected them before the sailing of the New Amsterdam last Saturday, and found them excellent. The rates of passage have not been raised.

We have been overwhelmed with labor day and night. Your response to my cabled request of August 31 for authority to endorse American travelers’ checks and drafts for necessary purposes, cooperating with the action of the Netherlands Government in securing the cashing of such endorsed checks and drafts here, has promptly and permanently relieved the situation. We have had no money strain here. But we have had to do an international banking business in small amounts on a large scale.

We have granted emergency passports, observing, with the utmost care possible in the circumstances, the regulations in regard to citizenship and expatriation, and endeavoring to avoid complications with the belligerent countries.

We have also conducted an inquiry and telegraph bureau, and have forwarded personal inquiries and despatches for German, Belgian, English and French citizens as well as for our own. I have obtained from the Belgian Minister here the courtesy of sending letters to Brussels in his mail pouch, and from the German Minister the same privilege in his courrier for Berlin. I shall make use of this privilege only for open letters, or letters addressed personally to our representatives in Berlin and Brussels.

I have transmitted two messages for the German Government to the American Minister in Brussels, for transmission, at his discretion, to the Belgian Government.

The Austrian Minister brought me a message from his Government on Tuesday night for transmission to our Legation in Brussels for the Austrian Legation there. He read me the message in German, but he offered it for transmission in a cipher which I could not read. I wrote him a polite note expressing my regret that my instructions prohibited me from sending a message in two different ciphers. I added that as the Austrian interests in Brussels had not been put in charge of our Legation there, my colleague might not understand my putting this matter in his hands, since it had to do with very intimate affairs of the Austrian Legation.

All personal messages, appeals or notices for humanitarian purposes, and messages dealing with the maintenance of international law, we are willingly transmitting. But I shall endeavor not to allow our country to be involved through its representatives in the military or political affairs of the belligerents.

The American Ambassador in Berlin inserted a notice in the London papers a few days ago, stating that I would transmit money from British subjects for their compatriots in Berlin under charge of the American Embassy. But he did not advise me of this, nor did he provide any means for me to transmit money or credits. The letters and telegrams began to pour in from England, and an inextricable confusion was threatened.

I therefore bought here with drafts drawn on you, 55,000 marks credit in Berlin, and sent cablegrams to you on August 12 and August 13,1 and telegraphed Ambassador Gerard as follows:

August 11. I have sent 5,000 marks credit to Dresdener Bank to be used against my credit telegrams to you. Van Dyke.

August 12. Have sent 50,000 marks credit to you Disconto Gesellschaft Bank to be used against my credit telegrams to you. Van Dyke.

I have already received very considerable sums of money and credits here from English sources which I have deposited in Marx & Company’s bank, as a separate account to be held against the above fund.

The heavy pressure of this work has made it necessary for me to employ as volunteer American secretaries of this Legation the carefully chosen persons whose names you will find in the enclosed list. They are working with the utmost devotion. The counsel of Professor Wilson on matters of international law is very valuable to me in this time of stress. Some of the gentlemen named replace others who have gone to America. None of them have asked remuneration, but I shall request authority from you to offer it to them at such a rate per day, and in such form of payment as you may approve.

Finally, I have the honor to withdraw the request for leave of absence from September 12 which was made in my despatch No. 110 of July 9.1 I shall remain at the post of duty as long as the need and danger continue.

I have [etc.]

Henry van Dyke

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 124.511/24

[Document 171]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1914, 11 a.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 27, 12 midnight. In the event of the seat of government being moved, the Department will be guided by your judgment as to whether the Embassy should remain in Paris or follow the Government.

Bryan

The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/709

[Document 172]

The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State

Belgian Legation,
Washington, August 28, 1914.
[Received August 29.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have just received a cablegram from my Government advising me that Austria-Hungary had declared war on Belgium.

Be pleased [etc.]

E. Havenith

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/199

[Document 173]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 28, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received August 30, 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Will North Carolina come to Constantinople, for, if so, I must secure permission for her passage through Dardanelles, and if not, make arrangements for receiving money to be used here? Fifty naval officers and 700 sailors arrived here to-day from Germany to enter Turkish Navy. McCauley desires information about health Senator Oliver.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/678

[Document 174]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 30, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

British Ambassador tells me this morning that he has learned from British headquarters that 70,000 British troops stood off 200,000 German troops for three days but gradually fell back in good order because of lack of French reenforcements. He stated that, although Germans succeeded in making hole through British lines, French troops had now come to assistance of British and conditions consequently more hopeful.

My suggestion to Minister for Foreign Affairs in interview this morning that in event of missions following government to Bordeaux or elsewhere, many interests could be best subserved by my remaining in Paris was most cordially received. British Ambassador also informed me that French Government removing gold from Paris. I am contemplating transferring the $150,000 gold from safe deposit vaults to Embassy so that it may be available in case of necessity.

Herrick

The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/725

[Document 175]

The Vice Consul General at Cairo (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, August 7, 1914.
[Received September 1.]

No. 57]

Sir: I have the honor to confirm my telegram of to-day wherein the Department was informed that a decision of the Egyptian Council of Ministers was announced yesterday in the Journal officiel to the effect that the presence of the British Army of Occupation in Egypt rendered the country liable to attack on the part of Great Britain’s enemies, and that in consequence it was necessary to adopt certain war measures. The British Army and naval forces were entrusted with the defense of the country.

A supplement to the Journal officiel dated August 4, but published the following day, contained announcements formally committing Egypt to neutrality in the war involving Germany, Russia, Austria and Servia. However, upon the day of publication of these announcements news was received of Great Britain’s declaration of war against Germany, and I understood from reliable sources that the Egyptian Government would make upon the following day an announcement placing the country under the protection of Great Britain. This announcement was dated the 6th instant but was not published until to-day. I immediately cabled the main facts and now have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of the Journal officiel 1 giving the French text of the decision of the Council of Ministers, together with an English translation. I also enclose copies and translations 1 of the announcement of neutrality dated August 4.

Briefly the political situation in Egypt is as follows:

Theoretically Egypt is a vilayet of the Ottoman Empire, with independent power to administer her internal affairs and foreign commerce. But this position, however, is only a legal fiction. Egypt has been administered, and its policies entirely shaped by Great Britain since her occupation of the country in 1882. The chief object of England’s occupation of the country has now been accomplished, namely, the military control in time of war of the Suez Canal, the key to the East and her eastern possessions.

I have been informed by the Chargé d’Affaires of the British agency that at present their efforts will be to insure peace and quietness in Egypt. Additional forces are expected to arrive in the country shortly (probably from India). It is believed that Germany and Austria will be too much occupied on the Continent to permit of their sending an expeditionary force to Egypt. In the event of British successes in the present war, the only two factors which may effect the tranquillity of the country appear to be as follows:

Turkey is said to have mobilized. Should she decide to throw in her lot with Germany, the native population may be incited to uprisings and demonstrations against the English. However, it is fully expected that the British forces in Egypt will have no difficulty in keeping order and affording protection to foreigners. If the war should be prolonged until after the time for marketing the cotton crop, the natives may have difficulty in selling their cotton, owing to the suspension of all credits. This may cause dissatisfaction and threatening demonstrations which would undoubtedly be quickly suppressed by the authorities.

There are at present less than 200 American citizens in Egypt. Of this number about 150 are missionaries. Practically all of our citizens are residing either in Cairo or Alexandria or within a few hours train journey from either city. In case of necessity I foresee no difficulty in securing their protection.

I have [etc.]

Paul Knabenshue

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/722

[Document 176]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 20, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received September 2, 12:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Twenty thousand Germans under command of General Von Jarotzky occupied Brussels this afternoon. Headquarters established in the Hôtel de Ville. Civil authorities carry on administration under the supervision of military authorities. Except for a small force to guard Grand Place, Hôtel de Ville, and railway stations, all the troops are encamped outside the city. I omitted to state in my telegram of yesterday evening that the Spanish Minister and I represented to the military governor that the resistance which he expected to offer would entail the loss of innocent human life and the destruction of artistic treasure which are of the greatest value to civilization. In view of these and other considerations he abandoned his plan and at a late hour last night disbanded the Garde Civique. The occupation of the city was effected quietly and perfect order prevails.

Whitlock

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/751

[Document 177]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, September 2, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received September 3, 1:20 a.m.]

[Telegram]

18. Following in brief the substance of remarks made to me to-day by the President. He began by saying that he was aware of my desire to remain in Paris and had requested me to come to the Elysée in order that he might thank me in the name of his Government for my decision as he felt that my presence would be an influence for maintaining the principles of international law and had already caused the Spanish Government to reconsider their determination to instruct the Spanish Ambassador to leave Paris. The seat of the Government was to be established elsewhere but nevertheless the struggle would be continued to the end and his Government would not accept any terms of peace. He appreciated my view that historic monuments and art treasures did not belong to any one nation but were international in their character and hoped that my presence in Paris would constrain the enemies of France to observe the customs of war; France asked for no more. He added that the City of Paris would be defended by the outer forts, by the inner forts, and by the valor of their troops.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/19

[Document 178]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 3, 1914, 4 a.m.
[Received 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

565. To the President: The idea is becoming common here that if the Germans take Paris, the German Emperor will make a proposal for peace and call on you to witness his unwillingness to shed another drop of blood. His proposal will, of course, be essentially the proposal of a conqueror. He will seek to save himself, his throne, and his bureaucracy. The dominant English opinion is that if he be let off, then the war will have been in vain. The resolve is to give a deathblow to the Germans at any cost in time, men and money. The English are preparing for a long war and, as I read their mood and character, they will not stop till they have succeeded. Many men freely express the hope to me that neither our Government nor American public opinion will regard any proposed peace as worth while that stops short of a final blow to bureaucracy.

So far as I can make out, the opinion of Europe outside of Germany is fast solidifying into severe condemnation of German methods, and the Germans are arousing the strongest moral condemnation. The burning of Louvain and other towns, the murder of non-combatants, the crimes against women and children, which are not printed but which are repeated everywhere, are producing in this kingdom a mood of grim determination.

Sir Edward Grey told me to-day that the Germans are preparing for a regular Zeppelin campaign to drop bombs on London. It is impossible to form an independent judgment about such a rumor, but Grey is the last man to indulge in gossip or to entertain groundless fears. The censorship here is so severe and effective that we hear nothing about the war till days after the events have occurred.

I am doing all I can without producing a degree of alarm that would offend the British Government to induce all Americans to go home. There are a good many here who remain merely to enjoy the excitement and the English are beginning severely to criticise them privately. They are in the way. They are in the wrong mood for such a time. Perhaps a proper expression of such an opinion by our Government would have an effect on them.

American Ambassador

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/788

[Document 179]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, September 3, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

No. A 1108/14]

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I am instructed by my Government to deny most categorically the rumors circulated by English agencies to the effect that Germany, in case she emerges victorious from the present war, intends to seek expansion in South America.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith) File No. 763.72111/357

[Document 180]

The Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith)

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 20, 1914, in which by direction of your Government you protest against the violation of Belgian neutrality by the German Army.1

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/373

[Document 181]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, July 31, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

No. 433]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the sympathies of the Swedish Government are with the Triple Alliance and that the German Government is endeavoring to persuade Sweden to attack Russia in case of a war between Russia and Germany. The present Conservative Government, however, is a minority government and it is my opinion that such a war would not be popular with the mass of Swedish people.

I have [etc.]

Jefferson Caffery

The Consul at Saloniki (Kehl) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/642

[Document 182]

The Consul at Saloniki (Kehl) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Saloniki, July 31, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

No. 132]

Sir: I have the honor to submit the following report on the political situation in this district:

The reoccupation of Kortcha on July 7 by the Epirotes adds another very serious phase to the already deeply enmeshed principality of Albania. The invading army headed by Capt. Tzontos Vardas, whose resignation from the Hellenic Regular Army was accepted through royal decree a few days before the occupation, is referred to in the Grecian press as the army of autonomous Epirus. On the other hand it has been repeatedly asserted by Albanian interests that this army is commanded largely by officers of the Greek Regular Army and that the Epirus propaganda has the moral, if not the material, support of the Hellenic Government.

The following synopsis of Kortcha events may be of some interest: It will be recalled that the town was first occupied by Greek regulars during the latter part of November 1912. In course of time the European concert decided on the conversion of Albania into an independent principality. Greek forces, mostly Epirotes, were in possession of a large part of Albania and there was no indication of a willingness to relinquish the occupied territory. An international commission for the delimitation of the south Albanian frontier was accordingly appointed by the European powers. In the filial decision of this commission, made public during October 1913, the districts of Kortcha, Colonia, and Argyrokastron were embodied in New Albania. The Hellenic Government and many Greek inhabitants of southern Albania protested vigorously against the delimitation as fixed by this commission, contending that the districts in question are purely Greek and would never submit to Musulman jurisdiction. A delegation of Korizians called on Prime Minister Venizelos in Saloniki and expressed their determination to destroy Kortcha by fire rather than see it fall into the hands of the Albanians. The Prime Minister counseled against such action and is said to have remarked, “Why should we destroy that which eventually will be ours?” Following the decision of the boundary commission, the European concert requested the Hellenic Government to remove its troops from Kortcha and other parts of Albanian territory before January 1, 1914. Under one pretext or the other, Greek regulars remained in Kortcha and exercised full military and administrative control up to March 2, 1914, on which day the town and district were handed over to the Albanian authorities. The greater part of the Greek army of occupation withdrew to Florina, 50 miles east of Kortcha, while many inhabitants of the affected district took up their abode in Argyrokastron and vicinity and there continued their opposition to annexation.

On February 23, 1914, the autonomy of Epirus, with Argyrokastron as seat of government, was declared. On the same day a committee for the defense of Epirus was organized in Athens, electing Mr. Christaki Zographos President of the provisional Government. Arms, ammunition, and soldiers were acquired in remarkably quick time and in less than one month the army of autonomous Epirus was in the field ready to oppose Albanian assimilation by force of arms. The revolt was strong, determined, and very popular in new and old Greece. It soon became evident that this separatist movement could not be quelled by a counterforce of arms and that liberal administrative concessions would be necessary to cope with the situation. Accordingly the International Commission of Control invited Mr. Zographos and other leaders of the Epirus movement to Corfu for a conference. The protocol of this conference, signed on May 17, 1914, provides in behalf of the Epirotes: Full religious freedom for the Greek Orthodox Church; official recognition of the Greek language; Christian governors for the districts claimed by the Epirotes and the administrative councils of these districts proportioned according to the predominance of the various religions; the gendarmerie to be composed of Christians; amnesty to all Epirote revolutionists; a continuance of the privileges and immunities enjoyed under Ottoman régime, etc. This protocol was approved by the Albanian Government on June 7, 1914. It appears that the concessions made to the Epirotes occasioned great dissatisfaction among the Mohammedans. The political interests of several neighboring states also appear to have been instrumental in adding to the pandemonium. The followers of Essad Pasha revolted, which in turn caused the adherents of other Albanian leaders to leave the ranks of the Nationalists and join in a movement for the overthrow of Prince William and thereby have created a civil war.

The powers responsible for placing Prince William on the Albanian throne now appear to be indifferent to his success or the future of Albania. The Epirotes were quick to take advantage of the disturbed situation and pushed their army beyond the lines of the accepted autonomous district and are now occupying all of the Albanian territory originally claimed by Greece. The International Commission of Control have protested against this extension of the so-called autonomous Epirus zone but without avail. The Albanian situation has now developed into a three-cornered fight—Epirotes, Insurgents, and Nationalists. The Epirotes, insisting on the abdication of Prince William, are disorganized but in possession of the greater part of Albania.

* * *

During the past six weeks there has been a very noticeable activity in military circles. Officers of the French military mission have visited and inspected the five army divisions distributed throughout Macedonia. Maneuvers are of daily occurrence. Recruits for the army and the gendarmerie are being drilled and distributed as rapidly as conditions permit. The practice fire of artillery and the fortifications in the vicinity of Saloniki can be heard daily between 7 and 10 a.m. Particular stress is being laid on developing the cavalry and artillery under the tutelage of French officers. A large quantity of old steel rails has arrived in Saloniki. These rails are being used for the construction of fortifications. Forage and army supplies, including winter capes, have arrived in large quantities during the past four weeks. It is estimated that 60,000 men of all arms, on a war footing, are now concentrated in Macedonia east of the Vardar River. This concentration is directed against Bulgaria. Skirmishes between Greek patrols and Bulgarian comitadjis are of daily occurrence. An element of uncertainty is very apparent throughout the whole of Greek-occupied Macedonia. The Bulgarian Government is making strenuous efforts for a revision of the Treaty of Bucharest. The Greco-Bulgarian commission charged with fixing the frontier lines at Okdjilar are unable to come to an agreement and have discontinued their conferences. The Ottoman Government declines to amicably surrender to Greece the islands of Chios and Mytilene. There is much conjecture as to the attitude of the Ottoman Government after her navy has been strengthened by the acquisition of the two dreadnoughts, Rechadie and Sultan Osman, now in English yards and about ready for delivery. Greek refugees continue to arrive but in a lesser number than during the month of June. The greater part of the arrivals during the past two weeks hail from Thrace which indicates that the Bulgarians are making a clean sweep of Greeks within their territory.

The Austro-Hungarian declaration of war against Servia, on July 28, has greatly weakened the political position of Greece in Macedonia. The new Balkan situation, which temporarily deprives the Hellenes of their ally, is of too recent origin for development. If reliance can be placed on the despatches published by Saloniki newspapers, a Greco-Bulgarian war is imminent.

I am forced to believe that Saloniki is facing a very serious situation. At present there are 20,000 refugees in this city and an additional 70,000 within a radius of 25 miles. The greater part of these refugees are being maintained by the Hellenic Government. In the event of another war, most of the inhabitants of Greek Macedonia will flee to Saloniki and within ten days this city will have no less than half a million mouths to feed in addition to caring for certain needs of the army. The available food supply under most favorable circumstances, will not suffice for eight days without replenishing. Another serious feature is the maintaining of a good sanitary condition in Saloniki. Cholera exists in the Gumuldjina district from which 5,000 refugees arrived in Saloniki during the past two weeks. I am unable to confirm a persistent rumor of the existence of cholera in Saloniki. The Department of Health reported 43 deaths from “cholerine” during the week ended July 25.

The inhabitants of Saloniki are very much disturbed over the general situation. In the event of a European war, which now seems inevitable, Greek Macedonia may be plunged into a third war, more savage than either of the last two, and more than likely devoid of all respect for the laws of civilized warfare.

I have [etc.]

John E. Kehl

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/376

[Document 183]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, September 4, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received September 5, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am informed from a reliable source that Roumania’s attitude will follow that of Italy. Roumania will remain neutral or move against Austria-Hungary and Germany if Italy takes such action.

Vopicka

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/830

[Document 184]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 18, 1914.
[Received September 8.]

No. 200]

Sir: As I expect to send out a pouch to-morrow I have the honor to send you the following facts in regard to the present European war, as a matter of record and for the information of the Department. In making this report I must observe that the Embassy has received no foreign newspapers and practically no outside information since the beginning of the war and that such statements as I am able to make are based solely upon the carefully censored despatches as they have appeared in the German press.

On July 31 we learned from the Foreign Office that Germany had given Russia twelve hours to recall her mobilization order and had given France the same time to declare her intentions. The central streets of Berlin were filled with crowds cheering and singing patriotic songs. Hostile demonstrations were made before the Russian and French Embassies and friendly demonstrations before the Austrian and Italian Embassies, and the Unter den Linden was white with the special editions of the Lokal Anzeiger giving the latest news gratis to the public. A decree was promulgated by the Government forbidding the further exportation of provisions from Germany. The S. S. Imperator , of the Hamburg-American Line, did not sail from Cuxhaven as scheduled and we learned from the Norddeutscher Lloyd that the Kronprinzessin Cecilie, already halfway across the ocean on her voyage from New York to Bremen, had been instructed by wireless telegraphy to return to the nearest American port. It was reported that she carried a large consignment of gold. Thirty-five passports were issued by the Embassy to American citizens.

August 1. We were informed by the Foreign Office that Russia had asked for two hours delay and that the Emperor was in telegraphic communication with the Czar, attempting to avoid hostilities, but the public was aware that war was certain. Martial law was declared in Germany, the Reichstag was called for August 4 and the Emperor made a speech from the balcony of the palace, calling upon Germans to defend the Fatherland. The streets of Berlin were thronged with crowds, singing and cheering for war. An order was given that all communications, including letters, telegrams and telephonic conversation, must be in German and that only German should be spoken on the street. The Reichsbank stopped its payments of gold and shopkeepers refused to accept paper currency, but this was soon overruled by the publication of an order that bank notes were legal tender. The Embassy issued 200 passports.

August 2. The mobilization of the German Army began to-day. The newspapers announced that clashes between patrols had occurred on the Russian border and that Luxemburg had been occupied by the Germans. The Landsturm was called out in certain districts—a radical step. The last trains left, crowded with tourists. The Foreign Office asked us to take charge of German affairs in Russia and France.

August 3. The Russian Ambassador and the staff of the Embassy left Berlin to-day in the midst of a threatening crowd gathered about the Embassy, who shouted “murderers” and tried to beat them with sticks as they passed out in automobiles. All foreigners were to-day forbidden to leave Germany until after the mobilization. The newspapers declared that France had begun war by crossing the frontier and occupying Gottesthal, Metzeral and Markirch, that French officers had been found in Germany in Prussian uniform, and that French aviators had broken neutrality by flying over Belgium and Holland towards Germany. It was also reported that the German cruiser Augsburg had shelled Libau and left the city in flames.

We learned that the French reply to the German note was to the effect that France would act in whatever way was most advantageous to her interests. The press announced that a French airship had dropped a bomb on Nuremberg. Warnings were published that a Russian automobile was making for the Russian frontier full of gold; this resulted in the shooting up of several tourist and military automobiles and several people were subsequently killed, including a German general. Many alleged Russian spies were arrested in Berlin and elsewhere and we understand that they were shot. Several Russian officers, including a number of generals, who were undergoing cures in Germany, were taken as prisoners of war and conveyed to Spandau. Mr. S. B. Conger, the Berlin correspondent of the Associated Press, was arrested on his way to St. Petersburg and was released only after several days of imprisonment and great hardship, the Embassy having intervened. There was intense excitement among the public during the day and night. The Embassy issued 418 passports and was crowded from early morning until midnight with American citzens seeking assistance.

August 4. The French Ambassador and his staff left to-night, and were sent by a special train to Denmark. England, whose attitude up to to-day seemed uncertain, declared war and the British Ambassador asked for his passports. An angry crowd gathered about the British Embassy and broke all the windows with stones. Several newspaper correspondents including two American citizens, Mr. Wile of the New York Times, and Mr. Bouton of the Associated Press, were arrested at the Hotel Adlon and taken to the Polizei Præsidium, under suspicion of espionage on the ground that they had been sending several telegrams and had been talking English. The Embassy made immediate representations to the Foreign Office and they were released within half an hour. Many Americans have been mistaken for Englishmen and arrested, and some have been mishandled by the crowd. The fury of the public against England is intense. The Kaiser to-day opened the Reichstag, which voted the war fund without opposition, even the Social Democrats cheering the Chancellor’s speech, an unprecedented event. The press urged the public to be on the lookout for spies, which greatly increased the danger to all peaceful foreigners in Germany. In the evening it was learned that Italy, instead of assisting her ally, was to remain neutral and a hostile demonstration was made before the Italian Embassy.

August 5. We sealed the archives and took charge of the British Embassy to-day. The insults which have been heaped upon Englishmen here are most regrettable: the hotels will not keep them, they are attacked or spat upon in the street and arrested whenever found by the police. The Embassy has suggested that Americans wear small American flags in their buttonholes for safety. There seems to be little animosity against France, she is regarded as coming into the war against her will and the general feeling is one of pity; all the German venom is vented on Russia and England. We learn that the German Embassy in St. Petersburg has been sacked by the Russian mob and the clerk of the Embassy, Herr Kattner, who has been there for thirty years, beaten to death. This has been confirmed. Mr. Conger of the Associated Press, returned to-day, having been five days in prison, fed on black bread and water; when finally brought up for examination in the town in East Prussia where he had been arrested, the examining official had him immediately sent back to Berlin where he was kept sitting on a bench in the Polizei Præsidium from six in the evening until ten the following morning and was then released. The Embassy has had to make continual representations to the Foreign Office in similar cases; the fault lies with the overzealous military authorities, not with the Government. The German press announced to-day that German warships had destroyed towns on the coast of Algeria and that a Russian cavalry brigade had been annihilated, near Soldau.

August 6. The British Ambassador and his staff left to-day for Holland in a special train. No ordinary trains have been running since the beginning of the mobilization. The British Minister in Dresden, Mr. Grant-Duff, and his wife came to Berlin also in a special train, which took nine hours for the journey as against the usual three hours; the windows of the Legation were broken by the mob before they left and they were told by the guard of the train that if they stood up, or lifted the drawn curtains, or even lit the lights, they would probably be shot by the mob en route. The English newspaper correspondents in Berlin left with the Embassy, but were not allowed, in most cases, to take even articles of dress from their apartments. The newspapers to-day published appeals to the public not to mistake Americans for Englishmen, as the former were friends. We received to-day the Department’s announcement that the Tennessee was coming with gold for the assistance of destitute Americans. There are many cases of want even among wealthy Americans, owing to their inability to draw on letters of credit and to cash checks.

The Embassy has organized various departments, each under the supervision of a chief and assistants, as follows: Correspondence department, passport department, inquiry department, relief department and British department. All departments are thronged daily from 9 a.m. until midnight. Many Americans have volunteered their services as assistants and the office staff now numbers some thirty persons, every one of whom is needed. The crowd waiting to gain admission into the Embassy daily extends far into the street. The Embassy is endeavoring to keep Americans throughout Germany informed of developments and possible means of returning to the United States by notices published in the press and by circulars sent regularly to the various Consuls. A register is kept and card catalogued of all Americans and British subjects who come to the Embassy, so that inquiries from friends may be answered immediately, and the various Consuls are, at the Embassy’s direction, preparing lists of American citizens desiring repatriation.

As Germany has invaded and broken the neutrality of Belgium, the Belgian Minister and his staff left Berlin with the British Embassy staff to-day. The German Government takes the attitude that the invasion of Belgium was necessary for strategic purposes and that she would uphold the word of honor given by the Chancellor to vacate Belgium immediately after the war. England’s entrance into the war has, however, altered the situation. Germany is now doing her utmost to justify her action by means of statements in the press and the circulation of “white books”; these are largely printed in English for the benefit of Americans returning to the United States, as Germany is well aware that the press despatches to the American newspapers come from England and France and that they are naturally prejudicial to her interests. There is a marked attitude of ultrafriendliness to us at the Foreign Office and by all officials.

August 7. The German press to-night publishes the statement that Liége has fallen to the Germans and there is enormous excitement and great rejoicing among the public. It would be interesting to hear the other side of the story, but we receive no news from outside the country. It is also reported that the Königin Luise , a German mine-layer, has been sunk off the Thames while laying mines, but that she first destroyed the British cruiser Amphion.

August 8. The public enthusiasm over the taking of Liége, which is reported by the press to have been carried out with little loss, continues, but no details are given.

August 9. No news from the front came in to-day. The papers comment on the fact that Japan has not declared neutrality. The hostile feeling against Italy for having declared neutrality seems to have declined and the press and public seem to appreciate her reasons for not supporting her ally actively. The feeling against England still continues at white heat, however, and all English signs and advertisements on the principal streets of Berlin have been painted out. One word of English spoken over the telephone causes the operator to cut the connection. Letters and telegrams from Americans in different parts of Germany pour in at the rate of a hundred or more daily, asking for information as to how to leave the country, how to secure money, etc., etc., and the Embassy can with the greatest difficulty cope with the correspondence. There appear to be over 3,000 Americans in Berlin itself and more than 10,000 in Germany desiring transportation to the United States. The Embassy has arranged with certain banks for the cashing of checks and letters of credit up to a certain sum.

August 10. The Ambassador had an audience with the Emperor this morning and delivered President Wilson’s message offering his services for mediation at any possible opportunity. The Emperor wrote out a long memorandum explaining his endeavors to avoid the war and thanking the President for his message. In the evening tremendous enthusiasm was caused by the publication of a statement that the Germans had defeated an entire French army corps and a division near Belfort in Upper Alsace. No reports of German reverses have come in as yet.

August 11. This morning a German soldier, who had been in France when the war broke out, had gotten through the French lines at night, swam the river into Luxemburg, crossed thence into Germany and had traveled steadily for a week to Berlin, brought us a message from a large number of Americans—1,000 he estimated—who stated that they were bottled up in Luxemburg and could neither leave nor communicate with the outside world, and had asked him to bring their message to us. We have taken the matter up with the Foreign Office and our Legation at The Hague and hope soon to secure permission for them to leave. An American gentleman arrived to-day from Holland and brought a sad story of conditions along the railroad: he said that those Americans who had tried to get to the frontier by the ordinary trains, a few of which have now begun to run again, were frequently ejected when soldiers wanted transportation and were obliged to wait at small stations without means of procuring food until another train happened to come along. The Embassy is now arranging for special trains for Americans to be sent to Holland every week or oftener, with dining and baggage cars.

A meeting of high officials and others was to-day held at the Rathaus to emphasize Germany’s friendship for the United States. The press is now daily publishing articles on this subject, aiming to show the sympathy existing between the two countries and urging the German public to show Americans every possible consideration and sign of hospitality.

The Embassy has begun to prepare lists of Americans desiring transportation to the United States, in three categories: (1) Families with children under 13; (2) unaccompanied women; (3) all others. The Consuls throughout Germany have been instructed to prepare similar lists covering their respective districts.

It is reported to-night that 700 French prisoners have been taken by the Germans near the Alsatian frontier. The papers are also full of reports of Belgian cruelties to German non-combatants in Belgium.

August 12. The press reports a great battle near Mülhausen in which the Germans were victorious and took 1,500 prisoners, but no details.

With the exception of the calling out of the entire Landsturm on August 15, no important events occurred or were reported in Berlin during the period August 12 to 18.

The Embassy has already sent one special train to Holland with nearly 300 Americans, another will follow to-morrow with 400, another on the following day, and still another next week. Special trains have also been arranged by the Embassy for Americans in Munich and Carlsbad, via Bodenbach, and in Switzerland, via Lindau, straight to Rotterdam, whence many have engaged passages to the United States. In view of the great pressure of travel and the limited sailings of the Holland-America Line, however, there will necessarily be several thousand American citizens desiring repatriation by such transports as may ultimately be sent from the United States. All communications on this subject are being cabled by the Embassy to the Department.

Up to the present, British subjects, whose protection and interests are in the Embassy’s charge, have not been permitted to leave Germany, but I am endeavoring to have this order rescinded and have made urgent representations to the Foreign Office, to the effect that while no possible good can be accomplished by the retention of British subjects in this country against their will, much inconvenience can be avoided by releasing them and much benefit brought to German subjects similarly held in England through reciprocal kindly treatment. I believe that my representations will be successful within a few days.

The Relief Department of the Embassy, which has been accomplishing splendid work since the outbreak of the war under the supervision of Mrs. Gerard, assisted by Mrs. Ruddock, Mrs. Gherardi and other ladies, has dealt with and relieved a very large number of cases of destitution and has forwarded funds for the same purpose to many of the Consulates throughout Germany. A large proportion of the money thus expended has been contributed by Mr. and Mrs. Ruddock themselves. As I have succeeded in inducing the Dresdener Bank, the Commerz and Disconto Gesellschaft and the Deutsche Bank to cash American letters of credit and checks up to a reasonable amount, many persons, who otherwise would have found themselves in need of funds, have obtained sufficient money to tide over their immediate wants.

Before closing this report, it is my pleasant duty to record the conscientious, tireless and most efficient service which has been rendered to the Embassy, and to American citizens who have sought the Embassy’s assistance, by the five gentlemen who are serving as my private secretaries, three of whom I appointed in view of the unusual conditions now obtaining and who volunteered at the commencement of the crisis: Mr. L. Lanier Winslow and Mr. H. Rivington Pyne of New York, and Mr. Boylston Beal, Mr. Charles H. Russell, Jr., and Mr. Grafton Minot of Boston. Mr. Beal, who organized and superintended the British department, charged with the issuance of passports and the rendering of assistance to British subjects, is unfortunately obliged to leave us and I am entrusting to his care the pouch which will bring this despatch. His work deserves the highest commendation. The other four gentlemen are remaining indefinitely. Besides these private secretaries, I have accepted the voluntary services of a large corps of American men and women travelers who found themselves in Berlin at the outbreak of the war and being temporarily without occupation offered most patriotically to assist the Embassy in coping with the unusual conditions which immediately arose. Several have acted as stenographers and others have undertaken the card cataloguing of the American and British registers, passports issued, applications for transportation, etc. Without their assistance the business of the Embassy could not have been carried on in an efficient manner. I shall later send their names to the Department.

I have [etc.]

James W. Gerard

The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/816

[Document 185]

The Belgian Minister (Havenith) to the Secretary of State

Belgian Legation,
Washington, September 5, 1914.
[Received September 8.]

[Translation]

No. 953]

Mr. Secretary of State: By my letter dated August 28 last,1 I had the honor to communicate to your excellency the text of the note that had been handed to the Belgian Government by the Minister of Germany at Brussels and the reply made by the King’s Government to that ultimatum.

On August 9 the Imperial Government through the Legation of the United States at The Hague and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands forwarded to the King’s Government a note that may be summed up as follows:

Germany is not coming as Belgium’s foe. Force of circumstances alone compelled her, on account of the military measures of France, to come to the grave determination of entering Belgium and occupying Liége as a supporting point for her subsequent military operations. Now that the Belgian Army has saved in an extremely brilliant manner the honor of its arms by the heroic resistance opposed to much superior forces, the German Government offers to the King’s Government to spare Belgium the horrors of war. The German Government is ready to sign with Belgium any agreement that may be consistent with the contest it is carrying on with France. Germany renews the assurance that she has no intention to appropriate Belgian territory and that she is ready to evacuate it as soon as war conditions will permit.

The King’s Government returned the following answer to that note:

The proposition made to us by the German Government reproduces that which was formulated in the ultimatum of August 2. True to her international duties, Belgium can but reiterate her answer to that ultimatum, all the more as since August 3 her neutrality has been violated, grievous war has been waged on her territory, and the guarantors of her neutrality have loyally and immediately responded to her appeal.

The foregoing reply has received the approval of the guaranteeing powers appealed to by Belgium.

Be pleased [etc.]

E. Havenith

1 Not printed.

New suggestion of good offices and mediation (September 7–8)—Developments in the Near EastNew suggestion of good offices and mediation (September 7–8)—Developments in the Near East

[186] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 7, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 763.72119/20a

[187] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 7, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 10:50 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/20

[188] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain (Page) and France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, September 8, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72119/20b

[189] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, September 8, 1914. [Received September 9, 2 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/532

[190] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 10, 1914, 4 a.m. [Received 6:55 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/22

[191] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, September 9, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received September 10, 9:20 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/21

[192] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, September 10, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received September 11, 6:53 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/836

[193] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 12, 1914, 9 a.m. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/23

[194] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, July 30, 1914 , [Received September 12.]

File No. 763.72/854

[195] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 12, 1914. [Received September 13, 7:10 p.m.]

File No. 711.673/35

[196] The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 14, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received September 16, 6:45 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/24

[197] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 2, 1914. [Received September 16.]

File No. 763, 72/888

[198] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 16, 1914, 12 noon. [Received September 17, 9:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/896

[199] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, September 14, 1914, 12 noon. [Received September 18, 2:35 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/902

[200] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 18, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72/896

[201] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, August 19, 1914. [Received September 19.]

File No. 763.72/910

[202] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, August 19, 1914. [Received September 19.]

File No. 763.72111/390

[203] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, August 19, 1914. [Received September 19.]

File No. 763.72111/391

[204] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 19, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received September 20, 1:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/917

[205] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, September 20, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received September 21, 1:30 a.m.]

File No. 711.673/42

[206] The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 20, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received September 22, 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/931

[207] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 23, 1914.

File No. 763.72/931

[208] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, September 24, 6 p.m. [Received September 25, 1914, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/965

[209] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, September 1, 1914. [Received September 25.]

File No. 763.72/989

[210] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, September 27, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received September 28, 7:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111/398

[211] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, New York, September 26, 1914. [Received September 28.]

File No. 763.72/1003

[212] The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, September 29, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 5:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1009

[213] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, September 29, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 9:50 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/401

[214] The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Athens, September 11, 1914. [Received September 29.]

File No. 868.00/74

[215] Unsigned telegram from Constantinople to the British Embassy at Washington, September 30, 1914

[Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, October 1, 1914, 3 p.m. ]

File No. 763.72/1032

[216] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, October 2, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 2:80 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1030

[217] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 31, 1914. [Received October 3.]

File No. 704.4167/5

[218] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

[219] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, October 3, 1914. [Received 4:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1043

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72119/20a

[Document 186]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 7, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

The President desires me to communicate the following: At a dinner Saturday night Hon. Oscar Straus asked Count Bernstorff if he thought the German Emperor would favorably consider an offer of mediation if extended by the President. Count Bernstorff replied that, while he had had no communication on the subject from his Government since he left Berlin, he believed from what the Chancellor said to him when he was returning to the United States that the Emperor would accept mediation if the other interested nations would. I have just received from Count Bernstorff confirmation of this dinner conversation. He cannot, of course, say whether the Emperor would agree to an armistice during mediation but he is willing that we should report to the German Government through you the conversation between him and Mr. Straus and ask the views of the Emperor. You will, therefore, please deliver a paraphrase of this despatch to the Emperor at once and say to him that upon receipt of a favorable reply the President will make similar inquiry of the other governments and that he will be much gratified if he can be the means of bringing the parties into conference with a view to the adjustment by them of their differences.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/20

[Document 187]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 7, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 10:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

621. The agreement between the Allies published to-day that no one will consent to end hostilities till all three consent is England’s declaration to the Kaiser that no peace proposals will be entertained till one side or the other is completely exhausted. The English are preparing for a long war. They mean to fight till promilitarism is utterly crushed.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain (Page) and France (Herrick) File No. 763.72119/20b

[Document 188]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain (Page) and France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, September 8, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram]

Oscar Straus at a dinner given by Speyer of New York, met the German Ambassador. During conversation Straus asked the Ambassador whether he thought Germany would accept mediation at this time. The Ambassador answered that while he had received no communication from his government on the subject since leaving Berlin, a conversation he had with the Chancellor just before leaving led him to believe that the Kaiser would accept mediation if the other nations also expressed willingness. I sent for the Ambassador and he confirmed the conversation and replying to my question said he was willing to have the conversation reported to the German Government and the Emperor’s views asked. I sent a cable yesterday at the President’s direction to Berlin reporting the conversation and asking for the views of the Emperor, saying that if he responded favorably a similar inquiry would be addressed to the other governments. The British and French Ambassadors have been informed of the substance of our inquiry and Straus has spoken to both of them about his interview with Bernstorff. We do not know, of course, what reply the German Emperor will make but this war is so horrible from every aspect that no one can afford to take the responsibility for continuing it a single hour. The British and French Ambassadors fear that Germany will not accept any reasonable terms but even a failure to agree will not rob an attempt at mediation of all its advantages because the different nations would be able to explain their attitude, the reasons for continuing the war, the end to be hoped for and the terms upon which peace is possible. This would locate responsibility for the continuation of the war and help to mold public opinion. Will notify you as soon as answer is received from Bernstorff.

Bryan

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/532

[Document 189]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, September 8, 1914.
[Received September 9, 2 a.m.]

[Telegram]

53. Received this evening following from Gerard:

Extremely urgent. September 8. German General Staff recommend that Americans leave Paris via Rouen, Le Havre. They will have to leave soon if they wish to.

To which I have replied:

I appreciate your telegram number 22. This Embassy has for some time past been advising Americans to leave Paris and many have already departed. As, however, I represent many important interests here I deem it imperative to remain together with my staff. Under all circumstances I feel satisfied that should German forces enter Paris, necessary measures will be taken to protect not only American property but other property entrusted to my care. Please communicate above to German Government.

Am taking immediate steps to urge Americans to leave Paris.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/22

[Document 190]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 10, 1914, 4 a.m.
[Received 6:55 a.m.]

[Telegram]

636. Referring to your telegram of September 8, 4 p.m. I have on my own account had an informal conference with Sir E. Grey about possible mediation. He reminded me that he exhausted every honorable means to keep peace and that every government involved showed a disposition to meet some of his proposals except Germany. She had deliberately planned and prepared for a war. Still he is willing to come to any honorable arrangement for peace now or at any time but everything will depend on the terms. The war has already revealed two great facts, first, that all Europe has been living on the brink of a precipice and, second, that Germany has done a grievous and irreparable wrong to Belgium. No peace can be concluded that will permit the continuance of or the recurrence of an armed brute power in central Europe which violates treaties to make war and in making war assaults the continuity of civilization. Any terms that England will agree to must provide for an end of militarism forever and for reparation to ruined Belgium.

The foregoing was Grey’s wholly private talk to me not to be quoted to anybody nor made public. It was personal and must be regarded as inviolably secret.

The following is the practically universal view held here. They regard the German Emperor and the system of government that be stands for as they regarded Napoleon, a world pest and an enemy of civilization, and that there can be no permanent peace till he and his system are utterly overthrown.

All the Allies must agree on peace terms before anyone can consent. They would all regard it as a part of the German propaganda if the Emperor should now make an impossible offer so that on its rejection the peace advocates in the United States would say that the Allies are to blame for the continuance of the war. That is precisely what the Emperor is playing for.

I send you this as the opinion universally held here. Such a move has been openly discussed here in the press and is expected. The feeling here is that there can be no peace now on any terms that the Emperor will propose, and that he knows this and if he proposes anything now he will propose it only to affect public opinion in America. If our Government tries to bring about any premature or inadequate proposal, this action may prejudice us as possibly successful mediators later.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/21

[Document 191]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, September 9, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received September 10, 9:20 a.m.]

[Telegram]

59. Your September 8, 4 p.m., suggests to me consideration of the following facts: 1. President Poincaré’s remark to me when I delivered the President’s communication to him on August 6 to the effect that France was not the aggressor in the present war and could not, therefore, accept a proffer of mediation.

2. President Poincaré’s statement to me on September 2 that France would consider the struggle to the end and would not accept any terms of peace.

3. Agreement of the Entente powers at London not to make peace independently of each other.

In view of the above facts and considering the certainty that a proposal for mediation would be refused by the Entente powers at present, might it not appear that Germany was making a bid for the aid and sympathy of the neutral powers by espousing a proposition which she knows to be unacceptable to the nations with whom she is at war?

Await with much interest your further telegrams on this subject.

Herrick

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/836

[Document 192]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, September 10, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received September 11, 6:53 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Consul at Belgrade reports that Servian forces have taken Sem and surrounding country. Roumanian Government appears ready to take action shortly.

Vopicka

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/23

[Document 193]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 12, 1914, 9 a.m.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

110. I presented the matter referred to in the conversation between Mr. Oscar Straus and Count Bernstorff in an informal manner not wishing to receive a refusal so formal as to prevent future similar offers. Have had no answer but know that time is not yet ripe. I think possibly the Kaiser’s letter to the President about dumdum bullets, etc.1 , offers an opportunity to get in the situation in a conciliatory capacity and suggest that you request me to investigate the charges made.

Gerard

1  post, p. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261].

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/854

[Document 194]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, July 30, 1914 ,
[Received September 12.]

Servian Series]

No. 28]

Sir: I have the honor to submit herewith a brief report on the present crisis between Austria-Hungary and Servia, and to inform the Department that it has proven extremely difficult from Roumania to keep in touch, except after a lapse of time such as to make telegraphic communications with you inexpedient, with the kaleidoscopic movement of recent events between Austria and Servia. It has been generally known since the perpetration of the Sarajevo crime that a rigorous investigation into the circumstances of the assassination was being made by the Austrian authorities, and that representations to Servia in regard thereto were likely.

An ultimatum in the severe tone of a note presented to the Servian Government on July 24, was hardly expected. An answer to this note was demanded within the time of 48 hours. The principal demands of the Austrian note, as summarized by the well-informed correspondent of the London Times were as follows: 1. That the Servian Government give a formal assurance that it condemns Serb propaganda against the Monarchy;

2. That a declaration expressing this condemnation be published on the front page of the Servian Official Journal of Sunday next;

3. That the declaration shall also express regret that Servian officers and officials participated in the anti-Austrian propaganda;

4. That the Servian Government promises to proceed with the utmost rigor against all who may be guilty of such machinations;

5. That this declaration be simultaneously communicated by the King of Servia to his Army as an order of the day, and be published in the official bulletin of the Army;

6. That all Servian publications which incite to hatred and contempt of Austria-Hungary be suppressed;

7. That a society styled the Naradno Obrana (National Union) be dissolved and its means of propaganda confiscated;

8. That teachers and methods of education in Servia which tend to foment feeling against Austria-Hungary be eliminated;

9. That all officers and officials guilty of propaganda against Austria-Hungary be dismissed from the service, the Austro-Hungarian Government reserving [to] itself the right to communicate to Servia the names and doings of such officers and officials;

10. That representatives of Austria-Hungary shall assist Servia in suppressing in Servia the movement directed against the territorial integrity of the Dual Monarchy and take part in the judicial proceedings on Servian territory against persons accessory to the Sarajevo crime;

11. That Servia furnish the Austro-Hungarian Government with explanations in regard to the utterances of high Servian officials in Servia and abroad who ventured to speak ill of the Austro-Hungarian Government after the Sarajevo crime;

12. That the execution of the foregoing measures be notified immediately to the Austro-Hungarian Government; and

13. That the Servian reply to this note be made by 6 o’clock on Saturday evening at latest.

After such consideration of the Austrian demands as was possible in the limit of time, Servia submitted a reply granting everything which her powerful neighbor demanded except those terms which were inconsistent with the sovereignty of the country. As Enclosure No. 11 with this despatch I beg to transmit a complete English text of the Servian reply.

As the Servian response did not prove a categorical acceptance of the Austrian demands, the Austrian Minister at Belgrade, upon the expiration of the time limit named in the note, withdrew, and the same evening the Servian Minister at Vienna was handed his passports.

I was informed July 29 by the Roumanian Minister for Foreign Affairs that Austria had issued a formal declaration of war.

Telegrams which I had received from the American Consulate at Belgrade reported that there was great excitement in that city. Latterly however, all telegraphic communications with Belgrade had ceased and it is reported that the Servian Court and Government, fearing the approach of the Austrian troops, have retreated into the interior of the country. I will not here comment upon the possible effects throughout Europe of this war and I will not fail to keep the Department fully informed of the developments.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

1 Not printed: the enclosure consists of a clipping the Londan Times of July 27, 1914.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.673/35

[Document 195]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 12, 1914.
[Received September 13, 7:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

130. Following communicated to the Department at the request of German Foreign Office:

Great Britain, France, and Russia have given to understand at Constantinople that they were willing to agree to the abolition of the capitulations in case Turkey remained neutral. Turkey replied that her neutrality was not for sale, but on the other hand drew the consequences and published an imperial irade, proclaiming the abolition of the capitulations.1 The ambassadors of the powers signatory were advised accordingly by the Grand Vizier. The German Ambassador at Constantinople has informed his colleagues that he was willing to discuss the situation with them should they so desire.

It seems that meanwhile rumors are spread by the representatives of Great Britain, France, and Russia that the capitulations were abolished at the instance of Germany. This is evidently done to make Germany responsible for the consequences and put all the blame on her in the eyes of the neutral powers.

Gerard

1 See Foreign Relations, 1914, p. 1090.

The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/24

[Document 196]

The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State 2

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 14, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received September 16, 6:45 a.m.]

[Telegram]

149. I transmit following verbal message from the Imperial Chancellor which seems an opening to mediation:

The Imperial Chancellor is much obliged for America’s offer. Germany did not want war. It was forced upon her. Even after we shall have defeated France, we shall still have to face England and Russia. England, France and Russia have signed a convention to make peace solely in mutual agreement with each other. England, that is, Mr. Asquith, the London Times, and English diplomatic officers, have on various occasions [stated] that England is determined to conduct the war to the utmost and that she expects success be from lasting [sic] a long time. It is therefore up to the United States to get our enemies to make peace proposals. Germany can only accept a peace which promises to be a real and lasting peace and will protect her against any new attacks from her enemies. If we accepted America’s offer of mediation now, our enemies would interpret it as a sign of weakness and the German people would not understand it. For the nation which has been willing to make such sacrifices has a right to demand that there shall be guaranties of rest and security.

Gerard

2 Repeated on September 21 to the Ambassadors in Great Britain and France.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763, 72/888

[Document 197]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 2, 1914.
[Received September 16.]

No. 206]

Sir: Very little news is given out here, but please be sure of one thing, and that is that Germany is walking through the French, English, and Russian armies as if they were paper hoops. The Germans will soon have a position near the seacoast in the neighborhood of Ostend, and then they can send Zeppelins to England. I respectfully suggest; that consideration might now be given to the probable German demands after the war and their effect on the United States. Germany will surely demand some or all of the French colonies and among these French colonies are the islands of Guadaloupe and Martinique in the West Indies, and I think the island of Miquelon near Nova Scotia, as well as French Guiana. There are also naturally the French Pacific islands to be considered. The war spirit here is extraordinary; Berlin is as calm as in time of peace. There is no confusion. At present our special trains to Holland are not running. This, I think, is because of the sending of troops from the western to the eastern frontier, but the great victories over the Russians in East Prussia will probably make further movements of this kind unnecessary.

Assistant Secretary of War Breckenridge arrived here with his staff on the 23d of August. He is now in Vienna. He left Major Ryan here, and Major Ryan has taken charge of the transportation bureau, a great relief to us all; he seems most tactful and efficient. Consul General Lay has also arrived. It is hard; work to get the Americans out of Germany, as many of them show a desire to stay here.

One million, two hundred thousand volunteers enrolled in a few days, this of course in addition to the millions already on the army lists; this will give you an idea of the spirit of the people. The people are far more incensed against England than against France or Russia, and I am sure will never forget the action of Japan nor fail to take their revenge. The Emperor, the Chancellor, and practically all the Ministers are at the front, probably Coblenz, although they [may] be now further north; the exact place of headquarters is always kept secret.

Many English women and girls are detained here but Germany will not let them go until an answer to their proposition is received from England. If England refuses to let men of military age go, an arrangement can probably be made about the women and children, but Germany thinks it is at least entitled to an answer.

We have received the enclosed communication from the Foreign Office here about the Declaration of London.1

I am writing this under constant interruptions from Americans asking me to prophesy about the war, which accounts for the disjointed style. Messrs. Gibson and Jones of bankers’ committee are also here.

I have [etc.]

James W. Gerard

1 Printed with the documents on this subject, post, p. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/896

[Document 198]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 16, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received September 17, 9:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

182. Department’s telegram August 28, 7 p.m.1 German Government unable to understand United States refusal to take action relative to neutralization of the African colonies lying within the conventional free-trade zone. They state that since the United States has kindly assumed German interests in the countries at war with Germany, it is only natural that they should seek the good offices of the American Government for the assertion of their wishes. As a matter of course, it remains in the discretion of the American Government to determine in what form the German requests are to be presented to the other belligerents, but in the opinion of the German Government no such request ought properly to be refused unless calculated to compromise the neutrality of the United States or conflict with the principles of law and equity.

The German Government hoped that their request, which aimed at avoidance of unnecessary accentuation of the present conflict inimical to the common cultural interests of the white race, would meet with full sympathy at the hands of the American Government, particularly in view of the attitude of the American representative at the Congo conference. They consider that the fact that the United States did not ratify the Congo Act of February 26, 1885, is irrelevant, the German Empire, which requests the good offices of the American Government, being a signatory power. The Imperial Government believes that the American Government will take the same view upon reconsideration and venture to renew their request as stated in my telegram of August 22, 11 a.m.

Gerard

1  Ante, p. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170].

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/902

[Document 199]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, September 14, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received September 18, 2:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Upon receipt last night of reports of Russian victories, a popular demonstration hostile to Austria-Hungary and Germany was suppressed by police and military. It appears likely that Roumania will enter into conflict with Russia within a few days.

Vopicka

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72/896

[Document 200]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 18, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

192. Your September 16, 12 noon. Inquire of the German Foreign Office whether they desire to have American Government request in the name of Germany the other belligerent countries to agree to the neutralization of the African colonies lying within the conventional free-trade zone. Your telegrams of August 22 and September 16, taken together, render it a little doubtful exactly what position Germany desires the United States to assume in this matter. There is a great difference between the United States proposing this neutralization on behalf of Germany and in her suggesting it herself as a neutral country, which seemed to be substantially what Germany requested according to your telegram of August 22.

Lansing

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/910

[Document 201]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, August 19, 1914.
[Received September 19.]

Servian Series]

No. 29]

Sir: Referring to my despatch, Servian Series No. 27, of July 16,1 I have the honor to state that during my last visit in Belgrade I had the pleasure of meeting and conversing freely with nearly all the representatives of foreign countries. Baron Giesl von Gieslingen, the Austrian Minister, and Baron von Griesinger, the German Minister, especially talked to me about the Sarajevo tragedy and the Austrian Minister stated that Servia must give full satisfaction to Austria for the murder of Archduke Ferdinand. It happened that I visited Mr. Pachitch, the Servian Minister for Foreign Affairs, as the Austrian Minister retired. Mr. Pachitch complained of the action of Austria saying that efforts were being made to hold the Servian Nation responsible for the crime. The Minister for Foreign Affairs further stated that Austria demanded that all Servian students in Sarajevo should be expelled and sent back to Servia, etc.

I am sure that none of the diplomats in Belgrade expected within a week after the funeral of Mr. Hardwig, the late Russian Minister at Belgrade, that war would have been declared by Austria against Servia. The Servian people themselves were not unprepared for war as the Austrian newspapers threatened them continually. Taking everything into consideration without prejudice, it seems to me that Austria wanted to have war with Servia and that the death of Archduke Ferdinand was welcomed as a casus belli.

The Austrians have for years been predominant in the Servian markets but lost nearly all of this trade in 1912 upon the inception of the war between Turkey and the Balkan allies. The Servians charge that Austria, by the creation of the independent state of Albania, is responsible for the disruption of the Balkan Alliance. Of course this, action was taken by Austria to deprive Servia of access to the Adriatic Sea. The late Archduke was the advocate of this anti-Servian policy and therefore it was no wonder that Servians did not like him as he had prevented the realization of the nation’s dream to own a large port on the Adriatic. Austria-Hungary is very jealous of greater Servia as it has progressed and extended against her will.

The agreement between Austria and Bulgaria which [it] is claimed was made after Bulgaria’s defeat by Greece and Servia, did not stop Servia and the friendship between this nation and Greece was very much disliked by Austria, but the greatest dissatisfaction came when it was announced that Greece had made an agreement with Servia regarding the port of Saloniki, which was to be also a Servian port on the Aegean Sea, and thus give an outlet to Servia to the sea which Austria had always tried to stop. There was no more chance to stop this and therefore Austria felt very unfriendly not only to Servia but to Greece also.

On the other hand Austrians charge that Russia was trying to get a hold on the whole of the Balkan Peninsula, including the city of Constantinople, and that Servia was her tool which should help her to accomplish the purpose.

It seems therefore that the Balkan Peninsula, which is like a volcano ready to explode at any time, played a large rôle in the world’s affairs; because taking into consideration the quick action of Germany in joining Austria in the present war, every intelligent man must actually believe that this new European war was brought about only for one purpose and that is for the supremacy of the world’s commerce.

The opinion of Lieutenant Miles, our military attaché, is that Austria was anxious to get a strip of land known as the Sandjak of Novibazar, which is a strip of land to the east of Herzegovina and which in 1912 at the close of the Turkish war was divided by Servia and Montenegro, thus joining the two nations of the same race. It is probable that it is this territory which Austria wants, both in order to sever Servia from Montenegro and to open the Austrian road to Saloniki. Austria also undoubtedly hopes that this war will strengthen her hold on the Slavonic people of her empire, but I believe she wants a great deal more than that.

Servia is a small country, but in case of war she has an army of 350,000 soldiers, all great patriots and enemies of Austria. They know the enormous task before them but they hope for success from the intense devotion of their people for their cause, the instinct knowledge of the theatre of war and the definite time limit in which Austria must win or give up. Of course now the result of the Servian war depends entirely on the outcome of the European war. The Servian Army is now fully mobilized. By the National Assembly at Nish, General Paulovitch was made commander of the Servian Army with headquarters at Kragujevatz.

In conformity with your telegraphic instructions I have undertaken the protection of German interests in Servia. Many appeals have already come to me for assistance. I have freely conferred with my German colleague and will, in due course, submit to you a full report.

As the protection of Austrian interests in Servia were, at the time of the withdrawal of the German Minister, intrusted to his Legation, I have at his request and further at the instance of our Embassy in Vienna, undertaken likewise the protection of the Austro-Hungarian interests in Servia.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/390

[Document 202]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, August 19, 1914.
[Received September 19.]

Roumanian Series]

No. 112]

Sir: I have the honor, in confirmation of my recent telegrams reporting upon the political situation in Roumania in relation to the general European conflagration, to state that public opinion in Roumania is becoming more pronounced in favor of the maintenance of complete neutrality by this country in the present crisis. This is the official attitude of the Government, no change having been decided upon since the convocation of the Grown conference on August 3 at which, as I informed you in my telegram of August 4, 9 a.m.,1 it was decided that Roumania should remain neutral and that while no general mobilization was ordered at that time the troops along the frontier were, it was decided, to be augmented. This military movement has since continued and Roumania is at the present time practically upon its war basis.

As I informed you in my telegram of August 11, 11 a.m.,2 the efforts of Austria to embroil Roumania in the conflict by calling upon it to fulfill the terms of the treaty entered into with Austria thirty-five years ago have not been successful, although the sympathies of His Majesty the King of Roumania, who is a member of the Hohenzollern family, are naturally with the Germans and Austrians in the present contest.

The present condition of affairs in Europe has had A disastrous result upon business in Roumania. Banking transactions are at A standstill and the circulation of silver coins was so abridged that until the Government put into circulation bank notes of five francs it was with difficulty that change could be obtained for a 20-or A 100-franc note.

Mr. Take Jonesco, the former Minister of the Interior; has well expressed in an interview, a translation of which I enclose with this despatch, the point of view which is that of A large majority of Roumanian public men who are neither closely affiliated with the Crown on the one hand nor Russophiles on the other hand.

I will continue to keep the Department advised in regard to Roumania’s position.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

[Enclosure]

Translation of interview with Mr. Take Jonesco, the former Minister of the Interior

Upon the question asked of Mr. Take Jonesco if Roumania would be able to stay neutral, Mr. Take Jonesco replied:

Yes, I assure you with certainty that we shall not be attacked by any one of the two large empires actually in war. Both know that we can not allow the violation of our territory and neither one wishes to add to his enemy half a million bayonets.

Roumania cannot be dishonored and suspected of any immoral politics such as to wait to see which is the weaker of the two enemies to declare against him. Besides, outside of any moral question, those who would advocate such a policy might be greatly disappointed. The actual war will last for some time, will be difficult and will see many ups and downs.

Two enormous armies are taking part in it on different fields of war, the land and the sea. The outcome cannot depend on one or two battles. Any one suspecting himself competent might be mistaken.

In regard to the opinion of the other party Mr. Take Jonesco added:

I see that the Government through its Ministry of Finance has given to the country many quieting assurances.

Nobody has the right to doubt men as Messrs. J. Bratiano and his colleagues, and the conservators [sic] whom I have met these last days the leader of which is Mr. J. Lahovary, whose competence and sincerity cannot be doubted, I have found of the same opinion as myself.

Mr. Take Jonesco further adds:

I have listened to all sorts of contingencies, but there is not one which could change the will of the nation. This will is the result of a sincere examination of the interests of the Roumanian kingdom, the only ones for which one can give Roumanian blood and spend the gold of the country.

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143].

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/391

[Document 203]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, August 19, 1914.
[Received September 19.]

Bulgarian Series]

No. 122]

Sir: I have the honor to report, in confirmation of my recent telegrams, that while martial law has been ordered and the Bulgarian Army has been practically placed upon a war footing, mobilization has not formally been decreed, and the policy of neutrality announced by the Bulgarian Government upon the outbreak of hostilities between Servia and Austria-Hungary remains unchanged.

The general mobilization of the Turkish Army has occasioned considerable misgivings in Bulgaria, for as Lieutenant Miles, our Military Attaché in Sofia, has advised me, the Bulgarians are apprehensive of a Turkish advance. As a result of Turkish mobilization train service between Bulgaria and Turkey has been interrupted, but upon the request of the Bulgarian Government, twice-weekly train service between Sofia and Constantinople and Sofia and Dedeagach has been instituted. The Bulgarian Government further requested without success that the Turkish troops upon the frontier be withdrawn.

I will continue to keep the Department informed upon the developments in Bulgaria.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/917

[Document 204]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 19, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received September 20, 1:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

228. Turkish fleet being remanned by Germans and think will soon be in war.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.673/42

[Document 205]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, September 20, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received September 21, 1:30 a.m.]

[Telegram—Extract1 ]

Cruiser Breslau with two torpedo boats went into Black Sea this morning. German Ambassador informed me that they were sent there merely to demonstrate to Russia and Roumania that Turkey controls the Black Sea, and that there is no intention of attacking Russia. He also said that if Breslau is not molested the Turkish Government intends parading some other warships in the Black Sea within a few days. German Ambassador also told me that if Roumania attacked Austria, Turkey and Bulgaria would immediately move against Roumania. Russian Ambassador yesterday sent about thirty cases from his Embassy to Odessa.

Morgenthau

1 The full text of the telegram is printed in the section dealing with the abrogation of the capitulations, post, p. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213].

The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/931

[Document 206]

The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 20, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received September 22, 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

236. Department’s telegram September 18, 5 p.m. With reference to Germany’s proposition about neutralization of African colonies lying in conventional free-trade zone, Germany wishes the United States to act as messenger merely, to convey proposition to other powers.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72/931

[Document 207]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)1

Department of State,
Washington, September 23, 1914.

[Telegram]

At the request of the German Government and on the understanding that the Department is merely acting as a medium of communication and has no comments whatsoever to make, you may bring to the attention of the Foreign Office the fact that on August 22 the German Government addressed a note to the American Ambassador at Berlin, referring to Article 11 of the Congo Act of February 26, 1885, relating to the neutralization of the colonies lying within the conventional free-trade zone. The note points out that Chapter 3 of this act deals with neutrality, and that Germany is willing to agree to such neutralization.

Department is transmitting similar communications to the French and Belgian Governments.

Bryan

1 The same to the Ambassador in France and the Minister in Belgium

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/965

[Document 208]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, September 24, 6 p.m.
[Received September 25, 1914, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

18. Informed confidentially Greek Minister has heard war between Greece and Turkey imminent. Italy’s action problematical but weight of opinion is that she cannot long continue neutral.

Nelson Page

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/989

[Document 209]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, September 1, 1914.
[Received September 25.]

No. 661]

Sir: I have the honor to forward, in copy and translation, a note from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs notifying the United States Government of the opening of hostilities between France and Germany, the alleged infraction of certain conventions by the Imperial German Government and the intention of the French Government to observe the same with reservation of such reprisals as it may find necessary to take.

I have [etc.]

Myron T. Herrick

[Enclosure—Translation]

The French Minister of Foreign Affairs (Doumergue) to the American Ambassador (Herrick)

The Imperial German Government, after having permitted its troops to cross the frontier and to commit on French territory various acts of murder and violence; after having violated the neutrality of the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg in spite of the stipulations of the Convention of London of May 11, 1867, and of Convention V of The Hague of October 18, 1907, on the rights and duties of neutral powers and persons in case of war on land (Articles I and II), conventions signed by it; after having addressed an ultimatum to the Royal Government of Belgium with a view to exacting the passage of German troops across Belgian territory, in violation of the treaties of April 10, 1839, also signed by it, and of the above-mentioned convention of The Hague;

Declared war against France on August 3, 1914, at 18.45 o’clock (6.45 p.m.).

The Government of the Republic finds itself, under these conditions, obliged, on its part, to have recourse to arms.

It has therefore the honor, by this note, to inform the Government of the United States that a state of war exists between France and Germany from August 3, 1914, at 18.45 o’clock.

The Government of the Republic protests to all civilized nations and especially to the Governments signatories of the conventions and treaties above referred to, against the violation by the German Empire of its international obligations; it reserves to itself the liberty of using such reprisals as may be found necessary against an enemy so careless of his word. The Government of the Republic, which intends to observe the principles of the rights of man, will conduct itself during the continuance of hostilities according to the stipulations of the international conventions signed by France in regard to the laws of war on land and water.

The present notification, made in conformity with the provisions of Article 2 of the Third Hague Convention of October 18, 1907, relative to the opening of hostilities, and sent to Paris, August 4, 1914, at — o’clock.

Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
Paris , August 4, 1914.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/398

[Document 210]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, September 27, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received September 28, 7:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

British Ambassador informed me English Admiral in command squadron outside of Dardanelles compelled Turkish torpedo boat which wanted to enter Mediterranean to return to Dardanelles because British Government had instructed him to treat all Turkish ships having German officers or sailors aboard as German ships. On torpedo boat’s return Weber Pascha, a German commandant of the Dardanelles, thereupon placed additional mines which completely closed Dardanelles. Just called on Grand Vizier who confirmed closing of Dardanelles. He was greatly agitated and stated that Turkey does not desire war and that the charge that the Cabinet has hostile intentions in Egypt against British is untrue. I informed Grand Vizier that United States did not admit that Turkey has right to close Dardanelles in time of peace. He answered that he hoped this incident would shortly be settled and Dardanelles reopened. To me situation appears extremely critical.

American Ambassador

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1003

[Document 211]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
New York, September 26, 1914.
[Received September 28.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: On August 25 the Agence Havas gave out the following intelligence:

We hear from Petersburg that the Russian mobilization which had begun on July 25 was completed on August 24.

With reference to this Havas announcement I have, by order of my Government, the honor to call your excellency’s attention to the fact that, as is shown in the German White Book, the Russian Minister of War on July 27 assured, on his word of honor, the German Military Attaché that no mobilization order had yet been issued. That assurance was received two days later from the Chief of the Russian General Staff, also on his word of honor.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1009

[Document 212]

The Minister in Roumania (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, September 29, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 5:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to my cable of September 14, noon.1 It appears probable that, as a result of Crown Council which is to be held next Wednesday, war will be declared by Roumania against Germany and Austria-Hungary. Great popular demonstrations are held here daily in favor of such action.

Vopicka

1  Ante, p. 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/401

[Document 213]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, September 29, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 9:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Turkish Government has notified England that Dardanelles will remain closed until English and French ships leave its mouth.

American Ambassador

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State File No. 868.00/74

[Document 214]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Greece (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Athens, September 11, 1914.
[Received September 29.]

Greek Series]

No. 43]

Sir: I have the honor to report that Greece has so far been able to get along without actually issuing the order for mobilization, which was expected at the beginning of the crisis. The Government has however sent up every available soldier to Saloniki and, to replace the garrisons of Athens and other towns in old Greece, has quietly summoned reservists. Short of a general mobilization, Greece is as well prepared for war as she can be.

Public opinion is strongly pro-French and I also hear that the King, although a brother-in-law of the German Emperor, has shown no preference to side with him. The country needs peace to consolidate its new territories and, if war comes, it will be due to Turkish action.

The German officials in the Balkans have been diligently striving to create a friendly feeling for Germany, even if it should be only a lively sense of gratitude for favors to come; but so far they do not seem to have had much success, and the recent Russian victories have done much to quench the warlike ardor of Bulgaria and Roumania. I do not despair of seeing Greece pull through without fighting.

I have [etc.]

Sheldon Whitehouse

Unsigned telegram from Constantinople to the British Embassy at Washington, September 30, 1914 File No. 763.72/1032

[Document 215]

Unsigned telegram from Constantinople to the British Embassy at Washington, September 30, 1914

[Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador,
October 1, 1914, 3 p.m. ]

There seems to be good reason to fear that in the general excitement which prevails in this part of the world, if war breaks out now Christians in Turkey will be in danger especially in outlying parts of the Empire, for instance, missionaries.

The present coal supplies will last the Turkish Fleet about six weeks. If the Turks get more coal, they will be encouraged to go to war. Their only source of supply is from the United States. Would it not be possible to put some difficulties in the way of this supply which will probably be carried out through British tramp steamers from American ports?

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1030

[Document 216]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, October 2, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 2:80 p.m.]

[Telegram]

It is affirmed, though unofficially, that Portugal, in accordance with English treaty obligation, will enter the war. It is my opinion that the above action will unquestionably be taken as soon as preparations shall have been completed.

Birch

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.4167/5

[Document 217]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 31, 1914.
[Received October 3.]

No. 301]

Sir: The information which reaches His Majesty’s Government from Constantinople shows that events are taking place there which may lead to a coup d’état and involve Great Britain in war with Turkey. In case this contingency should unfortunately occur His Majesty’s Government would wish that if possible British interests in that country should be entrusted to the diplomatic and consular representatives of the United States, and that British subjects and property may receive their protection during the period of hostilities.

I have received Sir Edward Grey’s instructions to ask if your Government would have the kindness to consent to this request, and I venture to express the hope that I may receive a favourable reply.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 218]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

No. 514]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 31, 1914, in which you request that in the event of war being declared between Great Britain and Turkey American diplomatic and consular officers take charge of British interests in that country, and in reply to inform you that should such contingency arise the Department will be glad to take the action requested by you.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1043

[Document 219]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Paris, October 3, 1914.
[Received 4:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

163. The following is a translation of third-person note from Foreign Office dated Bordeaux, September 28, in reply to communication made in accordance with your circular September 23.

The Ministry for Foreign Affairs has the honor to state that Germany having taken the initiative in hostilities against the French and Belgian possessions in the conventional basin of the Congo, the Government of the Republic has been obliged to beg the Spanish Government not to act on a request for good offices which at the suggestion of the Belgian Government it had already addressed the former in conformity with Article 11 of the Berlin Act.

Under these circumstances it is no longer possible for the French Government to avail itself of that article with a view to obtaining during the present war the neutralization of the possessions of belligerent powers situated in the conventional basin of the Congo.

Herrick

1 Transmitted to the Ambassador in Germany, October 5.

Further appeals for peace (October-November)—Turkey enters the WarFurther appeals for peace (October-November)—Turkey enters the War

[220] Memorandum by the Secretary of State

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72119/39

[221] The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Officers in the Belligerent Countries

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1914.

File No. 763.72/1105a

[222] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 12, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received October 13, 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1090

[223] The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Officers in the Belligerent Countries

Department of State, Washington, October 13, 1914.

File No. 763.72119/29

[224] The Minister in Venezuela (McGoodwin) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Caracas, September 29, 1914. [Received October 14.]

File No. 763.72119/27

[225] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 19, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received October 20, 8 a.m.]

File No. 867.00/692

[226] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, October 22, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No, 875.00/3

[227] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 24, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received 12 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1124

[228] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, October 2, 1914. [Received October 27.]

File No. 763.72/1135

[229] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 14, 1914. [Received October 27.]

File No. 763.72/1134

[230] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, October 9, 1914. [Received October 28.]

File No. 763.72/1139

[231] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Birch)

Department of State, Washington, October 28, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1143a

[232] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, October 12, 1914. [Received October 29.]

File No. 763.72111/3360

[233] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 29, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 12:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1143

[234] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, October 29, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received October 30, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1144

[235] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 29, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received October 30, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1147

[236] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 29, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received October 30, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1148

[237] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, October 29, 1914. [Received October 30, 4:35 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/555

[238] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 30, 1914, noon. [Received 10:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1152

[239] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 30, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received October 31, 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1156

[240] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 31, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received November 2, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1158

[241] The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, November 2, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 10:55 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1159

[242] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 1, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received November 2, 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1160

[243] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 5, 1914, 11:30 a.m. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1173

[244] The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, November 7, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received 11:58 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1180.

[245] The Persian Chargé d’Affaires (Kuli Khan) to the Acting Secretary of State

Persian Legation, Washington, November 6, 1914. [Received November 7.]

File No. 763.72111/596

[246] The Secretary of State to the Persian Chargé d’Affaires (Kuli Kahn)

Department of State, Washington, November 11, 1914.

[247] The Swiss Political Department to the Swiss Legation at Washington

Berne, November 11, 1914. [Communicated by the Swiss Minister to the Secretary of State, November 12, 1914.]

File No. 763.72119/115

[248] The Secretary of State to the Swiss Legation

November 14, 1914.

[249] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 4, 1914. [Received November 16.]

File No. 763.72111/672

[250] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 18, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received November 19, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72119/36

[251] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 15, 1914, 9 p.m. [Received November 20, 2:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1238

[252] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, November 2, 1914. [Received November 23.]

File No. 763.72/1251

[253] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 23, 1914. [Received 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1245

[254] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, undated. [Received November 24, 1914, 11:40 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1246

[255] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 24, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1238

[256] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, November 6, 1914. [Received November 30.]

File No. 763.72111/919

[257] The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Madrid, November 10, 1914. [Received November 30.]

File No. 763.72111/916

[258] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 7, 1914. [Received December 3.]

File No. 763.72/1276

[259] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, December 2, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received December 3, 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1277

[260] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 27, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received December 5, 6:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1285

[261] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, November 19, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 763.72/2221

[262] The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, November 5, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 763.72/1289

[263] The Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, November 19, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 763.72119/38

Memorandum by the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/39

[Document 220]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

Spanish Ambassador called to say that when the time came for mediation his Government would be pleased to act with this Government in a tender of good offices.

He seemed quite anxious that the President should understand that they were not only willing, but desirous of rendering any assistance in their power.

I have told him the matter would be laid before the President, and that I was sure the President would be pleased to know of their disposition.

I also asked him whether it would be possible for his Government to allow copper to be shipped to it directly, with the guarantee that it would not be reexported, or whether the Government would guarantee that copper shipped to private individuals in Spain would not be exported.

The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Officers in the Belligerent Countries File No. 763.72/1105a

[Document 221]

The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Officers in the Belligerent Countries

Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

In obedience to the proclamation of the President the people of the United States assembled at their places of worship on October 4 and joined in prayer for the restoration of peace in Europe. The attendance at these meetings was very large and there was everywhere a spirit of earnestness. Care was taken that nothing should be said of a non-neutral nature, the trend of the speeches being that God might so direct those in authority in the belligerent nations as to hasten the restoration of peace and that the American people might be wisely guided in the exercise of such influence as they might be able to exert.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1090

[Document 222]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 12, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received October 13, 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

478. On authority think hostilities between Turkey and Russia will commence soon and that ex-German ships Goeben and Breslau, rechristened Midilli and Javaz Sultan, with rest Turkish Fleet will attack Russian Fleet in Black Sea.

Gerard

The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Officers in the Belligerent Countries File No. 763.72119/29

[Document 223]

The Acting Secretary of State to American Diplomatic Officers in the Belligerent Countries

Department of State,
Washington, October 13, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

Governing board of Pan American Union, consisting of the representatives of all nations of America, at special meeting held on October 7, 1914, on motion of Chilean Minister on behalf of his Government, resolved to convey by cable to the belligerent countries of Europe, through the Secretary of State of United States as chairman of board, following resolution, unanimously adopted by board:

In view of the awful strife now devastating continental Europe and arousing universal sympathy, while profoundly disturbing the industrial and commercial interests of the world, the governing board of the Pan American Union hereby resolves to convey to the Governments of the belligerent countries an earnest expression of its hope for peace, as a tribute to the sentiments of fraternity which have inspired the meeting of the Pan-American conferences.

Communicate foregoing to Government to which you are accredited.

Lansing

The Minister in Venezuela (McGoodwin) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/27

[Document 224]

The Minister in Venezuela (McGoodwin) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Caracas, September 29, 1914.
[Received October 14.]

No. 288]

Sir: I have the honor to report that Dr. Manuel Diaz Rodriguez, Minister for Foreign Affairs, discussed with me in his office this morning the attitude of Great Britain with reference to the war now raging in Europe. He criticized the alleged determination of the British Government to prolong the conflict, declaring that such action works a much greater hardship upon Venezuela and all other South American countries proportionately than upon the Allies themselves. Dr. Diaz Rodriguez explained the purpose of his conversation as due to an earnest desire that the United States make another offer of its good offices to the nations at war and he gave me the impression that he may approach the other countries of South America with a view to making a joint appeal to Germany, representing that reasonable concessions should be made to the Allies as partial compensation for retention of that country’s commerce on this continent. It seems quite probable that there have been communications between the Venezuelan Foreign Office and most of the other South American Governments with some such purpose in view, but it is not yet clear whether an appeal will be made to all nations. I think the idea contemplates individual appeals—Peru to England, Venezuela to Germany, etc., the appellants addressing in each instance the European Government with which it has maintained the most extensive commercial relations or the most cordial, as the case may be. At all events, the antipathy to England for the reason given above is quite significant and it is most bitter in so far as this Government is concerned.

I have [etc.]

Preston McGoodwin

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/692

[Document 225]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 19, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received October 20, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The air is surcharged with all kinds of rumors, largely due to the present excited state of Government and diplomatic circles in Constantinople. As time progresses and the Germans have not been compelled to remove sailors and officers from the Goeben and Breslau, their actions are becoming more aggressive and correspondingly offensive to the English, French and Russians, whose patience may become exhausted. English and Russian Ambassadors have told me they are expecting trouble here, the English on account of warlike preparations in progress in vicinity of Egyptian boundaries and the Russian on account of the massing of Turkish troops at the Caucasian frontier and the maneuvering in the Black Sea of Turkish Fleet, augmented by the Goeben and Breslau and all officered by Germans. It seems that the Turkish war party desires to delay open conflict until result of general war can be more definitely forecast. Real danger consists in the war faction of the Union and Progress Party doing some foolish act that will precipitate a rupture, for instance, British Ambassador has remained at the Embassy for the past three days on account of warning received of plot to assassinate him. Time and place were [not stated]. British Ambassador abstained from attending memorial services for Roumanian King on Sunday. British Ambassador frankly told me that owing to British retention of Turkish dreadnoughts and the placing of British Fleet at the mouth of the [Dardanelles] and inflammatory articles against the English in Turkish press, he feared that he might receive similar treatment as Buxtons. When I spoke to the Grand Vizier to-day about the rumor as to the British Ambassador he assured me that nothing of the kind would happen. He also informed me that the Minister of the Interior would call on British Ambassador this afternoon and give him every assurance that his life was not in danger.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No, 875.00/3

[Document 226]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, October 22, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Reported, though not officially, that Italy has landed at Avlona for the purpose of maintaining order. Believed she has reached an agreement with other powers.

Nelson Page

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1124

[Document 227]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 24, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received 12 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Yesterday French Ambassador sent nine cases and to-day British Ambassador and Russian Counselor requested permission to send some cases to the Embassy for safe-keeping. The cases contain documents, silver, and other valuables. The British and Russian Ambassadors claim to have secret information that the Germans are now exerting extraordinary pressure to force the Ottoman Government into the general war and they, as well as French Ambassador, are, therefore, preparing for possible early departure. Secretary or War, while dining with me Thursday, said that Turkey does not contemplate attacking any country but intends to keep strengthening its army so as to be prepared for any emergency and is not considering partial demobilization as rumored. At my suggestion Minister of Public Instruction accompanied me to luncheon at Girls College and reception and concert at Robert College to-day. Both faculties appreciated his coming as it was the first time that any Minister of Public Instruction visited either institution. Minister of Public Instruction expressed great satisfaction with both institutions.

Please inform me if Tennessee is also to remain in Ottoman waters and comply with my requests.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1135

[Document 228]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, October 2, 1914.
[Received October 27.]

Roumanian Series]

No. 133]

Sir: Referring to my telegram of September 26 [29?], 1914, 3 p.m., in regard to Roumania’s probable entrance in action in the war have the honor to report that the Council of the Crown which was to have been convoked has been indefinitely adjourned as in the unanimous opinion of the leaders of all the political parties there is no reason, at the present moment, to consider a change in Roumanian foreign policy.1 I transmit as an enclosure with this despatch a copy and translation of the official communique 2 announcing this adjournment.

As is known to the Department, King Charles of Roumania is a German by birth, a member of the non-reigning branch of the Hohenzollern family and a nephew of Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany. Upon the outbreak of the present war, His Majesty used all his influence to the end that Roumania throw in its lot with the Germans and Austro-Hungarians. At the Council of the Crown held last August, as I reported to you in my telegram of August 2 [11?],3 his wishes were disregarded by an almost complete unanimity. This conference made up of members of the present Cabinet, former prime ministers, and leaders of the several prominent political parties decided in favor of a policy of expectant neutrality.

Since July the situation has changed greatly, the German forces operating in Western Europe have been unable as yet to occupy Paris and subjugate the greater portion of France in a short brilliant campaign as was expected by the German Government. In Western Europe the Russian forces have progressed slowly but irresistibly towards the heart of Austria-Hungary, and the towns of Lemberg and Cernowitz are already in their hands.

Popular opinion in Roumania [which] has always been in close sympathy with France, for the customs and manners and to a large extent the Roumanian language have been derived from France, did not remain unmoved by these events.

The ambition of all patriotic Roumanians is the realization of the hegemony of the Roumanian race—the union of the Roumanians of Transylvania and Bucovina and later those of Bessarabia with the present Kingdom of Roumania—the forming of a Great Roumania, and public opinion in Roumania feels that there is offered at the present moment an opportunity which may, perhaps, never be repeated, to join Russia and her allies, of adding to the Roumanian Crown the rich provinces of the Austro-Hungarian Empire almost entirely peopled by Roumanians.

Against this tide of public opinion is the King and his circle supported by many of the conservative statesmen of the country, who feel that any deviation on the part of Roumania from its declared policy of neutrality would be in the nature of an adventure and fraught with the possibility of great danger for the country.

Such is in brief the situation in Roumania, a situation which is styled by a portion of the press as the “Conflict between the King and his country.”

The military forces of the country, though no mobilization has been ordered, are practically on a war basis and the people and the army are anxious and expectant.

I will keep the Department in touch by telegraph and post with the developments in the situation.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

1  Ante, p. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213].

2 Not printed.

3  Ante, p. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143].

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1134

[Document 229]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 14, 1914.
[Received October 27.]

No. 152]

Sir: The fall of Antwerp has been the principal event of the last week. Its first consequence was to throw upon the Netherlands the burden of caring for an enormous number of innocent and helpless Belgian refugees. This burden has been borne with an admirable generosity and human kindness by the Dutch Government and the Dutch people. I have ventured to express my sympathy with them in this humane task in the letter of which I enclose a copy herewith. There are now, I suppose, more than 400,000 Belgian refugees in the Netherlands, almost all of them in a state of extreme poverty and distress.

In regard to the political effect of the fall of Antwerp upon the situation, and its relation to the neutrality of the Netherlands, I enclose an article translated from the Nieuwe Courant, a Dutch newspaper, which seems to me to sum up the matter as well as possible in a case where so many unknown quantities are involved.1 The fact that the only practicable access of Antwerp to the sea lies through the Dutch waters of the Scheldt greatly complicates the situation. It is difficult to see how Antwerp could be used either for attack or for defense in any naval operation without violation of the neutrality of the Netherlands. So far as I am able to understand the matter at present, any such violation by any belligerent nation would probably be resisted by the Dutch by force of arms.

I must add that as yet I can see no positive sign that such a violation is intended; although, of course, there is much talk in unofficial quarters of its possibility. Meantime, peaceful communications are kept open, greatly to our advantage, both with Great Britain and with America.

I have [etc.]

Henry van Dyke

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1139

[Document 230]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, October 9, 1914.
[Received October 28.]

No. 39]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department by way of further confirmation of predictions made in my former despatches that Portugal will unquestionably enter the European War, that I have just returned from the Portuguese Foreign Office after an interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which he stated that his Government would enter the war just as soon as called upon by the British Government to lend assistance. It is my opinion that there already exists between the Governments of the two nations an understanding of recent origin that England will make the above request just as soon as the Portuguese Army, which at present appears to be undergoing reorganization, can be gotten in readiness to enter the conflict.

I have [etc.]

Thos. H. Birch

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Birch) File No. 763.72/1143a

[Document 231]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Portugal (Birch)

Department of State,
Washington, October 28, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram]

Has declaration of war against Germany, or other decree indicating that a state of war exists, been issued by Portuguese Government? If so, report fully by telegraph.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/3360

[Document 232]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, October 12, 1914.
[Received October 29.]

My dear Mr. Secretary: I sent you this morning a telegram1 which I now confirm, stating that the new Minister of War who was appointed on Saturday afternoon, Major General Vittorio Zupelli, is a native of Istria, and therefore comes from that region along the northeast shore of the Adriatic whose inhabitants are known as “Irredenti” on this side of the border.

His appointment is supposed to have solved the difficulties which have hitherto existed in the difference of views between the General Staff and the civil War Ministry, as he was a trusted lieutenant of General Cadorna, the Chief of Staff, who is regarded as one of the strongest, if not the strongest military man in Italy, whose views that the Minister of War should be an active soldier of experience in the field, in close touch with the General Staff, have thus prevailed. It is supposed by some that this appointment indicates that Italy intends to rush her military preparations, which are still far below what she desires.

However, for the present, at least, General Cadorna’s views, as reported, are in favor of holding to neutrality. Undoubtedly Italy does not feel that she is yet in a position to take any aggressive action against her former allies. She is making every effort to remedy her want of heavy field artillery as well as of other supplies.

An order for 600,000 blankets was given about two weeks ago for the Army, and her factories are working double shifts on clothing for the soldiers.

The Government insists that it will continue its policy of neutrality, and the business men seem strongly adverse to any step towards war.

I hear rumors that this neutral attitude has been much reinforced by the tremendous strength which Germany has shown, and gossip has reached me that some of the Germans and Austrians do riot scruple to say that if fortune should fail to favor them, they feel sure Italy will attack them.

My own impression is that the Government really wishes to maintain neutrality and will do so unless its hand is forced by some untoward event which would set the people of Italy aflame and destroy all chance of maintaining their neutral position.

The Marquis San Giuliano, Royal Minister for Foreign Affairs, has been ill for over a month now with a serious attack of gout, from which he has been a great sufferer for a long time; but has shown his power in maintaining his policy of neutrality unimpaired, notwithstanding his serious illness.

A report has reached me from a private source to-day that a serious crisis in his disease set in this morning and that he may not last out to-day. Should he die, the two men most talked of as his possible successors are the present Italian Ambassador in Paris, Signor Tittoni, and the present Royal Minister of the Colonies; Ferdinando Martini, though other names are also mentioned. Signor Martini is a Tuscan 78 years of age and therefore remembers personally the close of the Risorgimento.

The selection of either one of these two would indicate a preparation for Italy’s departing in time from her policy of neutrality; but where the situation appears to change at times almost from day to day, no one can forecast the future.

It is interesting to recall that in 1892, when Italy appointed a minister who, like Zupelli, was an Irredento, the Austrian Government through its Embassy, interposed an objection and the appointment was recalled.

Believe me [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1143

[Document 233]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 29, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 12:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

British Ambassador has just received a telegram from Cairo that Bedouins have crossed frontier on their way to Suez Canal. He writes me it may mean war unless his demand to the Grand Vizier to immediately withdraw Bedouins is complied with.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1144

[Document 234]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, October 29, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received October 30, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

October 28, 4 p.m.1 War not yet declared. State of war does not exist. Portuguese commission conferring in England. Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs this afternoon states House of Representatives will be convoked Monday. Status remains the same as reported my recent despatches.

Birch

1 The telegram of October 28, 4 p.m., from the Secretary to the Minister read: Has declaration of war against Germany, or other decree indicating that a state of war exists, been issued by Potuguese Government? If so, report fully by telegraph. Lansing.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1147

[Document 235]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 29, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received October 30, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

My telegram October 29, 11 a.m. British Ambassador informed me that in order to prevent an eventual invasion of Egypt from Ottoman territory the British military authorities had decided, to destroy certain wells in the Sinai Desert. Ottoman Minister of the Interior admitted Ottoman authorities had induced Bedouins on Egyptian territory to endeavor to prevent British from destroying those wells. He claims that the Arabs mentioned by British are the Egyptian Bedouins and not Bedouins residing in [Turkey]. Ottoman Minister of War to-day, after the British Ambassador’s representations, telegraphed the OTTOMAN Commander in Syria to recall immediately any Ottoman Bedouins that may have crossed the frontier. Minister of the Interior stated that he did not believe there was any danger of immediate war between Turkey and Great Britain. But his conversation clearly showed that the Ottoman Government strongly inclined to side with Germany and may be pushed into war at any moment.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1148

[Document 236]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 29, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received October 30, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

British Ambassador has received from his Consul General at Odessa following telegram:

This port was raided by three torpedo boats before dawn this morning. The Russian gunboat Donetz was sunk in harbor and a part of the crew killed and wounded. Two Russian steamships were damaged. French ship Portugal was damaged, two of the crew killed and two wounded. It is alleged shells were fired on the town and the sugar factory was damaged with some loss of life. The Governor states that the raiding vessels were Turkish.

Turkish Minister of the Interior states that he has heard of an engagement between the fleets but has not yet received an account thereof.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/555

[Document 237]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, October 29, 1914.
[Received October 30, 4:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Bulgarian Parliament opened yesterday and continuation of POLICY of neutrality reaffirmed in speech from the throne.

Vopicka

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1152

[Document 238]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 30, 1914, noon.
[Received 10:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Russian Ambassador received telegram 3 o’clock this morning to demand his passport and those of entire Embassy and have all consuls leave their posts. He demanded immediate audience with the Grand Vizier who claimed illness prevents his seeing him to-day. He is now [omission?] not visible. Russian Ambassador, English and French Ambassadors are arranging to leave together and will probably start to-morrow. I am informed that Minister of Finance called on French Ambassador late yesterday evening and stated that the naval engagement took place without the knowledge of the Ottoman Government, intimating that the German officers in the Ottoman Navy had forced this issue. Italian Embassy is to take charge of Russian interests.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1156

[Document 239]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 30, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received October 31, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

As the Sublime Porte had not replied to Russian Ambassador’s request for his passport, Italian Ambassador and I, at the request of Entente Ambassadors, called on Minister of the Interior and explained to him the advisability of the Sublime Porte acting promptly, so as to avoid any unfriendly mob demonstrations against Ambassadors. Minister of the Interior informed us Sebastopol had been bombarded. He promised to comply with our request, and answered us positively that every courtesy would be extended to Ambassadors, and that British Ambassador and French consuls would be granted safe-conduct. Russian consuls must remain until Russia has accorded safe-conduct to Ottoman consuls. English and French Ambassadors demanded their passports to-day. Perfect quiet prevails in the city. Port of Smyrna closed to-day.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1158

[Document 240]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 31, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received November 2, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

When arranging for special train for to-morrow for English and French Ambassadors and their suite this morning with the Minister of the Interior, the latter requested me to see Russian Ambassador and ascertain what apology or action of Sublime Porte would pacify Russian Government. He asked me to do this as a personal favor. I saw Russian Ambassador and he said nothing else than the dismissal of all German officers, sailors and soldiers now in Turkish employ would satisfy Russia. Russian Ambassador said that his instructions were absolute to leave immediately, but that whenever Turkish Government would telegraph that the Germans had departed he would return and resume relations. Shortly afterwards Minister of Agriculture called at Embassy with same request as Minister of the Interior had made. I told him Russian answer. Russian Ambassador and French Ambassador just called together and Russian Ambassador informed me he was leaving at seven to-night. [Was] assisted by Italian Ambassador in arranging safe departure of Russians and arranged to have all panic-[stricken] Americans leave to-morrow.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1159

[Document 241]

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, November 2, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 10:55 a.m.]

[Telegram]

British Chargé d’Affaires just notified me that General commanding British Army occupation in Egypt has been ordered by British Government to assume military control and protection of Egypt and that martial law will be proclaimed here to-day and that the Government of Great Britain will not assume responsibility for any person disobeying orders of the General.

Arnold

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1160

[Document 242]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 1, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received November 2, 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Special train with British and French Ambassadors and suites left this evening. Other special train arranged for British and French was stopped by Minister of War who, when urged by me to permit its departure, insisted upon receiving promise that Turkish subjects in Egypt and England would be permitted to depart. British Ambassador authorized me to make the arrangement and hope to do so to-morrow. Minister of the Interior told me English had sunk two Turkish vessels near Smyrna and the Russians crossed the frontier near Erzerum.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1173

[Document 243]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 5, 1914, 11:30 a.m.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

992. Your November 3, 8 p.m.1 Sir Edward Grey informs me to-day that state of war exists between Great Britain and Turkey. The Turkish Embassy left this morning. I have taken charge of Ottoman interests and directed the Consul General to inform the consuls in the United Kingdom accordingly.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1180.

[Document 244]

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, November 7, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received 11:58 p.m.]

[Telegram]

General commanding British Egypt issued to-day proclamation in the name of King George assuming sole burden of defending Egypt against Turkey, claiming violation Egyptian frontier and agreeing not to ask Mohammedan Egyptians’ assistance.

Arnold

The Persian Chargé d’Affaires (Kuli Khan) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/596

[Document 245]

The Persian Chargé d’Affaires (Kuli Khan) to the Acting Secretary of State

Persian Legation,
Washington, November 6, 1914.
[Received November 7.]

Excellency: I have the honor to submit, for your consideration, the English translation of a cablegram received this morning from the Minister of Foreign Affairs at Teheran. The message, which is self-explanatory, is as follows:

From the beginning of the European War, Persia has firmly remained neutral. As now conflagrations have extended menacing actually to envelop Persian territory, this neutrality has been solemnly proclaimed by Imperial farman on November 1.

You are hereby authorized to notify the Government of the United States OF this decision. At the same time solicit their good offices for preventing neutral territory from becoming a theatre of war, and thus sparing innocent population from the horrors of a struggle to which it is a stranger. Alaos Saltaneh

I need not emphasize the need felt for the good offices of your Government at this time, and how highly all such friendly assistance will be appreciated by my Government.

Accept [etc.]

Mirza Ali Kuli Khan

The Secretary of State to the Persian Chargé d’Affaires (Kuli Kahn) [Document 246]

The Secretary of State to the Persian Chargé d’Affaires (Kuli Kahn)

Department of State,
Washington, November 11, 1914.

No. 2]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of November 6, 1914, giving the English translation of a cable message received by you from His Excellency the Persian Minister for Foreign Affairs requesting that this Government use its good offices with other powers looking to the preservation of the neutrality of Persia.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that the Government of the United States will lend its good offices to assist in doing whatever it may properly do to alleviate the conditions resulting from the situation existing in Europe.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing

The Swiss Political Department to the Swiss Legation at Washington File No. 763.72119/115

[Document 247]

The Swiss Political Department to the Swiss Legation at Washington

Berne, November 11, 1914.
[Communicated by the Swiss Minister
to the Secretary of State,
November 12, 1914.]

[Telegram—Extracts]

President Wilson is said to have expressed to a deputation of American women his willingness to take preliminary steps for negotiations with a view of bringing about peace upon desire of neutral states.1

How was the petition submitted on the first of November by Social Democratic parliamentarians to all Governments of neutral states received in Washington?1

With utmost caution and avoiding absolutely any publicity, American Government should be sounded whether President Wilson would be willing to enter into parleys with Swiss and other neutral governments, and, if possible, agree upon a common offer of mediation to be tendered at a given time. The moment for such an offer has, of course, not arrived yet. The preliminaries, however, would require much time.

The Swiss Government assumes that, for the purpose of preparation, a conference of delegates of neutral states should, under the presidency of the American delegate, meet in a European city and agree upon the modalities of procedure. Later the date for tendering the offer of mediation and an eventual program would have to be discussed.

1 According to a letter from the Swiss Minister, February 8, 1927, in regard to this communication, “Mr. Bryan answered immediately to the first two sentences, saying that President Wilson did not hold the conversation with a deputation of American women which had been attributed to him, and that nothing had been heard in Washington of a petition of Socialist parliamentarians addressed to the Government of the United States.”

1 According to a letter from the Swiss Minister, February 8, 1927, in regard to this communication, “Mr. Bryan answered immediately to the first two sentences, saying that President Wilson did not hold the conversation with a deputation of American women which had been attributed to him, and that nothing had been heard in Washington of a petition of Socialist parliamentarians addressed to the Government of the United States.”

The Secretary of State to the Swiss Legation [Document 248]

The Secretary of State to the Swiss Legation

Memorandum

The President appreciates most sincerely the interest expressed by the Swiss Government in the promotion of peace in Europe through mediation, and the confidence implied in the suggestions made; but from the information which he has, the President does not believe that the time has come when a renewal of the offer of mediation would be acceptable to the belligerent nations. And he does not feel that it would be wise to attempt, at this time, to determine the conditions under which the offer of mediation should be made, when the time for it arrives.

November 14, 1914.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/672

[Document 249]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 4, 1914.
[Received November 16.]

No. 550]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you, referring to clippings from the British newspapers from October 13 to October 28 which have been forwarded to the Department under separate cover, that British opinion, as expressed in the press during this interval, has been one which attempts to warn the British mind against the fallacy of the employment of criticism of an ignorant and unthinking nature of the attitude and action of the Government of the United States in the present crisis of events.

Examples are given as to how the relations between Great Britain and the United States during the American Civil War were strained on account of needless expressions of opinion by persons whose knowledge of the matters in question was but slight.

Several leading articles have laid stress upon friendliness of Great Britain with the American Government and people.

Great denunciation is expressed in all papers of what is called “Count Bernstorff’s publicity campaign,” and great satisfaction is shown of the way in which the American press has received the German Ambassador’s statements, particular emphasis being laid upon the comments in the leading articles of American newspapers concerning his reported remarks as to the Monroe Doctrine in connection with Canada.

In a word, the English press is very appreciative of what its American correspondents report as favorable public feeling in the United States, and they bespeak a fair deal in the intercourse between the two nations.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/36

[Document 250]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 18, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received November 19, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1083. I have heard, directly from General French, that he now regards the result of the war as practically determined. His opinion is that the Germans have done their utmost and there will now be a slow victory of the Allies, won perhaps next spring. Frederick Palmer, the man of best judgment among American correspondents, has just returned from a visit to the German armies and headquarters and he reports that their commanders know that they will be beaten. Anderson brings the impression from Berlin that they know they cannot win.

But no one expects early peace because the Allies will insist on an enormous indemnity to Belgium which the Germans are not expected to grant till they have to confess hopeless defeat. Public opinion on neither side will yet permit peace. But various German tentative proposals such as her recent proposal to France are expected as “feelers” during the next few months. When they are unsuccessful it will be denied that they were made. Informed British opinion is much more cheerful than it has been since the war, and Parliament and the whole people are preparing for war for an indefinite time. A long luncheon talk to-day with Sir Edward Grey revealed the state of mind of the Government, namely, that peace cannot be thought of and will not be discussed till Germany will agree to pay for the full restoration of Belgium, and he does not think that Germany will agree to this till she is thoroughly exhausted.

Perhaps the President may be interested in this.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1238

[Document 251]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 15, 1914, 9 p.m.
[Received November 20, 2:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

38. Minister of War called yesterday to apologize for search at British and French Embassies. He stated Ottoman Government would use moderateness towards British and French. I [re]monstrated that yesterday’s proclamation of holy war of Islam might arouse the religious fanaticism of Moslem masses. Also the danger of the movement getting beyond their control and attacking all non-Moslems; that should organized massacres occur the Turkish Government would lose the good opinion of the United States, and Bulgaria notwithstanding her present friendship for Turkey might side with the Triple Entente. I strengthened the latter argument by informing him that Bulgarian Minister had spent one hour with me that morning. This impressed him. Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me that Turkey had an understanding with Bulgaria and that the latter might attack Servia. Italian Ambassador, Bulgarian Minister, and myself are greatly concerned that methods now used by Turkish Government, encouraged by German influence, will lead to serious trouble. As neutrals we are cooperating to prevent it. Yesterday mob justified our apprehension.

To-day they are destroying Russian chapel at San Stefano erected as monument to commemorate Russian victory over the Turks in 1878. I have spoken to German Ambassador and intimated Germany’s share of responsibility in the event of massacres of non-Moslems; he thought Germany and Austria fighting with Turkey, and German officers being at the head of Ottoman forces, there is no danger of such massacres. Bulgarian Minister will also appeal to German Ambassador.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1251

[Document 252]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, November 2, 1914.
[Received November 23.]

No. 50]

Sir: Referring to the Department’s cable dated October 28, 4 p.m.,1 relative to declaration of war by Portugal, I have the honor to state that on its receipt I at once had an interview with the Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs during the course of which he stated that the attitude of Portugal regarding the war remained unchanged, and while he expressed himself as anti-German in feeling, he personally hoped Portugal would not enter the conflict. He further stated that in his opinion the Portuguese House of Deputies would be convened in extra session Monday (to-day), when the matter would receive consideration, and should it fail to declare war, he stated that the Government would be placed in a very embarrassing position owing to promises which had already been made to the British Government.

While the Portuguese House of Deputies has not been convened to-day as anticipated, nevertheless the preparation for war continues. Yesterday, I witnessed the drilling of men of the first Army reserve who were called out for the first time on Saturday last.

In case of a declaration of war or any other event of vital importance relating thereto by the Portuguese Government, I shall promptly cable full details to the Department.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Birch

1  Ante, p. 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1245

[Document 253]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, November 23, 1914.
[Received 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1117. Department’s circular instruction September 23 re neutralization of the African conventional free-trade zone.2 Foreign Office states that such a proposal would not be practicable in view of the hostilities which have already taken place on both sides which include attacks made by German forces on British East Africa, British Central Africa, and Albertville and asks that this reply be communicated to the German Government.

American Ambassador

1 Transmitted to the Ambassdor in Germany, November 25.

2  Ante, p. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209].

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1246

[Document 254]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, undated.
[Received November 24, 1914, 11:40 a.m.]

[Telegram]

324. The Portuguese Senate and House of Deputies unanimously approved the following resolution yesterday:

The executive power is authorized to intervene militarily in the present international armed conflict whenever and in the manner it may judge necessary to our high interests and duties as a free nation and an ally of England, adopting for this purpose the extraordinary measures which the circumstances of the moment demand.

Birch

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72/1238

[Document 255]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 24, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

64. Department is seriously concerned over your 38 of November 15, 9 p.m. Please report more fully in regard to proclamation of holy war of Islam concerning which Department has no information.

Department cautions you against making any statements which could give the impression that the United States was considering taking sides in the present conflict, and desires you to maintain the policy of strict neutrality which the Government of the United States has assumed in its relations to the belligerent nations in all parts of the world.

Bryan

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/919

[Document 256]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, November 6, 1914.
[Received November 30.]

No. 53]

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 50, dated the 2d instant, I have the honor to inform the Department that the attitude of Portugal as regards the European War remains unchanged. While it had been privately stated to me last week by the Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs that the House of Deputies would be convened in extra session on Monday, the 2d instant, the meeting, nevertheless did not take place. It appears that the primary object of the proposed convening on that date was to consider the report of the Portuguese commission which had recently been to England to confer with governmental and military authorities relative to the proposed participation of Portugal in the European conflict. This commission, however, did not reach Lisbon, but for some unknown reason after arriving at Bordeaux returned again to England where it still remains. The public press here states that the convoking of the House of Deputies has been postponed pending the arrival and report of the Portuguese commission.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Birch

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/916

[Document 257]

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Madrid, November 10, 1914.
[Received November 30.]

No. 177]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith, in original and translation, an article appearing in A B C, of November 6, 1914, which contains the statements of the Prime Minister before Congress as to Spain’s neutrality in the present European War. It will be noted that Spain’s position of neutrality is reaffirmed, and that the Government will appeal to Congress in case a change of attitude becomes necessary.

I have [etc.]

Joseph E. Willard

[Enclosure—Translation]

Article appearing in “A B C” of November 6, 1914—Statements of Prime Minister before Congress as to neutrality of Spain in the present European War

The Prime Minister reaffirms, in accordance with the wishes of a majority in Congress, the Government’s purpose to preserve the neutrality, which, with the warm applause of the country, was agreed upon immediately after the beginning of the present European War.

The Spanish Nation, he adds, has not received the slightest offense from the belligerent countries, and the causes of the conflict are totally foreign to it. For these reasons, therefore, Spain desires to keep aloof from the horrors of war.

This observance of neutrality is an indisputable right, and has been respected and recognized as legitimate by the very belligerent countries themselves, which countries have constantly honored our ambassadors and consuls with the custody of their countrymen.

Moreover, the Government has omitted nothing which would appear advisable for the national defense. All proper measures will be adopted which may be deemed necessary, in the belief that this policy will be supported by Congress and the country.

Should any unexpected circumstance compel us to change our attitude, we will hasten to appeal to the Parliament. In case it is not in session, it will be convened, because we absolutely trust in the patriotism of Congress.

He then alludes to the contingency of an aggression, and says that he does not believe that such a thing can happen; but in such contingency he says that we would be ready to defend the honor of Spain, her liberty and her independence.

He prays for the return of peace, and adds:

Meanwhile, we will strictly comply with the duties imposed on us in the present situation, with fairness and nobleness of mind to all the countries suffering from the disasters of war. For this reason we should all be closely united in a firm national solidarity, from the King down to the humblest citizen.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1276

[Document 258]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 7, 1914.
[Received December 3.]

No. 127]

Sir: I have the honor to forward you the following account of the severing of the diplomatic relations between the Entente powers and Turkey, and of the present situation here.

On October 24, I was told by the English and Russian Ambassadors that the Germans were exerting extraordinary pressure to force the Ottoman Government into the general war and they evidently feared the success of this pressure as they sent me that day many cases of documents and valuables for safe-keeping. No immediate developments followed, however, and although on the 26th the British sent me their archives, the tension seemed little more than it has been for some weeks.

On the 29th the British Ambassador received a telegram from Cairo stating that Bedouins had crossed the frontier and were headed toward the Suez Canal. The possibility of this action (and its results) has been the matter largely responsible for the tension here, as when Sir Louis Mallet a short time ago asked the Grand Vizier to guard the Egyptian boundaries, he received the reply that there were no boundaries between Egypt and the Ottoman Empire. Sir Louis wrote me that this Bedouin invasion might cause war and requested me in that event to take charge of British interests here. I agreed to do this and also to take charge of French and Belgian interests subject to the Department’s approval.

The Sublime Porte replied to Sir Louis’ representations that it was true that Ottoman authorities had induced Bedouins on Egyptian territory to try to prevent the destruction of certain wells which the English were destroying as a military precautionary measure, but that it was not true that Ottoman Bedouins had gone into Egypt. Moreover, the Minister of War at once telegraphed the Ottoman commander in Syria to recall any of the latter who might have entered Egypt without his knowledge. This same day the Minister of the Interior told me that he did not expect war immediately, but at the same time his conversation clearly showed a German bias and the possibility of war at any moment.

On the evening of the 29th, the British Ambassador received the following telegram from his Consul General at Odessa:

This port was raided by three torpedo boats before dawn this morning. The Russian gunboat Donetz was sunk in harbor and a part of the crew killed and wounded. Two Russian dreadnoughts were damaged, French ship Portugal was sunk and two of the crew killed and two wounded. Further shells were fired on the town and the sugar factory was damaged with some loss of life. The Governor states that the raiding vessels were Turkish.

The Minister of the Interior stated on that evening that he had heard of an engagement but that he had known nothing of it beforehand, and since then he has said that this action took place without orders from the Sublime Porte and that responsibility for it rests entirely with Admiral Souchon of the Goeben. While it is doubtful whether the Ministers of War and of the Interior were as completely in ignorance as to what happened as they stated, the action was undoubtedly planned and executed by the German naval officers. The raiding vessels were officered by Germans and it is said some of the few Turkish officers and some of the crew had been given a holiday for the Turkish Bairam. It was also a German officer who, it is said, without direct orders, closed the Dardanelles, and it was the increasing number of German naval officers here that caused the British naval commission to leave Turkey. The Entente Governments have been extraordinarily patient the last few months and have borne severe annoyances with a mere protest. The Turkish authorities themselves have not seemed to desire war but have fallen more and more under the influence and power of the Germans. There are now about 4,000 German officers, sailors, and soldiers on Turkish warships and in her forts, and this, together with the Goeben and Breslau controlling the Black Sea, has placed the country under German domination. The German admiral with a full realization of this, precipitated matters without even waiting to see if the last Egyptian difficulty would not cause war, and brought about the Black Sea raid.

It is said that besides the above attack at Odessa other Turkish ships at the same time bombarded Sebastopol and Theodosia and sunk fourteen or more merchant ships on the Black Sea. The incredible Turkish version of the affair is that a Russian mine layer was approaching the Bosphorus to mine the entrance and cut off the return of the maneuvering Turkish ships, and that the Russian Fleet had in other ways prevented the maneuvering of the Turkish Fleet, and that therefore the Turks attacked them.

Early on October 30, the Russian Ambassador demanded his passports and his action was followed by the English and French Ambassadors. At their request the Italian Ambassador and I called on the Minister of the Interior and urged prompt and courteous action toward the departing Ambassadors. This was promised and also that safe-conduct should be granted British and French Consuls. Russian Consuls must remain till Russia has given safe-conduct to Ottoman Consuls, and neither they nor Russian citizens have yet received permission to depart. The Italian Embassy has taken charge of Russian interests.

When on the 31st the Ottoman authorities realized what the results of the action in the Black Sea were going to be, they were rather stunned. The Minister of the Interior asked me as a personal favor to him to ascertain what apology or action of the Sublime Porte would pacify the Russian Government, and later on in the day the Minister of Agriculture made the same request. I asked this question of the Russian Ambassador who said that his instructions were to demand his passports and he knew that only the dismissal of all the German officers, sailors, and soldiers now in Turkish employ would placate his Government. He further remarked that Russia might abstain from declaring war if the Sublime Porte should guarantee that the Turkish Fleet should not again enter the Black Sea. After the Minister of Interior heard this answer, there was a conference at the Grand Vizier’s and the Minister of the Interior called at the Embassy and stated that the Grand Vizier had requested him to deliver a message to the effect that the Russian Ambassador’s statement should be sent to the Sublime Porte in writing, that it would be considered and that neither proposition was declined. But he informed me that a majority of the Cabinet, including himself, were in favor of war. I told the Minister of the Interior that I had put his questions to the Russian Ambassador as a personal favor to him, and that my activity in the matter must end with my delivering the Russian Ambassador’s answer to him. If he, the Minister of the Interior, desired to do anything further in the matter, he must do so through the Italian Ambassador who was to have charge of Russian affairs.

The following Cabinet Ministers were opposed to the war and have resigned: Djavid Bey, Minister of Finance, a Deunmé; Mahmoud Pasha, Minister of Public Works, a Laz; Bustany Effendi, Minister of Commerce and Agriculture, a Christian Arab; and Oskan Effendi, Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, an Armenian. The Cabinet is thus now composed of Moslem Turks. Only one new man has been so far appointed, namely, Nessimi Bey, a strong Union and Progress committeeman, Minister of Commerce and Agriculture. Talaat Bey, the Minister of the Interior, is looking after the Department of Finance, while Chukri Bey, the Minister of Public Instruction, now has charge of the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs; and Djemal Pasha, Minister of Marine, has taken over the Department of Public Works. The Grand Vizier, Said Halim Pasha, was also opposed to this war and wished to resign but was finally persuaded to stay in office by the promise of conservatism in the war. His remaining in office is an excellent thing for foreigners.

On the 31st, I also consented to take care of Servian interests here if necessary and if the Department approved.

At 9 p.m., on November 1, the British and French Ambassadors left for Dedeagach by a special train. There was much confusion and some rough handling of the crowd in the station, largely owing to the fact that a train for English and French citizens, due to leave at 7.15, had been stopped by the military authorities and the people who had planned to take it were still in the station. The military authorities, of whom the chief of staff is a German, have steadily put difficulties in the way of English and French leaving and claim that too much leniency is shown to the French and English by the civil authorities, but I have secured the final departure of every train planned.

On that evening the War Minister’s excuse for not permitting the train to depart was that a promise should first be received to permit Turkish subjects in England and Egypt to go. This promise has since been given on British Ambassador’s authority and Turkish officials have promised to pursue a liberal policy towards foreigners in Constantinople.

On this same day the English sank two Turkish vessels near Smyrna and the Russians crossed the frontier near Erzerum.

On November 2, a special train left with over two hundred French and English. Every facility was this time granted by Turkish officials. The next evening, however, a similar special train was stopped at the last minute by orders from the Minister of War. I was at the station and immediately motored to the house of the Minister of the Interior. He informed me this must be an order emanating from the German Chief of Staff and proceeded to reach the Minister of War on the telephone and tell him that his promise to me must be kept. The train finally left two hours late. On the morning of the 5th, the ordinary outgoing train containing many English and French was not allowed to go because of War Department’s order. The Minister of War, Enver Pasha, called on me later that morning and informed me this order was due only to a misunderstanding regarding a new law of twenty-four hours notice of departure. This law seems reasonable as its purpose is to permit the authorities to see that taxes, etc. have been paid.

Enver also said at this interview that his Government only wished to enforce such rules regarding citizens of hostile countries as the European nations were enforcing and that Turkey intended to wage this war with self-control and no greater hardship to non-combatants than war measures necessitated. This remark has up to this time appeared sincere for I have, by a policy of not irritating the authorities about small matters, succeeded in carrying all important points. This success is largely due to the fact that I have been enabled to maintain the most cordial and almost intimate relations with Talaat and Enver, the Ministers of the Interior and of War, who are the two most powerful members of the Cabinet. They have recently often consulted me about matters of the greatest importance. I have scrupulously followed your directions not to volunteer advice but have given it unstintingly when asked. These Ministers have never doubted America’s sincere friendship for Turkey as they realize we are the only great power with no ulterior motive toward them.

On November 3, I at last succeeded in obtaining a promise from the Minister of the Interior that all French and English subjects in the Empire might depart or remain as they elect. The announcement of this decision allayed all feeling of panic regarding concentration camps and was thankfully received by the nationals in question. Employees of telephone company, banks, etc., can now remain in their positions. The Minister of the Interior also told me, however, that this order had been only grudgingly permitted by the military authorities and that it would only hold good so long as Beirut or any other unfortified town was not bombarded by the Allies. If this should happen, no subject of a belligerent state would be permitted to depart. The Turks would consider such a bombardment outrageous and would wreak their vengeance on the only English and French they can reach, namely those in their dominions. The commander of their Syrian army remarked that he would take three lives for that of every Turkish civilian’s lost in such a bombardment.1 As it will take at least fifteen days to give British and French in interior time to depart, I telegraphed the situation to our Ambassadors in London and Paris as well as to the Department. Enver Pasha has since informed me that he is willing to come to some special agreement with regard to Smyrna which is a partially fortified town. From Constantinople itself most of the English and French have departed. The list of those who have gone includes the following: Sir Adam Block, president of the council of the Ottoman Public Debt; Robert Graves, adviser to the Ministry of the Interior; Sir Richard Crawford, financial adviser to Ottoman Government; Orme Clark, legal adviser to the Ministry of Justice; Mr. Henry Pears, a leading barrister; Reginald Whittall, a merchant, all English, and the following French: La Boulinière, the French delegate to the Ottoman Public Debt; Count Ostrorog, legal adviser to the Sublime Porte.

While the authorities have so far been moderate, some very stringent laws have been passed, as enclosure No. 12 regarding the amount of gold anyone leaving the country may take with him shows. A death penalty has been established for anyone concealing wireless apparatus. I turned over to the police one old wireless aerial which was found in the British Embassy when I took charge, and in that way avoided the Turkish request to search that Embassy. A severe penalty has been decreed for the spreading of any information regarding military movements and the military authorities are taking a close control of everything.

On November 4, I had a conference with the German Ambassador who controls the German-Turkish army officers and obtained his promise of hearty cooperation in getting the English and French out of the country as long as Turkish towns are not bombarded. As the leader of the Germans in this country, he is now a very powerful man. At my departure I noticed the arrival of the Ministers of War and Marine and of the Interior and the President of the Chamber of Deputies who were coming to consult with him. He anticipates no trouble in Constantinople and, indeed, thus far not only have Americans been all absolutely safe but I have been able to protect all English and French. At my request four English held prisoners—Stanley Morton, William Stevens, George Mills, and Sabator Corpola—have been released, and all leading Turkish officials have proved most amenable. That things are now so satisfactory is, however, not the least guaranty that they will remain so in a country used to kaleidoscopic changes. If the Turks later have their backs to the wall, no one can prophesy what will occur.

Enclosure No. 21 deals with the holy war that is being preached here now. The Ikdam is not an official paper, however, although it must pass the Government censor. That a holy war, a war which by its nature is waged against all Christians, should be officially declared by a Government allied with Christian nations seems highly improbable. Talk of it is permitted in order to make more popular a war that has been begun by a divided Cabinet and without the least popular demand.

With regard to the interior our Consul at Beirut wires that all is quiet there, but Consuls at Smyrna and Alexandretta report thorough preparations to burn those cities if at any time it became necessary to evacuate them.

On October 30, the port of Smyrna was closed. In Jerusalem the Turkish military authorities have taken supervisory control of the French and English banks. There has been a rumor that the military in Constantinople would take possession of funds of Ottoman Bank here, but there has been nothing so far to prove it. I have permitted the Crédit Lyonnais and other French and English banks to deposit some of their funds in the Embassy.

As regards the military situation, the Minister of War informs me that he has 850,000 men under arms, but he admits that some have very old guns and are to be used only where there is no conflict expected. He has also 100,000 gendarmes. This is probably somewhat exaggerated, but the Turkish army may number 600,000. The Russians have crossed the frontier at Erzerum and their numbers are variously estimated at from 200,000 to 400,000. According to the German Ambassador, the Turks plan a defensive warfare only. There are rumors, however, that Turkish troops are being shipped to Batum with the hope of being able to place the Russians in the Caucasus between two fires. One or more submarines are reported to have been received in sections from Germany together with other war supplies and money. The English are from time to time bombarding the forts at entrance of the Dardanelles. Commander McCauley reports that there are but 15,000 tons of British coal in Constantinople. It is said that there is a daily output of 500 tons from the Turkish mines at Heraclea. A month or two may see this inferior Turkish coal pretty well exhausted and a question arising as to the food supply.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau

1 For further correspondence respecting these threats, see the section on special efforts in behalf of British and French nationals in Turkey, post, p. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 1233 and Doc. 1234].

2 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1277

[Document 259]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State 2

American Legation,
Bucharest, December 2, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received December 3, 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Servian Minister for Foreign Affairs telegraphs that he has been notified by the Italian Minister in Servia that the Turkish Government proclaimed holy war against Servia and her Allies. The Royal Servian Government considers that all the treaties and conventions between Servian Kingdom and the Turkish Government have ceased to exist.

Vopicka

2 Repeated to the Ambassador in Turkey, December 4.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1285

[Document 260]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 27, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received December 5, 6:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

89. Your 64 received.1 Mailed on November 162 translation of fetvas and declaration of holy war in which Sultan blamed Russian fleet for opening attack on Turkish fleet while maneuvering, and subsequently the English and French severed their diplomatic relations by recalling their ambassadors and that as result of these acts Turkey was obliged to take up arms to defend her legal interests and to ally herself with Austria and Germany; that the Russian Government has caused many territorial losses to Turkey in the last three centuries and has frequently sought to destroy by war and wanton devices every force which could increase Turkey’s national power; that they undertake this great war to terminate attacks directed against the Caliphate and the other rights of this Empire; appeals to masses through the medium of their energies and sacrifices in this holy war, and like lions to attack enemy because on victory depends life [of] 300,000,000 Mohammedans; appeals to soldiers stating that the duty they assume is unique, that the hearts of 300,000,000 Moslems praying to God are with them; that they must show that they are descendants of Turkish Army which once made the world tremble so that enemies of Mohammedanism and beloved fatherland dare not foul their sacred soil and disturb tranquillity of the sacred ground which holds Kaaba of God and the sacred tomb of the Prophet; exhorts soldiers scorn death for their Caliph and the defense of their religion, country, and military honor; that government, right, and justice are with them and Englishmen [enmity] and oppression are on the side of enemies. There is therefore no doubt that the protection of God and aid of the Prophet are with Turks; that Turkey will come out of this holy war a state strong and glorious, having recovered from her losses of the great past; reminding Turkish soldiers that they are the allied armies of the two most courageous and strongest armies in the world.

At the same time fetvas were published showing that all Moslems should fight against enemies of Islam and that it is a great sin for Moslem subjects of Great Britain, Russia, and France to fight against Germany and Austria-Hungary, the allies of the Caliphate. Paradoxically it was feared that Moslem masses, kindled by fanatical zeal of holy war, might fail to distinguish between Christian subjects of Great Britain, France, and Russia and Christian subjects of other nations; therefore, in order to show that the holy war is directed only against those who have attacked the Caliphate, that the subjects of the friendly powers should enjoy reciprocal good treatment, a proclamation was issued by the Sheik ul Islam and laws of ulemas in council insisting further on necessity of holy war but stating that it had directed against Russia, France, Great Britain and their allies Imperial irade dated November 23. Orders publication of this proclamation to whole Moslem world, this [in] view of [apparent omission].

The incongruity of the Turkish position is evidenced by their being allied with Christians and having thousands of Armenian and Greek Christians in their army.

Have been extremely cautious to make no statement or do anything through which my absolute neutrality thoroughly recognized by everybody here could be questioned. The powers of the Government are at present almost entirely exercised by the Minister of the Interior and Minister of War and, fortunately, I have considerable influence with them and am using it to secure from them proper and moderate treatment of all non-Moslems.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255].

2 Enclosures of November 16 not printed.

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/2221

[Document 261]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, November 19, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

My dear Mr. Secretary: I am sending in the pouch which leaves to-day a number of despatches relating to the present opportunities for the introduction of American enterprises offered here in Italy in the present juncture.

I want, however, to speak of the situation here, especially of the sentiment as it appears to me to exist, and therefore I write confidentially.

Outwardly, the situation of Italy appears calmer now than for some time past. How deep this goes I am not able to say. Another class of men formerly with the colors has just been relieved and sent home. This, however, leaves about half a million men still under arms and every unit in the service is represented, so that at any time these men who have been sent home could be remobilized and simply assigned to their respective commands which are in actual service.

The Government has provided for the immediate additional outlay of 400,000,000 lire for military purposes, which is in addition to the other large outlays already provided for some little time back, and many thoughtful men are asking why this great sum should be expended and how the Government will justify it, unless it is intended to go to war.

The common talk is that in the spring she will take a decisive step. I have learned, however, that the principal wants—guns—will be fully supplied by December, and Italy is certainly making great efforts to get stores of all kinds imported.

Only night before last, as I telegraphed you, the Foreign Office sent to me to request my aid in getting shipments of cargoes of grain expedited from America. It was said to be for great Italian milling companies, but the Foreign Office showed unusual interest.

There has been much stir in the North African colonies since Turkey declared war, much more than has appeared in the press; but I understand that with a view to keeping Italy out of the struggle, Germany and Turkey are both desirous to confine, at least for the present, the jehad to England and French colonies.

I have heard a rumor that Italy and England have an understanding to aid each other in protecting these contiguous North African colonies of theirs.

I am conscious here of a strong undercurrent of conviction that when one side or the other in the present war prevails, America will become the next object of attack, either on the part of Germany or of Japan, as the case may be. It seems to be considered that the war will not end until one or the other party is absolutely discouraged and that no tenders of friendly offices will avail before that crisis. Also there is frequent expression of the thought that even should the war be ended in its present status, it would only be a truce until the belligerents, more especially Germany, had recuperated sufficiently to attack again with better success, and that permanency of peace will depend on a condition in which absolute disarmament can be insisted upon.

I find in some quarters a strong subcurrent of thought that in time America and possibly other neutral powers may even have to step in and insist at the right moment that the war shall end and disarmament take place, to save civilization, which many agree in thinking is absolutely imperiled.

I write you thus because I feel that I should inform you as fully as I can of the way currents of thought are running here, and I hope you will pardon my imposing upon you such a letter.

I am [etc.]

Thomas Nelson Page

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1289

[Document 262]

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, November 5, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 82]

Sir: I have the honor to report following a communication from the British Agency that the enclosed proclamation was promulgated on the 3d instant by General Maxwell commanding the British forces in Egypt. I at once called upon the British Agency and upon the General both of whom told me that the status of the United States Agency and of the United States as protectors of the German, Swiss, and Brazilian interests in Egypt is just the same as before the declaration.

The General said his action was hastened by the events that have already taken place on the Black Sea between Turkey and Russia.

I learn also that martial law was proclaimed in order to hold the natives of Egypt under more rigid control, if necessary.

There have been within three or four days some forty-three transports pass through the Suez Canal with troops but how many of these were retained the authorities did not say except to remark that a corps with 500 fine camels from India had been retained.

While all eyes are on the Turkish frontier of Egypt where the length including a Canal front is 120 miles, sight should not be lost of the fact that on the western boundary of Egypt there is a practically undefended front of many hundred miles where abound the Sennussi tribe which, if unfriendly to Egypt, under present conditions could do great damage.

Cairo, Alexandria, and in fact the whole of Egypt are quiet as usual on the surface and measures are being taken to remove all disturbing factors.

His Highness the Khedive is still in Constantinople together with many notables, mostly Turks, and the brother of the Khedive, Prince Mohammed Ali, within a few days will leave Egypt for “Italy.” Prince Aziz, cousin of the Khedive, a colonel in the Turkish Army, leaves to-day for Italy.

A rumor has it that the uncle of the Khedive, Prince Hussein, was summoned from Alexandria to Cairo three or four days ago to consult re placing the oldest son of the Khedive on the throne with Prince Hussein as regent, but it may be baseless as there are at least ten new stories told per day most of which have no foundation in fact. I communicate this for what it may be worth.

I have [etc.]

Olney Arnold

[Enclosure]

Proclamation . . . By the general officer commanding His Britannio Majesty’s forces in Egypt

Notice is hereby given that I have been directed by His Britannic Majesty’s Government to assume military control of Egypt in order to secure its protection. The country is therefore placed under martial law from this date.

J. G. Maxwell
Lieutenant General

The Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/38

[Document 263]

The Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, November 19, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 170]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith an article published in the Gazette de Hollande, containing a translation of an editorial which appeared in the Amsterdam Algemeen Handelsblad, one of the leading papers in Holland, on the 16th instant.

This article has been widely copied in European papers and has caused much discussion here. The prevailing opinion in The Hague is that it is a very good piece of journalism, but that such action at present would be premature.

I have [etc.]

Marshall Langhorne

[Enclosure]

Article from the “Gazette de Hollande” November 17, 1914

An eloquent appeal for mediation in the great world struggle is made by the Algemeen Handelsblad, in the course of which our contemporary writes:

Nation after nation is being drawn into a struggle whose continuance can serve no ideal end, whilst it is slaying or destroying the noblest youthful powers of Europe and leaving only the names of some famous towns on the map. The sufferings of hundreds of thousands are becoming unbearable. Human woe is rising to heaven, witnessing against religion and civilization.

Is not the moment come to attempt to save what there is yet to save? Two countries are indicated for this task, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of the United States of North America . . . and now is a favourable moment to offer their mediation. The Minister of the United States here is now on his way to Washington, where he enjoys the full confidence of the American Government. Our Queen is honoured, is popular in America. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs is generally known and esteemed in the Republic. Cannot both Governments now, under these favourable circumstances, together prepare for the task of offering their mediation? A like opportunity to that now offering will certainly not easily recur. A powerful word can be spoken, and it would prove to the great honour of our country if coming generations were able to testify that it was Holland’s Queen who had had the high courage to first speak the word that showed the peoples of Europe the way to a lasting peace. . . .

Spanish suggestion of joint good offices (December 7)—Establishment of the British Protectorate in EgyptSpanish suggestion of joint good offices (December 7)—Establishment of the British Protectorate in Egypt

[264] The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Madrid, December 7, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/39

[265] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Willard)

Department of State, Washington, December 8, 1914.

[266] The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Madrid, December 11, 1914, noon. [Received 7:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72119/41

[267] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 16, 1914. [Received December 11.]

File No. 763.72/1294

[268] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 16, 1914. [Received December 11.]

File No. 763.72/1295

[269] The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, December 11, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received December 12, 10 p.m.]

File No. 883.00/49

[270] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Cairo (Arnold)

Department of State, Washington, December 12, 1914.

[271] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, December 15, 1914. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1306

[272] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, November 24, 1914. [Received December 15.]

File No. 763.72111/1164

[273] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, December 17, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received December 18, 8:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1326

[274] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 18, 1914. [Received December 19.]

File No. 883.00/51

[275] The Diplomatic Agent at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cairo, undated. [Received December 20, 1914, 12:30 a.m.]

File No. 883.00/52

[276] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, November 30, 1914. [Received December 22.]

File No. 763.72/1330

[277] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, November 30, 1914. [Received December 22.]

File No. 763.72111/1234

[278] The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bucharest, November 30, 1914. [Received December 22.]

File No. 763.72111/1233

[279] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 29, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 10:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1338

[280] The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lisbon, December 3, 1914. [Received December 26.]

File No. 853.032/3

[281] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople , November 28, 1914 . [Received December 30.]

File No. 763.72/1357

[282] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, December 28, 1914. [Received January 12, 1915.]

File No. 763.72/1379

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/39

[Document 264]

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Madrid, December 7, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

13. In a recent conversation with Minister for Foreign Affairs he informed me confidentially that some days ago he received information that suggestions of peace negotiations had been made to our Government through Holland.1 He instructed Spanish Ambassador at Washington to inquire if the United States Government felt that the time was ripe for action. He stated that the Department’s reported response was somewhat cold and lacked the cordiality he had anticipated. He disclaimed any intent to influence our Government and desired only to suggest and cooperate in any movement looking toward peace when the right moment should present itself, adding that the cordial cooperation of our respective diplomatic representatives in the belligerent countries, as already demonstrated, would be able to secure information essential to the success of future peace developments. I again mention His Majesty’s earnest desire, often expressed, that the United States and Spain should work together with this end in view.

Will Department instruct me to give assurance in the above sense but without committing our Government to any understanding of joint action?

Willard

1 See the dispatch from the Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands, ante, p. 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Willard) [Document 265]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Willard)

Department of State,
Washington, December 8, 1914.

[Telegram]

15. The President appreciates most sincerely the interest expressed by the Spanish Government in the promotion of peace in Europe through mediation, and the confidence implied in the suggestions made; but from the information which he has, the President does not believe that the time has come when a renewal of the offer of mediation would be acceptable to the belligerent nations. And he does not feel that it would be wise to attempt at this time, to determine the conditions under which the offer of mediation should be made, when the time for it arrives.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72119/41

[Document 266]

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Madrid, December 11, 1914, noon.
[Received 7:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

15. Yesterday evening I communicated informally contents of Department’s No. 15 to Minister of Foreign Affairs, who promptly and cordially conceded the wisdom and propriety of the President’s attitude. Minister of Foreign Affairs earnestly requested that he be informed so soon as our Government felt time had arrived for a renewal of its offer of mediation, in order that Spanish Government might second or support in any manner agreeable to the United States the latter’s action.

Willard

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1294

[Document 267]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 16, 1914.
[Received December 11.]

No. 132]

Sir: In continuation of my despatch No. 127, dated November 7, 1914, on political affairs, I have the honor to report that on the 11th instant, early in the morning, I was informed that the British Embassy was in the possession of the police.1 I went there immediately and was informed that new orders had been issued that morning to search all embassies and consulates for wireless apparatus. The police agreed to discontinue their search until I had conferred with the director general of the police. Mr. Tarler visited the French Embassy and found similar conditions there with the exception of the fact that the officers in charge there informed him that they would continue to search the buildings, and that furthermore they would not allow him or the Ambassador to enter the premises unless accompanied by the chief of police. The Servian Legation and the British Consulate General had also been entered; many of the caretakers, kavasses, and the French Vice Consul were arrested but immediately released. The police had also requisitioned twenty horses and two carriages from the British Embassy and six horses from the French Embassy.

I immediately sought the Minister of the Interior to whom I strongly protested. As I informed you in my No. 18, of November 12, noon, he apologized for the occurrence stating that the police had acted under orders from the military authorities without his knowledge and he sent for the chief of police whom he obliged to apologize to me. I also protested to the Minister of War who disclaimed all blame for entering the embassies by stating that he had ordered a general search for wireless apparatus but that he had not given any detailed directions as to how it was to be carried out. He promised to call at the Embassy formally to apologize. Undoubtedly during my interviews with both ministers all the premises entered had been searched. It was agreed that no further search should be made and that I might seal the embassies and consulates for a week, which I did. I pointed out to the ministers that by doing this the individual operating the wireless apparatus would either have been discovered by the end of the week or the authorities would be assured that the embassies and consulates were not being used as wireless stations.

Before closing up the British Consulate General the police seized some firearms and ammunition. Before allowing Mr. Tarler to seal the British Embassy, another officer had arrived who stated that he wished to enter a certain locked room there as he believed it contained arms. Mr. Tarler promptly notified me and as soon as I was able to communicate with the chief of police, the necessary orders were given to allow the Embassy to be sealed without further delay. By special arrangement the French dragoman and vice consuls and servants were allowed to remain on the premises in their respective houses, and the same privilege was accorded to the servants of the British Embassy.

That evening I discussed the matter with the Austrian Ambassador who is dean of the Diplomatic Corps, and he agreed that I should protest to the Ottoman Government. On the following day I submitted to the Grand Vizier a formal protest against this unprecedented violation of the principles of international law.

On the 12th instant, I had the Belgian Legation sealed and on the 15th the Servian. The Belgian Minister and his secretary had departed two days previously.

The Ottoman Government has promulgated an order forbidding the use of the post for all correspondence excepting that written in French, Turkish, or Arabic. All sealed envelopes to our consulates in Turkey have been refused. I have taken this matter up with the Porte, and, pending their consideration of it, I am enabled to transmit my consular correspondence with the assistance of the Ministry of the Interior. The only cablegrams in code which will be communicated from the telegraph office are those addressed to the Department. The Minister of War has, however, made a special arrangement to have my code telegrams to consuls transmitted through his office.

On the 11th instant, a formal declaration of war was made by Imperial irade. I have the honor to enclose herewith copy and translation1 of a proclamation issued on the 12th instant, declaring a holy war. This manifesto was undoubtedly calculated to inflame the religious fanaticism of the Moslems and a demonstration was made by them on the 14th which forms the subject of a separate despatch.

On the 13th instant, a number of Persians paraded to this Embassy and on the broad ground of humanity and our world-wide endeavors to assure peace, they handed me a protest in behalf of their country against the aggression of Russia and England.

On the 13th instant, three Turkish transports were sunk in the Black Sea and the officers and crews consisting of 219 men and several passengers were taken prisoners by the Russians.

It is generally quiet here, but there is apprehension that in case an unfortified town is bombarded by the Allied fleets, all British subjects and French citizens will be taken as prisoners and held as hostages.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau

1  Ante, p. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258].

1 Not printed: summarized in the Ambassador’s telegram No. 89, November 27, ante, p. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1295

[Document 268]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 16, 1914.
[Received December 11.]

No. 133]

Sir: I have the honor to forward you herewith a translation of the account in the Lloyd Ottoman of the 15th instant, of a demonstration which took place in Constantinople on the 14th.2

After the ceremonial declaration of the holy war described in the translation, Seid Bey, deputy of Smyrna, made a speech in which he emphasized the sin a Moslem committed in fighting in the armies of England and France against the Ottoman army. The crowd led by the committees of “National Defense” and of the Fleet, then visited the Sublime Porte, the Sultan’s Palace and the German and Austrian Embassies, at all of which places there were patriotic speeches. At the German Embassy it was announced that Emperor William was sending to the Sultan Musulman prisoners captured by the German armies.

After the visit to the Austrian Embassy most of the crowd dispersed, but those referred to in the local press as “a few evilintentioned individuals” broke the windows of the Russian Consulate General, of one French and one English shop and wrecked the first floor of “Tokatlians,” a large Russian-owned hotel. The damage in each case was done by a few men and without real police opposition. A considerable cheering crowd followed them and watched the proceeding. It is quite possible that the demonstration was engineered by the Government to give a fictitious appearance of enthusiasm for this war.

At the very moment this small riot was beginning, Enver Pasha, the Minister of War, was calling at the Embassy assuring me that there was no danger here for English and French, that only suspicious characters would be asked to leave; that there could be no massacres without orders from the Government, and that these orders would never come. The Minister of the Interior informed me to-day that the offenders of yesterday would be severely punished, as they committed these acts of vandalism without the permission of the police.

The official declaration of the holy war described in the accompanying enclosure1 is a dénouement long desired by the Germans in order to cause Moslem uprisings in Egypt and India. Since Turkey is allied with Christian nations this move is somewhat extraordinary, and I cannot yet tell what effect it will have on this country. Since the mob on the 14th, this city has been perfectly quiet.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau

2 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State File No. 883.00/49

[Document 269]

The Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, December 11, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received December 12, 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Prince Hussein, uncle of Khedive, rumored about to be proclaimed by British as Sultan of Egypt. If occurrence transpires and if diplomatic agents invited to be present at the ceremony, telegraph instructions in view of attitude of Turkey toward Egypt.

Arnold

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Cairo (Arnold) [Document 270]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Cairo (Arnold)

Department of State,
Washington, December 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

When the Khedive assumes authority, you will deal with him as a de-facto official, but do not attend the ceremonies. You can show this telegram unofficially to the British authorities and explain that this action is taken out of scrupulous regard for neutrality.

Bryan

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1306

[Document 271]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, December 15, 1914.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

7. Following statement received from Foreign Office: On the invitation of His Majesty the King of Sweden a meeting will take place at Malmö the 18th of December next between the Kings of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. The Kings will be accompanied by their Ministers of Foreign Affairs. This interview bears testimony to the good relations existing among these three northern Kingdoms and of the perfect accord among them as far as concerns the neutral attitude that they have hitherto maintained. The interview has in particular in view the opportunity of deliberating about the means which may be employed to ameliorate and lessen the economic difficulties which the state of war has caused in these three countries.

Morris

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1164

[Document 272]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, November 24, 1914.
[Received December 15.]

No. 55]

Sir: Referring to my despatch No. 54,1 dated yesterday, regarding the attitude of the Portuguese Government and people toward the proposed declaration of war, I have now the honor to state by way of further confirmation of my telegram to-day that the Portuguese Senate and House of Deputies yesterday unanimously approved a resolution “authorizing the President to intervene militarily in the present international armed conflict whenever and in the manner he may judge necessary to our high interests and duties as a free nation and an ally of England, adopting for this purpose the extraordinary measures which the circumstances of the moment demand.”

After the adoption of the above resolution the president of the Ministry, Bernardino Machado, read the following address explaining the reasons for its adoption:

At the beginning of the war Portugal spontaneously declared that she was quite prepared as the ally of Great Britain to give every assistance.

The British Government highly appreciated this evidence of solidarity and friendship and have willingly invited the Portuguese Government to give effect to their offer of assistance. By this cooperation the two Governments will secure the objects of the alliance which has so long existed between their two countries and which it is the joint interest of both countries to maintain.

While the resolution will give the Portuguese Government the advantage in an argumentative attitude which it probably intends to assume, that it has not declared war, it is nevertheless my opinion that it will secretly, if not openly, espouse the cause of Great Britain by giving such aid as lies within its power, such as the furnishing of munitions of war, etc., as detailed in my despatch alluded to above. By assuming this attitude Portugal doubtless hopes to enjoy all the privileges of trade and intercourse that legitimately under the rules of war belong to neutral nations.

The Portuguese Government by the adoption of the above resolution believes that it has satisfactorily fulfilled its treaty obligations to Great Britain and thereby, also, gained the good will of the entire group of Allied powers; [is] convinced that in the event of victory against the German armies, Portugal as a nation will then stand on a firmer foundation both at home and abroad; that the friendship of Great Britain and France will serve as a guaranty against encroachments on her home territory by Spain; and that she will feel secure and free from molestation in the future occupation and development of her African colonial possessions.

I have [etc.]

Thos. H. Birch

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1326

[Document 273]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, December 17, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received December 18, 8:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

353. Since recent catastrophe to Austro-Hungarian forces in Servia, great indignation being openly expressed by all classes. Financial and commercial circles urging peace for Austria-Hungary. No word of dissatisfaction finds publicity in press which so controlled that no details of defeat are published. Reports come from Czech part of Bohemia and from Hungary that popularity of war has reached vanishing point. Opinion persists that Italy will enter strife in New Year. This I hear from various persons coming from Italy but officials here maintain Italy’s neutrality will continue.

Penfield

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 883.00/51

[Document 274]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, December 18, 1914.
[Received December 19.]

No. 434]

Sir: I have the honour under instructions from my Government to communicate to you, Sir, for your information the accompanying copy of a telegram stating that His Majesty’s Government consider that the suzerainty of Turkey over Egypt is terminated and that they have advised the King to place Egypt under his protection.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The British Foreign Office to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

You should communicate the following to Government to which you are accredited. In view of the state of war initiated by Turkey against Egypt His Majesty’s Government consider that the suzerainty of Turkey over Egypt is terminated, and they have advised His Majesty to place Egypt under his protection and to order the adoption of all measures necessary for the safety of the inhabitants, the defence of the country, and the protection of the many and various important interests existing there. Official notifications to this effect have been issued in London and Cairo. The unprovoked nature of the Turkish aggression has prevented any discussion of this matter with the powers beforehand but His Majesty’s Government have no intentions of impairing foreign interests and wish to act in harmony with the powers in making those changes affecting their interests which are rendered unavoidable by the aggression of Turkey.

Meanwhile the Egyptian Government will arrange for the issue of a Khedivial decree providing that the consular and other foreign courts shall continue to exercise in Egypt their accustomed jurisdiction to the extent to which the arrangements which will have to be made by the military authorities for the maintenance of public order are not inconsistent therewith. You should add that His Majesty’s Government have appointed a High Commissioner for Egypt who will also be the Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Egyptian Government, and His Majesty’s Government would therefore ask that the Government to which you are accredited will be so good as to instruct their representative in Cairo to address all his official communications in future to the High Commissioner as Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Diplomatic Agent at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State File No. 883.00/52

[Document 275]

The Diplomatic Agent at Cairo (Arnold) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cairo, undated.
[Received December 20, 1914, 12:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

To-day Prince Hussein was proclaimed Sultan of Egypt by King George.

Extract from the British note to Prince Hussein

As regards foreign relations His Majesty’s Government deem it most consistent with the new responsibilities assumed by Great Britain that the relations between Your Highness’s Government and the representatives of foreign powers should henceforth be conducted through His Majesty’s representative in Cairo.

His Majesty’s Government have repeatedly placed on record that the system of treaties known as the capitulations by which Your Highness’s Government is bound are no longer in harmony with the development of the country but in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government the revision of those treaties may most conveniently be postponed until the end of the present war.

Arnold

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1330

[Document 276]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, November 30, 1914.
[Received December 22.]

Servian Series]

No. 35]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the situation in Servia is gloomy. For nearly four months the Servian army was successful in fighting the Austro-Hungarian forces but about ten days ago it was short of munition and some of these sent by other powers were not fit for their rifles, and I am told that that was one of the reasons for vacating Valjevo. The second reason in my opinion is a superior force of three army corps of Austrian and German soldiers which had just recently been sent on the Servian front.

Four days ago the Russians succeeded in forwarding over the Danube River enough ammunition to Servia for some time to come.

Our consular agent in Belgrade reports the transfer of Austrian prisoners from Belgrade to other points in Servia which action would indicate that there might be a danger for Servians to lose Belgrade.

The main difficulty for the Servians is that they can not use their whole army against the Austrians, as it is necessary for them to keep at least 50,000 soldiers on the Bulgarian frontier to protect the parts of Macedonia now called the new Servia.

The Russian Minister here told me that his Government was sounding Servia, whether she would give up part of Macedonia to Bulgaria and that way help the Triple Entente to get Bulgaria in line and relieve Servia, but his Government met with flat refusal. Servia was not willing to lose any part of her territory, especially part of Macedonia, which country is considered one of the richest territories of the Balkan Peninsula.

The Servians are by no means downhearted, on the contrary they believe in ultimate victory.

Servia has between 10,000 and 15,000 Austrian war prisoners and she claims that Austria-Hungary has less than that amount of her own and I believe this statement to be true.

Sometime ago I made a personal appeal to the American Red Cross for relief for Servia. I now repeat it because Servia is exhausted and needs it more than any other country probably except Belgium. The Servian Government is very thankful for the help and sympathy expressed and given by the American people.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1234

[Document 277]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, November 30, 1914.
[Received December 22.]

Roumanian Series]

No. 163]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the political situation of Roumania has undergone no change since my last report on this matter.

Roumania would like to obtain territorial expansion at the expense of Austro-Hungary, but there are many sympathizers here with Austria and Germany, amongst them the present King and several leaders of the Conservative Party and others, who are opposed to any action against Austria and Germany. Furthermore, Roumania is short of ammunition and is therefore unable to go to war. For this reason, a commission has been sent to the United States to obtain ammunition and medicaments, as per my recent telegrams. The feeling of all classes of the people here is that Roumania should obtain Transylvania from Austria, where about 4,000,000 Roumanians live; but the Government is afraid that if it should go to war, Bulgaria would attack Roumania. The Roumanian Government is therefore trying to make some kind of an arrangement with Bulgaria, but so far nothing has been done. I have, however, no doubt that, before Roumania takes part in the war, an agreement with Bulgaria will be arrived at.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1233

[Document 278]

The Minister in Roumania, Servia, and Bulgaria (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bucharest, November 30, 1914.
[Received December 22.]

Bulgarian Series]

No. 141]

Sir: I have the honor to report in regard to the present political situation in Bulgaria as follows:

During the session of the Sobranjé, many speeches were made by leaders of different parties, in which they all claimed that, although the Bulgarians are Slavs, they are, above all, Bulgarians. The Prime Minister, Mr. Radoslavoff, made a speech, of which the following is the most important extract:

Bulgaria adheres to her neutrality, as proclaimed on July 31 last. There are no complaints that we have broken our neutrality and where questions have arisen with countries, the latter have been satisfied with the explanations given. Although the present situation is a very difficult one for us to maintain, I shall, supported by the majority of the Sobranjé, continue to carry out the same policy. We are on the best of terms with Roumania, Greece, and even Servia, and on the most sincere relations with Turkey. I also proclaim that Bulgaria has her integrity assured. Whether we are obliged by circumstances to come before the Sobranjé for more authority depends entirely upon the attitude of the European powers.

My opinion is that Bulgaria is trying to get through her diplomacy what she lost on the battlefield last year. She is waiting for the development of the war and, as I am informed, she is in daily conference with representatives of all the fighting powers. Bulgaria is trying to get Macedonia from Servia, Kavalla from Greece, and Silistria from Roumania without war. Either of the belligerent parties here is willing to promise this territory to her, but the other Balkan States, Serbia, Greece, and Roumania, are opposed to giving anything to Bulgaria. For that reason, it is difficult for the powers at war to secure her cooperation for their side. Furthermore, it is my opinion that, unless the war situation becomes very dark for the Triple Entente, nothing will be done with Bulgaria. The Triple Entente will not bring pressure to bear upon the above-named countries, which are friendly to the Entente, to cede the different parts of their country to Bulgaria, unless they are absolutely obliged to have the support of this country. It is also possible that if the chances of war should favor Germany and Austria, Bulgaria, against the will of her people, whose sympathies are with Russia, will join them because the present Bulgarian Government believes that it can obtain more from Germany and Austria than from Russia, as Bulgaria is convinced that Russia is trying to make a large Servia, which would mean that a great part of Macedonia which Servia now holds, would not go to Bulgaria.

I have [etc.]

Charles J. Vopicka

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1338

[Document 279]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 29, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 10:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Feeling in Italy, especially among official and commercial classes, seems sensibly turning against Allies owing chiefly, as close observers believe, to constant vexations and interruptions by them of commerce, both directly with Italy and in transit to other countries. I understand a noticeable change is occurring for some reasons in other neutral European countries notably Switzerland, Scandinavia, Greece, Holland. Many Italian ships besides some American are reported to be held in England and French Mediterranean ports. Italy seems inclined to resent what is interpreted as efforts to force her hand. Italian press formerly warmly friendly to Allies begins to assume strongly critical attitude.

American Embassy

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State File No. 853.032/3

[Document 280]

The Minister in Portugal (Birch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lisbon, December 3, 1914.
[Received December 26.]

No. 57]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that the Portuguese Senate and House of Deputies assembled yesterday in regular session. Nothing of importance was transacted aside from the usual formal organization on the first day except the delivery of an address by the Premier when, in referring to the partial mobilization of the Army, he made the significant statement that “it was for the effective preparation of a division soon to leave for the seat of war.” This statement is in accord with information already sent to the Department in some of my previous despatches.

I have [etc.]

Thomas H. Birch

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1357

[Document 281]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople , November 28, 1914 .
[Received December 30.]

No. 137]

Sir: In continuation of my last political despatch No. 132, dated November 16,1 on political affairs and local conditions, I have the honor to enclose herewith translation of the leading article of the Tanine,2 the Government organ, which with similar articles of a more violent character published in other daily publications are calculated to arouse the strongest possible anti-British feeling. A noteworthy feature of this article is the moderation recommended to the Ottoman Government in its treatment of Britishers—the same spirit being indicated as has often been stated to me by the Minister of the Interior, namely, the purpose of the Turkish Government to demonstrate to the world at this time the superiority of its civilization over the nations of Europe.

Early in the morning of the 18th instant, I was informed that the police had entered and taken possession of all the public and private schools, hospitals and religious institutions belonging to or subsidized by the Governments of the belligerents. This was done without previous notice having been given to me, and after I had received assurances from the Minister of the Interior that I would be given ample time to arrange for the departure of the inmates, particularly the girls’ schools which I had hoped to be able to keep open until Christmas. I immediately visited as many of the institutions as I could in company with the chief of police, and upon ascertaining that nobody was allowed to enter or depart from the buildings, I telephoned the Minister of the Interior who ordered the chief of police to do nothing further until the former had conferred with me. I also learned that money had been taken from several institutions, and that in several instances the professors, men and women, had been locked in rooms and kept confined for hours without food, and that other rooms as well as certain boxes had been sealed by the police.

I protested most strongly to the Ministers of War and of the Interior who agreed to allow the various institutions a period of ten days in which time the teachers were to depart, being allowed to take with them their personal effects and in the meantime they were not to be further molested by the police. It was also agreed to allow such sisters and priests, who are indispensable for the churches, to remain. Turkish directors and physicians were placed in the hospitals,and I arranged that in case of need the hospitals be used for Red Cross purposes. It is the purpose of the authorities also to make the teaching of the Turkish language obligatory in all schools and colleges here. The Minister of the Interior assured me that his Government’s action in connection with all these institutions had absolutely no connection with the present war, but that it was inaugurated only to carry out the Government program in connection with the abrogation of the capitulations. He also assured me that such men who were not allowed to depart would not be molested, unless they were suspected of espionage, and in that event they would be expelled to Brusa, Konia, or some interior city.

At the same time an order was issued by the authorities allowing all teachers, priests, and children to leave. The Minister of the Interior stated that he would allow such men over fifty years of age to leave as I might designate.

Since then the Embassy has been occupied in facilitating the departure of these unfortunate people and few of these from Constantinople still remain. We expect shortly to receive those who were expelled from the interior. In the meantime the authorities have gradually been taking possession of the buildings belonging to the institutions.

I was able to secure a special train for some of the people who had been expelled which was to have departed on the evening of the 19th instant. Several hours before its scheduled departure I was informed by the Minister of War that for military reasons the train would not be allowed to leave. Later I was informed that the railway company had refused to sell tickets further than the Bulgarian frontier. I communicated several times with the Bulgarian Minister but could not ascertain the reason for this. The morning train of the following day did not depart and we then learned that no more Bulgarian visas could be obtained for Dedeagach. I was apprehensive then that Bulgaria was mobilizing, but two days later the trains were again running to Dedeagach and the Bulgarian Consulate recommenced visaing passports.

In a conversation I had with the Bulgarian Minister, he stated that the closing of the institutions by the Turkish officials would create a very bad impression upon his Government. He had so informed the Austrian Ambassador who had promised to discuss the matter of this policy with the German Ambassador with a view to obtain, if possible, a modification of these severe measures.

Upon discussing the present policy of the Ottoman Government with the German Ambassador, he stated that he was unable to control their present actions; he believed, however, that the demonstration by the mob and their vandalism, as reported in my despatch No. 133, dated November 16,1 Not printed might be condoned from the standpoint of the fact that it was perhaps necessary to give the people a little rein to appease them. It is well known, however, to all students of Turkish history that public opinion does not exist here; these movements calculated to show the indignation of the populace are generally carefully organized, and there is little doubt that the incident referred to is in the same category.

On the 18th instant, the Embassy learned that the Servian dragoman who had been left in charge would be arrested. He was kept here overnight and the next day we received a note verbale ordering him to leave within twenty-four hours. We were able to secure a delay for several days and having obtained a safe-conduct for him he departed on the 22d instant.

On the 18th instant, the Dercos waterworks, the principal supply of Constantinople, operated with French capital, was seized by the Ottoman officials and the majority of the employees, foreign subjects, were dismissed. A Turkish director was appointed by the authorities and he assumed charge.

As a reprisal for the suppression by the British Government of tribute from Egypt and Cyprus, the Ottoman Government has also seized the Aidin Railway operated by British capital, and has practically seized the Damascus and Extensions Railway operated by French capital.

On the 19th instant, I arranged to turn over to the Ministry of War all arms and ammunition found in the British Embassy. I had the Embassy unsealed, and after placing all the arms in the garden, turned them over to the representatives of the Minister of War and then resealed the Embassy.

The local press continually reports Turkish victories in the Caucasus, but I have received no official verification thereof. A short time ago the Goeben returned from the Black Sea with a number of dead and wounded, and it is reported that she was damaged in the bow and her forward turret. The Hamidieh has not been heard from for nearly a week.

I have the honor to enclose herewith translation of a general notice issued by the Imperial Government regarding the treatment of belligerents, postal and telegraphic relations, etc.1

On the 25th instant, the Sheik ul Islam, the ecclesiastical head of the State, issued a proclamation concerning the holy war, signed by His Imperial Majesty the Sultan and the high council board of ulemas, copy of which I enclose herewith.1 The Government organ in commenting upon this states that since it has been elaborated by Turkey’s most esteemed religious men and having been issued under the auspices of the Commander of all Believers, it will rapidly spread throughout the Islamic world; that patience has been exhausted, endurance is at an end, and the hour of vengeance is at hand; it is therefore the duty of all Moslems to obey the command of the Caliph, and the Islamic world from north to south and east to west is ready for vengeance.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau

1  Ante, p. 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267].

2 Not printed.

1  Ante, p. 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268].

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1379

[Document 282]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Christiania, December 28, 1914.
[Received January 12, 1915.]

No. 60]

Sir: Referring to my No. 56 dated December 16, 1914, informing the Department of the proposed conference at Malmö, Sweden,December 18—19, 1914, and the participation therein of the King of Norway, the King of Sweden, the King of Denmark, and their Foreign Ministers.1 I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of an official communiqué received from the Norwegian Foreign Office regarding the same.

The conference having been called by the King of Sweden is especially pleasing to the press and the people of Norway. Ever since the opening of the great European War the people of Norway have lived in a nervous state of tension; not only were they confronted by the possibility of being dragged into the war by one of the other belligerent powers, but there were even greater possibilities of their legitimate trade and commerce being crippled. Norway with her enormous length of coastline and her tempting harbors and fjords, the chief fear was that the warships of one of the great powers would sooner or later make such use of Norwegian waters as would endanger the neutrality of the country, and from information I have received Sweden and Denmark were in like position. All three of these kingdoms have done everything possible to observe their neutrality. The prospect seemed not encouraging, each country felt that alone it could achieve very little, and the press and people of Norway began to long for a United States of Scandinavia, of which there has been talk for years. The question was how could this alliance be formed. The event of 1905, when the union of Sweden and Norway was dissolved, precluded Norway from taking the initiative. Happily when the conference was called by the King of Sweden, the problem was solved. The meeting of the three Scandinavian Kings at Malmö will undoubtedly be recorded as one of the most important events in Norway since 1905. Not only is it 600 years since the monarchs of Norway, Sweden and Denmark met in friendly conference, but by Norway in particular the meeting of King Gustaf and King Haakon was hailed with delight as a sign of reconciliation after nine years of estrangement.

In an interview I had with the Minister for Foreign Affairs after his return from Malmö, and discussing the result of the conference with him, he informed me that the three monarchs had agreed upon a uniform course of action with respect to serious difficulties that have arisen as the result of the war, such as the entry of belligerent war vessels into Scandinavian ports, and their disarmament, [and] proceeding with regard to foreign reservists who enter Scandinavian ports on their way home. Unanimity of action was also arranged in regard to trade and navigation, and a better method of obtaining alteration and facilitation with respect to the practice that has arisen during the war regarding visitations and detention of merchant vessels.

In all these cases the three monarchs jointly agree to maintain a strict neutrality. Mr. Ihlen further stated that there does not exist an offensive or defensive alliance between the three countries, and that the proceedings of the conference would not be published.

Such in brief are the chief objects of this momentous conference. The three monarchs have as yet not formed the “United States of Scandinavia,” but have obtained an entente of the utmost significance. As the King of Sweden emphasized in his opening speech, the monarchs were performing a duty not only to the three nations of to-day, but, what is perhaps of greater importance, to posterity; they would pave the way to an even better understanding and closer alliance of the three sister kingdoms.

I have [etc.]

A. G. Schmedeman

[Enclosure—Translation]

Official “Communiqué” concerning the Conference of Malmö

The conference [was] opened Friday, September 18, by H. M. King Gustaf, who emphasized the unanimity of the three Scandinavian kingdoms in maintaining their policy of neutrality, and expressed a desire that they might continue to work together for protection of their common interests.

King Gustaf stated that he had invited the monarchs of Denmark and Norway to the conference, in the consciousness of his responsibilities to the present and future generations, so that nothing might be omitted that could contribute to the welfare of the three nations.

King Gustaf’s speech was answered by King Haakon and King Christian, both of whom expressed their joy at the initiative of King Gustaf, and at the same time uttered a wish that the conference might have happy and blessed results for the three nations.

The meeting adjourned on the afternoon of the 19th. The negotiations between the monarchs, who were accompanied by the respective Ministers for Foreign Affairs, will tend not only to strengthen the existing friendly relations of the three northern kingdoms, but they have also proved the existence of complete unanimity with regard to the special questions that arose for discussion. Finally, it was agreed that the cooperation that had thus been so auspiciously commenced should be continued, and that when occasion might arise representatives of the three powers should again meet with the same object in view.

1 Not printed.

The war in the Far East: Neutralization proposals—Japan’s entrance against Germany—The extension of operations in China and the Pacific OceanThe war in the Far East: Neutralization proposals—Japan’s entrance against Germany—The extension of operations in China and the Pacific Ocean

[283] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 3, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 10:45 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111/3

[284] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 3, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/4

[285] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 6, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/283

[286] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/3

[287] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/277

[288] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/4

[289] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 8, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 11 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/270

[290] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 7, 1914, 2 a.m. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/229

[291] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 29, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/668

[292] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 10, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/296

[293] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 11, 1914, 2 a.m. [Received 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/326

[294] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 11, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/317

[295] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 11, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 11 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/324

[296] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72/326

[297] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72/317

[298] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914, 5 p.m.

[299] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 11, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 11:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/337

[300] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 12, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/346

[301] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, August 12, 1914.

[302] The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State

Navy Department, Washington, August 12, 1914.

File No. 763.72/363

[303] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 13, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received August 12, 9 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/354

[304] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 13, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received August 14, 9:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/406

[305] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received August 16, 3:32 p.m.]

File No. 768.72115/7

[306] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo August 15, 1914 midnight. [Received August 16, 6:55 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/434

[307] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 18, 1914.

File No. 763.72/538

[308] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State, Washington August 19, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 768.72/434

[309] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 19, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 11 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/509

[310] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914, 6 p.m.

[311] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, August 20, 1914, 3 a.m. [Received August 19, 10:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/531

[312] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914, 5 p.m.

[313] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Washington, August 22, 1914.

File No. 763.72/538

[314] The Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

[Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador, August 23, 1914, 2:45 p.m. ]

File No. 704.9462/1

[315] The Imperial rescript issued at Tokyo, August 23, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador, August 23, 1914, 2:45 p.m. ]

File No. 763.72/619

[316] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 22, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received August 23, 5:26 p.m.]

File No. 768.72/574

[317] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 24, 1914.

[318] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 24, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/581.

[319] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 26, 1914, 9 a.m. [Received 4 a.m.]

File No. 768.72/616

[320] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 26, 1914. [Received 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/629

[321] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 3, 1914. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/372

[322] The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, undated. [Received September 10, 1914, 4:25 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/833

[323] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) and the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State, Washington, September 12, 1914, 3 p.m.

[324] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 15, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 8:00 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/861

[325] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, September 15, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/877

[326] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1914.

[327] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, September 1, 1914. [Received September 23.]

File No. 763.72/936

[328] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 29, 1914. [Received September 23.]

File No. 763.72/937

[329] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 29, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 7:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/994

[330] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 28, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received September 29, 10:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111/899

[331] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 29, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 12:20 p.m.]

File No. 768.72/995

[332] The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 30, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1012

[333] The Japanese Embassy to the Secretary of State

[Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador, October 1, 1914.]

File No. 763.72/1354

[334] The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,Peking, October 2, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received October 1, 6.30 p m.]

File No. 763.72/1023

[335] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, October 6, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received 2:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1054

[336] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, September 22, 1914. [Received October 13.]

File No. 763.72/1092

[337] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, October 20, 1914, midnight. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1106

[338] The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, September 10, 1914. [Received October 20.]

File No. 763.72111/490

[339] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Reinsch)

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914.

[340] The Consul at Nagasaki (Deichman) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Nagasaki, November 7, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1176

[341] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, October 8, 1914. [Received November 11.]

File No. 763.72/1197

[342] The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, October 12, 1914 [Received November 14.]

File No. 763.72/1217

[343] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, November 14, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1220

[344] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914.

File No. 763.72/1220

[345] The Ambassador, in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, November 23, 1914. [Received December 17.]

File No. 763.72/1315

[346] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, November 23, 1914 [Received December 17.]

File No. 763.72/1316

[347] The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, December 18, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 10:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1320

[348] The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, December 23, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1334

[349] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Reinsch)

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1914, 6 p.m.

[350] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, December 7, 1914. [Received December 30.]

File No. 763.72/1351

[351] The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Peking, January 2, 1915, 6 p.m. [Received 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1363

[352] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, December 12, 1914. [Received January 14, 1916.]

File No. 763.72/1391

[353] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo December 18, 1914. [Received January 14 1915.]

File No. 763.72/1392

[354] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, December 31, 1914. [Received January 27, 1915.]

File No. 763.72/1413.

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/3

[Document 283]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 3, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 10:45 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Withdrawal of the British and German naval forces from the Yangtze leaves almost wholly to the American and Japanese forces the responsibility for protecting general foreign interests in that region. I would therefore suggest that the Admiral be instructed to undertake such general protection of foreign interests other than American and that it be particularly recommended to him to keep one of the larger vessels at Shanghai, where the Government troops are reported to be unreliable and disorders are apprehended.

In view of the possibility that the failure to obtain in Europe the loans upon which the Government relies to meet immediate financial needs may result in disaffection among the troops, the virtually complete withdrawal of the German and Austrian Legation guard to Tsingtao and the possible reduction of the French and Italian guards may necessitate other measures for the protection of the Legation quarter, and with a view to that eventuality I beg to request that arrangement be made by which the Legation could, in case of need, call upon the Admiral for two or more additional companies of marines from the fleet now at Chefoo. Similar considerations forbid removal of any of our troops guarding railway from Tientsin northwards, and may in fact require eventual increase.

The proposal is being mooted to neutralize all foreign settlement concessions in China not including leased areas. I beg to request authorization for the Legation to participate in such an arrangement when laid before the Diplomatic Body.

MacMurray

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/4

[Document 284]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 3, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I have been approached on behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs with an inquiry as to the consideration the American Government would give to a request that it endeavor to obtain the consent of the belligerent European nations to an undertaking not to engage in hostilities either in Chinese territory and marginal waters or in adjacent leased territories. I beg to request instructions whether or not to encourage the Chinese Government to make the request which it is thus tentatively considering.

MacMurray

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/283

[Document 285]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 6, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Chinese Government is addressing to the Department of State a request in the sense outlined in my telegram of August 3, 11 p.m. It is also simultaneously requesting the Japanese Government to cooperate with ours in this matter. It is planned that the President of China will to-morrow address his request to the President directly.

I beg to request that as the Diplomatic Body has not been willing to take up the question of the neutralization of the treaty ports, referred to in my telegram of August 3, 5 p.m., it might be advisable to suggest to the belligerents that, even though failing a complete exclusion of the Far East from the area of hostilities, they instruct their representatives to maintain the principle of neutrality throughout their jurisdiction in China. It is earnestly hoped that the attitude of the German Government in this matter may be made known to the Legation for communication to the Chinese Government as soon as possible.

MacMurray

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) File No. 763.72111/3

[Document 286]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of August 3, 5 p.m. The Department authorizes Legation to participate in proposed arrangement to neutralize all foreign settlements in China not including leased areas.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) File No. 763.72111/277

[Document 287]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of August 6, 8 p.m.1 Report nationality and numbers of troops withdrawn from the railway and of those remaining. Has the Diplomatic Corps recently discussed question of continuing railway guards? Have governments withdrawing made any arrangements with other powers for substitutes?

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) File No. 763.72111/4

[Document 288]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 3, 11 p.m. Previous to the receipt of your telegram the Chinese Minister here on August 3 left a memorandum with the Department requesting the American Government to take the action mentioned in your inquiry. The Department is giving the matter careful consideration.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/270

[Document 289]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 8, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegram of August 7, 2 p.m. From Tientsin and railway the Germans have withdrawn all but ten out of 300; Japanese approximately 1,000 out of 1,400 and Russia all of their 800 troops; French approximately 400 out of 1,100 and their remaining troops, like the 2,300 British, are expected to be withdrawn at any time, although no confirmation is yet obtainable. Apart from Americans other forces there are negligible.

The corps has not discussed railway guards nor will it take up any claims [involving] international questions at present, but the desirability of increasing American guards has been intimated to me informally by both British and German Legations.

I can not ascertain arrangements have been made for substitutes but the Japanese Legation is reliably quoted as stating that its Government is prepared to take all measures necessary for the protection of foreign interests.

MacMurray

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/229

[Document 290]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 7, 1914, 2 a.m.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The German Chargé d’Affaires informs me that at the time of Russia’s preoccupation with the Balkan situation two years ago Japan took the opportunity to conclude a convention by which Russia in the event of becoming involved in those hostilities would lend Japan all practicable support in annexing southern Manchuria and acquiring Kiaochow, Russia reserving freedom of action in northern Manchuria; that subsequently by the intermediation of Great Britain it was arranged that in the event of European War Japan would participate with Great Britain and Russia in hostilities against Germany in the Pacific, receiving in compensation German rights in Kiaochow. To that end Japanese war vessels are already stationed within reach of Tsingtao and transports have been prepared in Japan for an expeditionary force to be landed at Haichow, Kiangsu, and to invest Tsingtao pending the arrival of the Australian naval force.

MacMurray

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/668

[Document 291]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, August 29, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

In a conversation with Russian Ambassador yesterday he stated in most positive terms that there was no agreement of any kind between Japan and Russia concerning China.

Guthrie

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/296

[Document 292]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, August 10, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

German Ambassador says England has called on Japan for assistance under alliance. He was unable to communicate with the Minister of Foreign Affairs but had an interview with the Vice Minister yesterday. He could get no assurance as to action contemplated by Japan. He says Japan’s fleet has been mobilized and he believes it is Japan’s intention to seize Tsingtao and all German possessions in the Far East. German forces will resist but resistance is hopeless. He asserts that elimination of Germany from the Far East and the transfer of her possessions to Japan would be prejudicial to American interests and requested me to call on Foreign Office for information as to Japan’s purpose. I declined to do so but at his suggestion promised to communicate with the Department. Ambassador is ready to leave at a moment’s notice and desires to place German affairs in our hands.

Chinese Minister has called to know whether American Fleet would be used to protect China and preserve peace in the Far East. On the 8th local newspapers published report that I had been instructed by Department to inform the Foreign Office that our Atlantic Fleet was on its way to Far East. This report was made positively and caused considerable excitement and comment here. It was probable cause of call from Chinese Minister. In answer to many requests for information I denied the story. It was also denied by the Foreign Office.

Guthrie

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/326

[Document 293]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 11, 1914, 2 a.m.
[Received 8 a.m.]

[Telegram—Extract]

323. Sir Edward Grey has conferred with me about suggestions that he says you have made through the British Embassy at Washington concerning the possible neutralization of the Pacific Ocean. He fears that so sweeping an arrangement could hardly be made. But suggestion from the United States to England and Germany to agree that status quo in China be maintained by each of them would be a great advantage if agreed to. Grey must consult British Cabinet before committing himself but there is little doubt in my mind about the Cabinet’s acceptance. Please consider whether our Government will make such a suggestion and inform me. . . .

Grey’s concern is to prevent fighting in China or in Chinese waters for fear of causing disturbance in China.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/317

[Document 294]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, August 11, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Counselor of German Embassy informs me that his Ambassador anticipates proposition from Japan for neutralization of Orient. Ambassador has no direct communication with Berlin and he requests you to inform his Government and says that he advises this arrangement and desires instructions so that he may be prepared to act if proposition is made. Unless the arrangement is made Ambassador believes that attack will be made on German possessions and considers resistance hopeless. I have had no communications with the Foreign Office on the subject.

Guthrie

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/324

[Document 295]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 11, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]

[Telegram—Extract]

Japanese Chargé d’Affaires reliably quoted as stating that his Government would welcome an opportunity to participate in taking Kiaochow and that an expedition for that purpose is available immediately. . . .

MacMurray

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72/326

[Document 296]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram-Extract]

Your No. 323, August 11, 2 a.m. The suggestions to which you refer were discussed by Lansing with Barclay. Lansing explained to Barclay that they were personal and not the subject of an official or even an informal communication for his Government. Barclay later informed Lansing that he had telegraphed Sir Edward Grey in regard to the subject but had done so personally and confidentially. . . .

The statement made to you by Sir Edward Grey is most gratifying to this Government as it accords with its desire to preserve the status quo in China.

The Department is in the most confidential and informal manner sounding certain of the other powers interested in China as to their views about preserving the status quo. As soon as they have indicated their attitude you will be fully advised.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) File No. 763.72/317

[Document 297]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of August 11, 1 p.m. The Department doubts whether it may properly and lawfully become a medium of communication between a belligerent Government and its own diplomats. But the Department is on its own account making inquiry of the German Government respecting the possibility of circumscribing the area of hostilities in the Far East and preserving there the status quo. You will be informed of the result.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 298]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

Discreetly ascertain the views of the German Government as to the possibility of circumscribing the area of hostilities and maintaining the status quo in the Far East. This must not as yet be considered a formal proposal by this Government but an inquiry. The American Ambassador in Tokyo states that the German Ambassador there, who cannot communicate with Berlin direct, is also desirous of knowing the attitude of his Government.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/337

[Document 299]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 11, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 11:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Sir Edward Grey informs me that Japan finds herself unable to refrain from war with Germany, The German Ambassador at Tokyo has made further refraining impossible. Japan assures Britain that she is anxious to respect both the neutrality and the integrity of China. The Anglo-Japanese treaty binds both parties to it to respect her integrity.

American Ambassador

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/346

[Document 300]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 12, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 10 a.m.]

[Telegram-Extract]

There is a persistent rumor . . . upon which the Chinese are founding extravagant hopes to the effect that the United. States is sending very considerable reenforcements to its Asiatic Fleet to assist China in case of need. I beg to request such information as may enable the Legation to speak authoritatively on this subject.

MacMurray

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) [Document 301]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, August 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 12, 6 p.m. The United States is not sending reenforcements to its Asiatic Fleet. You should deny report.

Bryan

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/363

[Document 302]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State

Navy Department,
Washington, August 12, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward herewith, for the information of the Department of State, a copy of a cablegram received from the naval attaché at the Embassy in Tokyo relative to mobilization of the Japanese Fleet.

Sincerely yours,

Josephus Daniels

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The Naval Attaché in Japan (Cotten) to the Navy Department

Tokyo, undated.
[Received August 12, 1914, 7:14 a.m.]

The Japanese Fleet mobilizing. There is a strong feeling against Germany. War may be declared.

Cotten

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/354

[Document 303]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 13, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received August 12, 9 p.m.]

[Telegram—Extract]

From Chinese sources. . . I learn that advices of this Government confirm the belief that Japan is seeking the opportunity to cooperate with Great Britain against Tsingtao as reported in my telegram of August 11, 5 p.m.; that, apparently with a view to making available a pretext for further independent action, the Japanese in Manchuria have been creating daily provocative incidents; and that their Legation here (refusing to accept the explanation that the Chinese Minister at Washington had acted on his own responsibility in presenting a memorandum to the Department in advance of the proposed simultaneous overtures to American and Japanese Governments) has informed the Foreign Office his Government regards it as an unfriendly act that the Chinese Government so far disregarded the friendly disposition of Japan as to seek in the first instance good offices of the United States in the attempt to exclude the area of hostilities from the Far East.

In consequence of what they term intolerable attitude of Japan the President and his advisers are reported to be convinced that it is the intention of that Government on the basis of some fictitious grievance to occupy South Manchuria and Fukien as well as Kiaochow. . . .

MacMurray

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/406

[Document 304]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 13, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received August 14, 9:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Answering your telegram 11th, relative to circumscribing war in East.

1. Germany does not seek war with Japan.

2. If Japan, on account of the treaty with England, asks that Germany do nothing against English colonies, warships, or commerce in East, Germany, will assent in return for corresponding promise from England.

3. England and Germany to reciprocally agree that either all warships of both in East leave eastern waters or remain inactive as against the other, if remaining there.

4. Japan, England, and Germany to agree that none of these three shall attack warships, colonies, territory, or commerce of any of the others in the East.

5. The East to mean all lands and seas between parallels London 90 east and all Pacific to Cape Horn.

Notify German Ambassador in Tokyo.

If this zone is too large, smaller limits will be accepted.

Gerard

1 Repeated to the Ambassador in Japan, August 15.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72115/7

[Document 305]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 15, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received August 16, 3:32 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Many Japanese getting money and leaving. Twelve Japanese officers left in one party yesterday.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/434

[Document 306]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo August 15, 1914 midnight.
[Received August 16, 6:55 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The following statement was handed me by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to-night:

Considering it highly important and necessary in the present situation to take measures to remove all causes of disturbance to the peace of the Far East and to safeguard the general interests contemplated by the agreement of alliance between Japan and Great Britain, in order to secure a firm and enduring peace in eastern Asia, establishment of which is the aim of the said agreement, the Imperial Japanese Government sincerely believe it their duty to give advice to the Imperial German Government to carry out the following two propositions: (1) To withdraw immediately from the Japanese and Chinese waters German men-of-war and armed vessels of all kinds and to disarm at once those which cannot be so withdrawn.

(2) To deliver on a date not later than September 15, 1914, to the Imperial Japanese authorities without condition or compensation the entire leased territory of Kiaochow, with a view to eventual restoration of the same to China.

The Imperial Japanese Government announce at the same time that in the event of their not receiving by noon, August 23, 1914, the answer of the Imperial German Government signifying an unconditional acceptance of the above advice offered by the Imperial Japanese Government, they will be compelled to take such action as they may deem necessary to meet the situation.

At the same time, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, after expressing a strong desire to perpetuate the friendship between our two countries, requested me to impress on you as strongly as possible that in taking the present action Japan was not animated by any selfish purpose but was acting strictly in pursuance of the alliance with Great Britain and would not seek any territorial aggrandizement or selfish advantage in China and would carefully respect all neutral interests.

He expressed fear that there was strong possibility of internal disturbances in China, due chiefly to the failure of that Government to complete the loans under negotiation at the outbreak of the war in Europe. In case of such disturbances he said that Japan and England would cooperate to preserve order but intimated that they might need the assistance of America.

He thought that if China could raise money, the danger of disturbances would be reduced to a minimum, and seemed desirous to have this idea suggested to the United States as there was no other source from which it could be obtained.

The German Ambassador this evening informed me through his secretary that Germany could not concede Japan’s demands and that he and staff would probably leave for America en route to Germany by the first available steamer. Austrian Ambassador may accompany him, but this is not certain.

German Ambassador expects to turn over his archives to this Embassy. The Minister for Foreign Affairs made no objection to this and said Japan would ask America to render her the same service in Germany.

I have telegraphed to Legation at Peking text of Japan’s notice to Germany.

Guthrie

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/538

[Document 307]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State 1

[Memorandum]

His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to communicate to him the following telegram which has been received from Sir Edward Grey:

The Governments of Great Britain and Japan having been in communication with each other are of opinion that it is necessary for each to take action to protect the general interests in the Far East contemplated by the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, keeping specially in view the independence and integrity of China as provided for in that agreement.

It is understood that the action of Japan will not extend to the Pacific Ocean beyond the China Seas, except in so far as it may be necessary to protect Japanese shipping lines in the Pacific, nor beyond Asiatic waters westward of the China Seas, nor to any foreign territory except territory in German occupation on the continent of eastern Asia.

British Embassy, Washington, August 18, 1914.

1 Repeated to the Ambassadors in Great Britain and Japan, August 18, and to the Chargé d’Affaires in China, August 19.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) File No. 768.72/434

[Document 308]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State,
Washington August 19, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your cipher telegram of August 15, midnight. In reply to the statement of the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs you will communicate to him textually the following:

The American Government, while regretting that differences have arisen between the Imperial Japanese Government and the Imperial German Government which may eventuate in war, does not, in accordance with its policy of strict neutrality in relation to disputes between other nations, express any opinion as to the merits of the differences. It however, notes with satisfaction that Japan, in demanding the surrender by Germany of the entire leased territory of Kiaochow, does so with the purpose of restoring that territory to China, and that Japan is seeking no territorial aggrandizement in China in the movement now contemplated, but is acting in strict pursuance of the alliance with Great Britain. It is recalled that one of the aims of that alliance is declared to be “the preservation of the common interest of all powers in China by insuring the independence and integrity of China and the principle of equal opportunities for the commerce and industry of all nations in China.” Should disturbances in the interior of China seem to the Japanese Government to require measures to be taken by Japan or other powers to restore order, the Imperial Japanese Government will no doubt desire to consult with the American Government before deciding upon a course of action. This would be in accordance with the agreement made in the exchange of notes on the 30th of November, 1908 by His Excellency, Baron Kogoro Takahira, then Japanese Ambassador to the United States, and Hon. Elihu Root, then American Secretary of State.

Repeat to Peking as strictly confidential for information only.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/509

[Document 309]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State 1

American Legation,
Peking, August 19, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I learn that the German Chargé d’Affaires has been discussing with the Foreign Office, altogether informally and unofficially in consequence of his having no instructions and being out of communication with his Government, the possibility of immediately retroceding Kiaochow directly to the Chinese Government. I also learn that the Chinese Government has now been warned to discontinue such pourparlers.

The British Minister informs me that the Japanese Government has made a communication to ours in regard to the terms of its cooperation without [with?] the other powers and the press telegrams report that “the United States regards Japanese promise to restore Kiaochow to China as satisfactory.” I beg to be informed of such communications as may have passed and particularly whether our Government has expressed approval of the Japanese proposal and, if so, whether the proposal as approved contemplates the immediate retrocession of the leased territory and of the special rights in Shantung conceded to Germany in conjunction with the lease.

MacMurray

1 The first paragraph repeated to the Ambassadors in Great Britain and Japan, August 19.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) [Document 310]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of August 19, 5 p.m. The American Government has not said that it regards the Japanese promise to restore Kiaochow to China as satisfactory, but in accordance with its attitude of strict neutrality the American Government has refrained from expressing any opinion upon the merits of the question. Communications to and from the Department relating to this matter are being repeated to you. You will be kept informed.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/531

[Document 311]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, August 20, 1914, 3 a.m.
[Received August 19, 10:15 p.m.]

[Telegram—Extract]

Liang, Minister of Communications, advises the Legation in strict confidence that the note in which Japanese Legation communicated to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the ultimatum to Germany stated that the matter is one that does not concern the Chinese Government which was advised to remain absolutely passive in regard to it; and it announced to the Chinese Government that if any internal disturbances should arise in China, Japan and Great Britain would undertake to suppress them. In reply to informal inquiries as to the possibility of Germany’s retroceding Kiaochow directly to China, British Minister informed the Chinese that his Government could not now recognize such a transfer. In view of the threatening attitude adopted by Japan and apparently acquiesced in by Great Britain, the Chinese Government dares take no official action.

Liang, however, on his own responsibility requests me to telegraph to the Department an intimation that it would be acceptable to the Chinese Government if the United States were to find it possible to undertake to bring about the immediate retrocession of the leased territory and he suggests that the purpose might be accomplished by the American Government approaching Great Britain and Germany with a proposal that, in order to avert hostilities, the German rights in Kiaochow might be ceded to the United States for immediate transfer to China. He added that the Chinese regard the occupation of Tsingtao by Japan as a menace to the independence of China....

MacMurray

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) [Document 312]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram—Extract]

Your telegram of August 20, 3 a.m. Inform Minister Liang that the Department regrets its inability to comply with his request.... The Department feels sure that such a course would do more to provoke than to avert war.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) File No. 763.72/538

[Document 313]

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

[Memorandum]

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Britannic Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his memorandum, dated August 18, 1914, quoting a telegram from Sir Edward Grey with reference to the protection of general interests in the Far East by the Governments of Great Britain and Japan.

Department of State,

Washington, August 22, 1914.

The Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda) File No. 704.9462/1

[Document 314]

The Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)1

[Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador,
August 23, 1914, 2:45 p.m. ]

[Telegram]

The German Government failing to make answer to Japan’s advice within the time limit assigned therefor, a state of war exists between Japan and Germany from noon, August 23, 1914.

In informing the United States Government of the above, you will request them to take over charge of the Japanese Embassy and consulates and to undertake the protection of the Japanese subjects in Germany.

The Japanese Chargé d’Affaires at Berlin has been instructed to notify the German Government of this arrangement, but you will also request the American Government kindly to bring the matter to the knowledge of the German Government.

1 Received at the Embassy, August 23, 1914.

The Imperial rescript issued at Tokyo, August 23, 1914, 6 p.m. File No. 763.72/619

[Document 315]

The Imperial rescript issued at Tokyo, August 23, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador,
August 23, 1914, 2:45 p.m. ]

We, by the grace of Heaven, Emperor of Japan, seated on the Throne occupied by the same Dynasty from time immemorial, do hereby make the following Proclamation to all Our, loyal and brave subjects:

We hereby declare war against Germany and We command Our Army and Navy to carry on hostilities against that Empire with all their strength, and We also command all Our competent authorities to make every, effort, in pursuance of their respective duties to attain the national aim by all means within the limits of the law of nations.

Since the outbreak of the present war in Europe, calamitous effect of which We view with grave concern, We on Our part have entertained hopes of preserving peace of the Far East by the maintenance of strict neutrality, but the action of Germany has at length compelled Great Britain, Our Ally, to open hostilities against that country, and Germany is at Kiaochow, its leased territory in China, busy with warlike preparations, while its armed vessels cruising seas of eastern Asia are threatening Our commerce and that of Our Ally. Peace of the Far East is thus in jeopardy.

Accordingly, Our Government and that of His Britannic Majesty, after full and frank communication with each other, agreed to take such measures as may be necessary for the protection of the general interests, contemplated in the agreement of alliance and We on Our part being desirous to attain that object by peaceful means commanded Our Government to offer with sincerity an advice to the Imperial German Government. By the last day appointed for the purpose, however, Our Government failed to receive an answer accepting their advice. It is with profound regret that We, in spite of Our ardent devotion to the cause of peace, are thus compelled to declare war, especially at this early period of Our reign and while we are still in mourning for Our lamented Mother.

It is Our earnest wish that by the loyalty and valor of Our faithful subjects, peace may soon be restored and the glory of the Empire be enhanced.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72/574

[Document 316]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 22, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received August 23, 5:26 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Austrian Embassy requests that following message be telegraphec:

Berlin, August 22, 1914. To the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador in Tokyo. H. M. S. Empress Elizabeth, harboring at Tsingtao, should disarm, crew to proceed to Tientsin.

Berchtold
Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 317]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 22. Department prefers not to transmit message in regard to disarmament of H. M. S. Empress Elizabeth, harboring at Tsingtao.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/581.

[Document 318]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, August 24, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Negotiations with favorable prospects for the withdrawal of the Austrian war vessel Kaiserin Elizabeth from Tsingtao and her disarmament and internment at Shanghai. If successful, Austrian Ambassador will not leave. Japan seems agreeable to proposal.

Guthrie

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72/616

[Document 319]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, August 26, 1914, 9 a.m.
[Received 4 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to the Embassy’s telegram of August 24, 5 p.m., satisfactory arrangement has been completed.

Guthrie

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/629

[Document 320]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 26, 1914.
[Received 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I have just been informed by wireless by my Government that Emperor has ordered Commander of Austrian cruiser Elizabeth in Tsingtao to take up fight together with German Navy. Our diplomatic relations with Japan are broken off.

Dumba

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/372

[Document 321]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 3, 1914.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

A circular from the Foreign Office to-day states that German forces in the vicinity of Kiaochow and British and Japanese there and at Lungkow and Laichow are taking military action in disregard of the declared neutrality of Chinese territory, and, citing precedent of Liaotung region in the Russo-Japanese war, it announces inability of the Chinese Government to preserve the neutrality of its territory in the regions affected by those operations.

MacMurray

The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/833

[Document 322]

The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, undated.
[Received September 10, 1914, 4:25 p.m.]

[Telegram]

For German Ambassador, Washington:

English press reports state Japanese Government proposes to extend war to regions east of Hwang-ho River, to expel all Germans not only from Dalny but from Mukden, Changchun and even Tientsin. Please ask State Department to find out through American representatives, Tokyo, Peking, whether reports are true and, if so, to protest with Japanese Government against measures affecting Germans residing in neutral Chinese territory.

Imperial Foreign Office.

Zimmermann
American Minister

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) and the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) [Document 323]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) and the Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray)

Department of State,
Washington, September 12, 1914, 3 p.m.

[Telegram]

Ascertain and report as to truth of statements made in English press that Japanese Government proposes to extend war to regions east of Hwang-ho River and expel all Germans not only from Dalny but from Mukden, Changchun, and even Tientsin.

Lansing

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/861

[Document 324]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 15, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 8:00 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegram of September 12, 3 p.m.

So far as can be determined press reports untrue. I am reliably informed that upon determining attack Tsingtao the Japanese Government stated to the Chinese Government that it would be necessary to make use of all of Shantung east of Hwang-ho. This the Chinese Government strongly opposed and it is now believed operations will not extend west of Weihsien. Germans not expelled from places mentioned by you.

MacMurray

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/877

[Document 325]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, September 15, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to Department’s telegram of September 12, 3 p.m. Vice Minister of Fomento [sic] says that statements mentioned are entirely unfounded and untrue.

Guthrie

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 326]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1914.

[Telegram]

Please inform Foreign Office that Department has inquired of Tokyo and Peking whether there was foundation for the English press reports stating that Japanese Government proposes to extend war to regions east of Hwang-ho River, to expel all Germans not only from Dalny but from Mukden, Changchun and even Tientsin, and has received replies stating that reports are entirely unfounded and untrue.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/936

[Document 327]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, September 1, 1914.
[Received September 23.]

No. 119]

Sir: Referring to my telegram of August 15, 12 p.m.,1 transmitting the text of Japan’s ultimatum to Germany, I have the honor to enclose an English translation of the proclamation of war,2 which was issued at noon of the 23d ultimo, the date of expiration of the multi Tatum, simultaneously with which the German Ambassador was handed his passport.

It was the general conviction here that Germany would not comply with the terms of the ultimatum, and that war was inevitable, so that the proclamation was received by the public with but little surprise.

The vernacular press unanimously supported the Government in its action, recognizing Japan’s obligations under the alliance with England, and her duty to preserve the peace of the Far East, and to protect international shipping in Oriental waters.

Some of the newspapers referred to the intervention of Germany following the Chino-Japanese War, and expressed satisfaction at the opportunity afforded for retaliation. The efforts of the German Emperor to imbue Europe with the fear of a “yellow peril” were also recalled.

The promise of the Government to restore Kiaochow to China provoked some discussion, and while most of the journals raised no objections, some of them considered that as Germany had rejected the ultimatum, Japan was no longer bound by the terms thereof, and was at liberty to retain that territory as a prize of war.

There are also enclosed English translations3 of the list of articles regarded as contraband during the war between Japan and Germany, of the regulations relating to German merchantmen anchored in or bound for Japanese ports at the time of the declaration of war. The articles of contraband practically correspond with those provided by the conference of London, with one important exception, that aircraft are transferred from conditional to absolute contraband.

A special session of the Diet is to be convoked on the 3d instant, to vote the war budget for the current fiscal year, which it is said will amount to about $18,000,000.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

1 Ante, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306].

2 Ante, 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315].

3 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/937

[Document 328]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, August 29, 1914.
[Received September 23.]

No. 114]

Sir: Supplementing my telegrams of August 24, 5 p.m., and the 26th, 9 a.m., I have the honor to report that on the 24th the Austrian Ambassador informed me that the Minister for Foreign Affairs had received through the Japanese Ambassador at Vienna a proposal from the Austrian Government that the Austrian cruiser Kaiserin Elizabeth, then at anchor in the harbor of Tsingtao, be dismantled and interned at a neutral port in China. The Ambassador added that the Minister seemed agreeable to the proposal, but would have to consult with the representatives of the other powers concerned.

On the 26th he advised one that a mutual understanding had been readied, and that while the cruiser still remained at Tsingtao, the officers and crew had left for Shanghai. He appeared to consider that this removed the necessity of his withdrawing from Japan.

On the 27th, however, he informed me that he had received a telegram from his Government instructing him, in view of the action taken by Japan against Germany, the ally of Austria-Hungary, to request his passport from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and to leave Japan together with the personnel of the Embassy, and of the Austrian consulates established in Japan.

On the 28th the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me that he had handed the Austrian Ambassador his passport, and had at the same time instructed the Japanese Ambassador at Vienna to demand his passport, and to withdraw from Austria-Hungary at once.

At the request of the Ambassador I have assumed charge of Austrian interests and subjects in Japans, and have instructed the American Consuls at Yokohama, Kobe and Nagasaki to take over the Austrian consular affairs at those ports.

The orders of the Japanese Government ensuring the protection of German subjects remaining in the country, copies of which were transmitted with my despatch No. 111, of the 27th instant,1 have been applied also to Austrian subjects by an order appearing in to-day’s Official Gazette.

The vernacular press regards the action of Austria with indifference, as she has no possessions in the Far East, and her only man-of-war in this region, the Kaiserin Elizabeth, has been abandoned by the officers and crew. The newspapers only regret that Austria, with whom Japan has always enjoyed the most cordial relations, should have been forced to sever them as a result of pressure from Germany.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/994

[Document 329]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 29, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 7:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

My telegram of September 28, 5 p.m.1 The Foreign Office now advises me that it has received from the Japanese Minister formal notification that, in spite of the understanding in regard to the policing of the Shantung Railway by Chinese troops, the Japanese Government now finds itself compelled by military necessity to take possession of the railway as far west as Tsinan.

MacMurray

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/899

[Document 330]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 28, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received September 29, 10:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The Foreign Office informs me that it has had occasion to protest to the Japanese Government against the fact that, in disregard of the zone delimited by agreement with China, Japanese forces have occupied Weihsien.

The Chinese Government now learns further that Japanese forces are proceeding westward from that point and have taken possession of several mines.

MacMurray

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72/995

[Document 331]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 29, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 12:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs tells me in strict confidence that in support of plea of military necessity on which was based the announcement reported in my telegram of September 29, 3 p.m., the Japanese Minister urged that the railway was in any case subject to seizure by Japan as being German property held under the terms of the convention for lease of Kiaochow. The Minister for Foreign Affairs said that, it was only in connection with railway that this apparent claim to the reversion of German rights in Shantung had been asserted as yet.

MacMurray

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1012

[Document 332]

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 30, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am reliably informed that members of Japanese Legation have urged upon representatives of the press with a view to publication the argument as to the liability of the Shantung Railway to seizure which was reported in the Legation’s September 29, 7 p.m.

I learn that British Legation has telegraphed its Government urging that action be taken to restrain the Japanese from occupying railway.

Reinsch

The Japanese Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1354

[Document 333]

The Japanese Embassy to the Secretary of State

[Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador,
October 1, 1914.]

The Japanese Government have decided to take over the control and operation of the German railway system, known as the Shantung Railway. In deciding upon this course, the following points have been carefully considered.

1. The entire railway system in question had its origin in the convention of March 6, 1898, between Germany and China respecting the lease of Kiaochow, and is inseparable from the lease of Kiaochow itself. It may justly be considered a part, or an extension, of the leased territory. In fact, it is one of the most important organs of the German administration of Tsingtao and is German property of a public nature. Further, the terms of the grant of concession to the Shantung Eisenbahn Gesellschaft for the construction and operation of the railway, issued by the German Imperial Chancellor, June 1, 1899, as well as the terms of the articles of incorporation of the above railway company go to show not only that the railway system is placed under complete control of the German authorities, but that the railway company is even made to directly contribute to the expenses of the administration at Tsingtao. In this connection, extension of the police administration of the leased territory over the entire railway system may be particularly noted.

2. After the outbreak of hostilities the railway in question has been actually used in facilitating and augmenting military operations on the part of the Germans, such as carrying troops, arms and munitions of war.

3. Military operations extending to a portion of the railway system east of Weihsien cannot but result in cutting off the other portion of the line to the west of Weihsien to Tsinan, and in losing its administrator, to end in the stoppage or complete demoralization, of communication. Even considered as a measure of expediency to serve the public interests of the localities to be thus affected, it is deemed imperative for the Japanese authorities to take over control of the entire line. In order to avoid any misapprehension regarding the subject, it may be added that the above steps on the part of the Japanese authorities do not imply extension of the belligerent zone.

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1023

[Document 334]

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,Peking, October 2, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received October 1, 6.30 p m.]

[Telegram]

As the result of a long Cabinet meeting to-day Liang Tun Yen informs me that the Chinese Government, while accepting in good, faith the assurances of Japan and not intending to offer any opposition to her operations, is deeply concerned over the proposed military occupation of the Shantung Railway west of Weihsien fearing that such penetration into the interior away from the seat of war will almost inevitably lead to incidents beyond its control threatening to force China into hostilities. President Yuan will, therefore, through Minister Shah ask President Wilson to confer with the British Government as to the possibility of prevailing upon. Japan to restrict her action to the necessary field of belligerent operations. The seriousness of the situation is generally felt here.

Reinsch

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1054

[Document 335]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, October 6, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received 2:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Public notification issued by Japanese Navy Department to-day states that the portion of the Japanese Fleet assigned to engage the enemy squadron in the South Seas landed a force on Jaluit Island,Marshall Archipelago, destroyed all military works and received the surrender of the authorities without resistance. In reply to inquiry made by the naval attaché of the Embassy, the private secretary of the Minister of Marine stated that he thought it likely that small force had been left on the island but that if there was any occupation it was temporary and for military purposes only.

Guthrie

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1092

[Document 336]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, September 22, 1914.
[Received October 13.]

No. 127]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the war budget for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1915, voted by the special session of the Diet convened on the 4th instant, amounts to $26,500,000, which in addition to the estimated expenses for operations on land and sea against Kiaochow, includes an appropriation for the construction of ten destroyers.

The session was first called for three days, but owing to the opposition of the Seiyukai, which questioned the good faith of the Government, and consumed the time in heated interpellations, it became necessary to extend the period to six days. One of the members accused the Prime Minister of “forcing unanimity on the nation” in the present war; to which the Minister replied, “If you approve the Government’s action, please support it; if you do not, oppose it openly and manfully.” This altercation intensified the feeling, and threatened to precipitate disorder in the lower House, but the opposition was finally brought to terms by its leader. The attitude taken by the Seiyukai evoked the criticism of almost the entire press, which denominated it as “puerile.”

The Minister for Foreign Affairs in his explanation to the Diet of the events which led to the outbreak of the war in Europe and to the participation of Japan in the Far East, stated that—

In the early part of August England requested Japan to furnish her assistance under the terms of the alliance. After submitting the request to the Emperor the Government announced its intention to Great Britain, and a cordial exchange of views followed, as a result of which it was decided necessary to take the proper measures for the protection of the general interests contemplated by the alliance. Japan did not voluntarily throw herself into the whirlpool of war, but acted in the belief that it was her duty under the alliance.

The Minister also communicated to the Diet the following official note received from the British Government:

The British Government having no previous agreement with the French and Russian Governments, have now concluded an agreement with the two Governments with regard to the war now being carried on in common. In view of Article II of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, there is no necessity of concluding such an agreements between the Japanese and British Governments. The British Government have informed the French and Russian Governments that the agreement with them as to making peace and terms of peace must not, be regarded as modifying in arty way the provisions of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, which is a prior obligation upon the British Government, and the said two Governments have been informed that the British Government must of course act in common and in mutual agreement with the Japanese Government as regards the conduct of war and making peace.

In this connection the Minister stated in reply to an interpellation that the British forces are expected to cooperate with the Japanese in the military operations against Kiaochow, but that with reference to Kiaochow after the war there is no agreement between the two Governments outside the provisions of the alliance.

The Minister during the session took occasion to express the appreciation of the Government for the service rendered by the United States in undertaking the protection of Japanese interests and subjects in Germany and Austria during the war, in the following language:

I cannot dose my speech without t word on the courtesy which the American Government were good enough to extend to the Imperial Government in connection with the present trouble.

When the relations between Japan and Germany reached a point of rupture, the Imperial Government asked the American Government if in ease or need they would be good enough to undertake the protection of Japanese subjects and interests in Germany. This request the American Government promptly complied with. Subsequently upon the rupture of diplomatic relations between Japan and Austria-Hungary, the Imperial Government again appealed to the American Government for the protection of Japanese subjects and interests in Austria-Hungary, and Were given the game willing consent as before. I desire to avail myself of this opportunity to give an expression to the sincere appreciation on the part of the Imperial Government of the courtesy so kindly extended by the American Government.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1106

[Document 337]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, October 20, 1914, midnight.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Japanese Navy Department to-night issued following statement:

The portion of our fleet which has been operating toward Jaluit Island has strategically taken possession of the Islands strategically Important among flit Marianne, the Marshall, and the East and West Caroline Archipelagoes. During the action we found two of the enemy’s war vessels in hiding. One sank herself and the other was captured, with her crew. We suffered no damage.

Navy Department states that to disclose names of islands taken possession of might defeat the object of the Japanese Government, namely the restriction of the area of operations of the German Fleet which, has heretofore been able to coal and plant mines at will The Japanese Foreign Office has informally stated to newspaper men that it regards recent captures as on the same basis as that of Jaluit Island and that the Japanese Government has been all along acting with the knowledge of and in conjunction with Great Britain.The naval attaché has been informed that Japan has assured the British authorities that at any time it is desired she will turn over Yenchow to a British force.

Guthrie

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/490

[Document 338]

The Chargé d’Affaires in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, September 10, 1914.
[Received October 20.]

No. 362]

Sir: Referring to the despatch No. 334 of the 13th ultimo, with which the Legation transmitted the rules of neutrality adopted by the Chinese Government,1 I have the honor to enclose herewith a translation of a circular note, under date of September 3, by which (as reported in my telegram of that date, 9 p. m)2 the Ministry for Foreign Affairs notified the various legations that in view of the military operations actually carried on by the German forces in the neighborhood of Kiaochow Bay and by the British and Japanese forces at Lungkow and Laichow, it could not hold itself responsible for the obligations of strict neutrality within those places and the adjoining regions absolutely necessary for the passage and use of belligerent troops. This somewhat indefinite delimitation of an area within which, under the precedent of the Liaotung region in the Russo-Japanese War, the Chinese Government declares itself unable to preserve the neutrality of its territory, was occasioned by the landing of Japanese expeditionary forces at Lungkow and Laichow (in regard to which I would refer to the despatches Nos. 79 and 80, of September 3 and 4, respectively, addressed to the Legation by the Consulate at Chefoo, of which copies were enclosed with my despatch No. 361 of September 9)3 against the protest—whether vigorous or perfunctory—of the local Chinese authorities.

From an official but reliable source it is learned that on the 3d instant, and again on the 4th, the German Chargé d’Affaires addressed to the Wai Chiao Pu protests against the Chinese Government’s acquiescence in the violation of the proclaimed neutrality of its territories, stating, that it would thereby incur liability for all damages to German interests consequent upon the operations thus permitted. I am informed that the Austro-Hungarian Minister also submitted a similar protest. To these protests I understand that the Chinese Government replied by citing anew the precedent of the Russo-Japanese War and disclaiming all responsibility in view of its helplessness to resist the military operations of the belligerents.

This matter of maintaining its sovereignty, as involved in the question of neutrality, has been one of much solicitude and anxiety to the Chinese Government. It would seem that, during the first weeks of the war, even the more serious and responsible of the Chinese were deluded by the rumors which were disseminated from Japanese sources to the effect that the American Government was preparing to act in opposition to Japanese interests in China; and upon that delusion they founded extravagant hopes that the United States would undertake to guarantee China against any territorial aggression or disregard of its sovereignty. The publication, in the Reuter News Service, of the substance of the note with which the American Government acknowledged the Japanese communication of the ultimatum to Germany (embodied in the instruction to the Tokyo Embassy, August 19, 2 p.m.)1 synchronized with a sudden and almost complete cessation of the anti-American agitation in the press controlled by Japanese influences. On the other hand, the suggestion of consultation between the American and Japanese Governments, in pursuance of the Root-Takahira exchange of notes of 1908, seems to have been interpreted in some Chinese quarters as indicating a determination on the part of our Government to insist upon its approval as a condition precedent to any Japanese action in Chinese territory. On the 27th ultimo Dr. V. K. Wellington Koo, of the Wai Chiao Pu, called upon me informally, professedly at the instance of the President, to inquire as to the precise terms and purport of the American note. I enclose herewith a copy of the paraphrase which I subsequently furnished to him in accordance with the Department’s telegraphic authorization of August 27, 5 p.m.2 In discussing the matter with me, Dr. Koo strongly intimated the view that the Root-Takahira exchange of notes established in favor of the United States a right to be consulted with respect to any action contemplated by Japan in Chinese territories, as though to imply that such rights were held by our Government in trust for the Government of China; and he specified the possible landing of an expeditionary force in Shantung (beyond the limits of the zone of condominium established by the treaty of lease of the Kiaochow territory) as constituting a question in regard to which the Japanese Government would thereby be required to seek the approval of the United States. Not knowing how peremptorily our Government is disposed to insist upon its suggestion that the Japanese Government would doubtless desire to consult our own in the event that it should judge the situation here to require action, I pointed out to Dr. Koo that that suggestion in terms concerns only the case of internal disorders in China; and I furthermore reminded him that the Root-Takahira exchange of notes, although frequently referred to for convenience as an agreement, was in fact simply a joint declaration of policy rather than a convention establishing a legal status which either party might invoke against the other.

Since the Chinese Government’s circular of the 3d instant, delimiting the area within which the Chinese. Government finds itself unable to maintain the neutrality of its territories, Dr. Koo has called to inquire the views of our Government in this matter; and I have told him that I have not received and do not expect to receive any instructions which might be construed as a comment upon the action of the belligerent powers in landing troops in Shantung.

In connection with this matter of the neutrality of China and the supposition that the United States may in some way afford a guarantee thereof, it is perhaps relevant to refer to the agitation which is manifested in Shanghai, and particularly in the columns of the China Press, in favor of our despatching to China military and naval forces “sufficient to meet eventualities.” I venture to suggest that the eventualities thus rather vaguely referred to may be analyzed as follows: 1. War with one or more powers opposed to our interests in the Far East;

2. Intervention with a view to the maintenance or establishment of some particular political regime in China; and

3. The protection of American and other foreign interests against possible disorders.

The first two of these categories would seem at the present time to be negligible—wholly hypothetical and not to be anticipated as either actual or probable. For the purposes of the third category, which involves simply a police duty, the American forces now available here would appear to be almost adequate to meet any but the most serious and unanticipated emergency. It seems to me that it would (as indicated in my telegram of August 6, 8 p.m.1 ) be advisable to bring up to full strength the organizations now stationed in China but it would appear that any increase of forces beyond that limit would at the present time be not only unnecessary for the purposes which are now in view (and entirely inadequate, unless of an extraordinary nature, for the other hypothetical purposes of such forces) but likely to challenge misinterpretation and invite rivalry with powers better able than ourselves to fill this country with troops— and more likely to use them to the disadvantage of Chinese and incidentally of American interests. With respect to this question, however, I beg to request for the guidance of the Legation some intimation of the views of the Department.

I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MacMurray

[Enclosure]

The Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs to the American Chargé d’Affaires (MacMurray)

Peking , September 3, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Chinese Government, in view of the fact that China is on terms of friendship with all the belligerent powers In the present European war, resolved to proclaim neutrality and has since been observing it faithfully. Now the local authorities of Shantung have reported at different tunes that the German troops have been moving about and making preparations for war in the Kiaochow Bay and its vicinity, and also that the allied forces of Great Britain and Japan have also been making military movements in Lungkow, Kiaochow Bay, Laichow, and in the neighborhood thereof. But Germany, Japan, and Great Britain, being all on terms of amity with China, it is unfortunate to see that they should take such unexpected steps within the dominions of China, thus constituting extraordinary circumstances parallel to the war waged between Japan and Russia in the Liaotung Peninsula in 1904.

Following this precedent the Chinese Government cannot but declare that at such points within Lungkow, Laichow, and the neighborhood of Kiaochow Bay adjoining thereto as are absolutely necessary for the passage and use of belligerent troops it cannot told itself responsible for the obligations of strict neutrality. Outside these points China will continue to enforce the regulations respecting neutrality as previously promulgated.

But it is still incumbent upon the belligerent powers to respect the territorial and administrative rights of China and all persons and properties within the area defined above.

Besides notifying each of the belligerent powers I now send this communication to you with the request that you will notify the American Government.

With compliments [etc.]

Minister Of Foreign Affairs

1 Not printed.

2 Ante, p. 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322].

3 None printed.

1 Ante, p. 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309].

2 Paraphrase and telegram not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Reinsch) [Document 339]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Reinsch)

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

No. 192]

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of the Legation’s No. 362, of September 10, 1914, with enclosures relating to Chinese inability to preserve strict neutrality in certain portions of the Province of Shantung, because of the military operations incident to the attack upon the German leased territory of Kiaochow by Japan and her allies.

In this despatch which was written by Mr. MacMurray, request is made for some intimation of the views of the Department upon the question of an increase in China of the military and naval forces of the United States “sufficient to meet eventualities.”

Mr. MacMurray’s analysis of the situation appears to the Department to be quite correct. While regretting that the wars which have unfortunately broken out in Europe have involved the Far East in hostilities, the Department realizes that the belligerents could hardly hope to keep their leased territories in China free from attack, since they partake of the nature of military bases. The international settlements, however, at the open ports of China, are regarded as belonging to an entirely different category. These settlements with their cosmopolitan population, the Department believes should be by general consent entirely excluded from the field of military operations.

In view of the possibilities of internal disorders in China threat ending the safety of life and property in these settlements, the American Government desires to do what it can with the consent of other interested powers to assist in the protection of these settlements, but the Legation must realize that the forces at the disposal of the Government for such purposes are limited.

When the Legation’s telegram of August 6, 8 p.m.,1 was received, an unfounded report was already in circulation to the effect that the United States was sending a large naval force to the Far East. In order to silence these rumors and prevent any misunderstanding, it seemed prudent to refrain from any act that might be construed as a threat of intervention, hence no immediate response was made to the request of the Legation for additional forces, but the War Department was consulted and agreed to keep the China expedition at its maximum strength and, as the Legation has recently been instructed, the Navy Department has decided to increase the number of vessels m Chinese waters.

Reference was made in the despatch under acknowledgment to the Department’s telegraphic instruction to Tokyo of August 19, 2 p.m.,1 in reply to the communication notifying the United States of Japan’s ultimatum to Germany. Mr. MacMurray, in his conversation with Dr. Koo, interpreted very correctly the reference to the Root-Takahira exchange of notes. The Department had reason to fear that the military operations undertaken against Tsingtao might lead to misunderstandings or that the revolutionists who were reported to be planning to take advantage of the situation might foment disturbances elsewhere in China and that a condition of affairs might arise which would invite, if not require, foreign intervention to restore order and therefore in its reply to the Japanese memorandum, it recalled the Root-Takahira exchange of notes to assure the Japanese Government that should the status quo in China be threatened the Department relied in full confidence upon Japan’s willingness to consult with the United States.

With respect to other questions raised in the despatch you are instructed that, while the Department desires, of course, to safeguard all American rights in China, to protect all legitimate American interests there and to promote by all proper methods the development of American trade, it is at the same time anxious that there shall be no misunderstanding of its aims by the Chinese Government. The United States desires China to feel that American friendship is sincere and to be assured that this Government will be glad to exert any influence, which it possesses, to further, by peaceful methods, the welfare of the Chinese people, but the Department realizes that it would be quixotic in the extreme to allow the question of China’s territorial integrity to entangle the United States in international difficulties.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

1  Ante, p. 172. [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

The Consul at Nagasaki (Deichman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1176

[Document 340]

The Consul at Nagasaki (Deichman) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Nagasaki, November 7, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Tsingtao fallen.

Deichman

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1197

[Document 341]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, October 8, 1914.
[Received November 11.]

No. 135]

Sir: Referring to my telegrams of October 6, 10 p.m.,2 and the 7th, 11 p.m.,3 regarding the operations of the Japanese Fleet in the Marshall Archipelago, I have the honor to enclose a translation from the Official Gazette of the notification upon which the telegrams were based.1

In this connection I have the honor to report that the vernacular newspapers which comment on the question approve the action of the Government, and state that it came as a pleasant surprise, in view of the official declaration that military operations would be limited to Japanese and Chinese waters. It is interpreted as an indication that the diplomatic policy of the present ministry is not so irresolute as was supposed at the beginning.

While the newspapers apprehend that the event will provoke criticism in the American and Australian press, most of them consider that there is no occasion for suspicion on the part of either the United States or Australia, as Japan has disavowed any intention to seek territorial aggrandizement. They believe on the contrary that these countries should appreciate the assistance of Japan in preserving order in the South Sea and ensuring, the safety of international commerce in that region. The action is taken in pursuance of the alliance in conjunction with Great Britain, which at present is by itself unable to cope with the enemy in the Pacific. The press is of the opinion that the developments now taking place will increase the sphere and efficacy of the alliance.

The Yamato Shimbun thinks that the war will also result in the recognition of the principle of the open door and equal opportunity in the South Sea, which has hereto been regarded by Europe and America as their exclusive monopoly. This recognition should produce a better understanding and more cordial neighborhood between Japan and the other powers having interests in the Pacific.

The Yoroau Choho, a sensational and antigovernment journal, takes this opportunity to express unfriendly sentiments against the United States. It says that the three American naval bases at Hawaii, Guam and the Philippines, have not only checked the natural extension of Japanese interests in the south Pacific, but have rendered Japan helpless against intimidation from that region, and that the necessity of securing a point of vantage to counteract this opposition has been met in the acquisition of the Marshall Islands.

The Niroku Shimbun, also a “yellow journal,” voices similar opinions, believing that the predestined direction of Japanese expansion lies in the southern seas, and suggesting that Jaluit may be retained as a starting point in this southward movement.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

2  Ante, p. 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335].

3 Not, printed.

1 Not, printed.

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1217

[Document 342]

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, October 12, 1914
[Received November 14.]

No. 406]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit, for the information of the Department, a translation of the Japanese official reply to the Chinese Government in the matter of the occupation and control of the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway, together with a report of the discussion of this question in the Tsan Cheng Yuan (Advisory Council) and the interpellation addressed to the Government also an editorial discussion of the same matter from the Peking Gazette of the 5th instant.

The reply of the Japanese Government contains the sentence:

The aim of the Imperial Government is not only the overthrow of the base possessed by enemy, but also to cause the control and administration of this inseparable railway to fall into our possession.

It is argued that, as the railway was built by a company under the control of the German Government, the railway is in reality “one with the leased territory.” It was strongly urged by the Chinese Government that as the Shantung railway was the property not of the German Government, but of a stock company organized by individuals who had furnished the capital and who were deriving dividends from the enterprise, it could not legally be seized by the Japanese any more than other private property of belligerents situated in China. The Chinese Government also offered to exercise a sufficient control to prevent any unneutral use of this railway controlled by German capital. The statements made by the Japanese Government indicate a desire permanently to confiscate this property as in some way connected with the lease of Kiaochow. A the Shantung Railway Company since February 12, 1913, has also taken over the property of the Shantung Mining Company against a compensation to the owners of the latter of 5,400,000 marks, for which new capital shares were issued, it is here feared that the Japanese will also seek to seize the German-owned mines in Shantung. The broad expression from the Japanese official reply, cited above, could be brought into harmony with fundamental principles of international law only if the control and administration” asked for were to be confined purely to the duration of the war, as made necessary by military operations, and if the rights of the owners were to be restored at the conclusion of the war.

The final sentence of the Japanese official reply, The Imperial Government will not give its consent, no matter what facts are held up before us,” has left a very bad impression with the Chinese, as it seems to indicate that any plan decided upon by the Japanese Government will be carried out regardless of any arguments as to legal right which may be advanced against such a course of action.

The deep concern felt by Chinese officials and the Chinese people with respect to the situation was voiced in the discussions in the Tsan Cheng Yuan, of which reports are enclosed. Aside from the fact that the seizure of the Tsinan Railway by Japan constitutes a serious attack upon China’s sovereignty, the feeling is common among the Chinese, and has been expressed to me again and again by high Chinese officials during the past week, that the course of Japan in this and in incidental matters is consciously calculated to stir up the Chinese to commit some act of opposition; the fear is universal that Japan would take advantage of any such incident to extend her authority, supported by armed force, far into the interior of China. The Chinese feel that the present situation constitutes the most serious crisis which they have yet encountered.

The conditions of the Japanese occupation of the Tsinan Railway are as follows, as stated to me by the Minister for Foreign Affairs: The administrative control, as well as military occupation, will be exercised by the Japanese. They will, however, for the time being allow the Chinese engaged in the handling of the traffic to continue the work of their employment with the exception that Japanese conductors are to be placed on the trains. With respect to the ultimate disposal of the railway, the Japanese have not given any expression of their intention. The Chinese Government to the last continued its active protests on the ground that the property in question, being situated on Chinese territory, it was not permissible for a belligerent to interfere with or seize it, especially as the Chinese Government stood ready to prevent any unneutral use being made of the property.

I have [etc.]

Paul S. Reinsch

[Enclosure I]

Extract from the “Peking Gazette,” October 5, 1914—The Kiaochow–Tsinan Railway—Japanese official reply

Regarding the occupation of the whole line of the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway, the Japanese Minister in Peking delivered the following communiqué to the Chinese Government on Saturday:

I have the honor to state that I have duly received your despatches of September 27 and September 29 in which your honorable Ministry made protests regarding the occupation of the Weihsien railway station by the troops of our country, and regarding the request for your approval, which I made at the instruction of my Government, to your honorable Minister in person on September 29, for the transfer of that part of the railway between Weihsien and Tsinan to the control and management of my country, which documents I have telegraphically communicated to my Government. Telegraphic instructions have been received from my Government on the same day, and I have the honor to transmit the original text for your perusal. The instructions read:

In pursuance of the policy of the Imperial Government definitely to uphold the peace of the entire Far East, and for, the purpose of weakening the fundamental influence of Germany in the Far East, the German-Japanese war was declared. The war now declared has for its aim not only the attack on the men-of-war and forts of the enemy in the leased territory of Kiaochow Bay, but also the elimination of the base of German activities in the Far East, which aim has been repeatedly communicated to the Government of China, and we hope, has received its consideration.

Regarding the Shantung Railway, it was the outcome of the treaty of lease of Kiaochow Bay between Germany and China in the year 1898. It was in consequence of this treaty that Germany secured the right of building this railway, the company of which is entirely under the control of the German Government, and its nature is in no way different from a purely German company. In reality it is one with the leased territory, which fact is definitely proved beyond dispute by its intention, its fundamental right of existence, the special permit given by the German Government and the way in which the company draws its funds.

When speaking of a railway it is absolutely impossible to separate it from its practical purpose as a separate thing. Therefore, this purely German-owned railway although situated on the west of Weihsien, cannot be held as having changed its nature through the excuse that it is in neutral territory. Besides, the aim of the Imperial Government is not only the overthrow of the base possessed by the enemy, but also to cause the control and administration of this inseparable railway to fall into our possession. In view of the war, this does not seem to be beyond propriety. It is, therefore, not necessary to secure the approval of the Chinese Government as to execution of this principle. But in order to avoid misunderstanding, we have made friendly request for approval regardless of the urgency or otherwise of the situation. It is surprisingly beyond the comprehension of the Imperial Government for the Chinese Government to be suspicious of Japan’s every movement. We regret such a condition.

Regarding the points misunderstood by Chinese Government as shown in the two documents, we point out as follows: 1. Whether the Shantung Railway is a German railway or a joint-interest railway can only be determined substantially by the special permit given by Germany. As to the governmental nature of the railway there is no doubt as to the correctness of what has been said above.

2. If the Shantung Railway cannot be held as being the property of a neutral, how can it be said that we are violating neutrality if it is transferred to our control? Now China, in consequence of the limitation of the war zone, suggests simultaneously to change the nature of the Shantung Railway. The Imperial Government cannot see the reason why China should do so. Furthermore, the question of limiting the war zone and the question of the nature of the Shantung Railway, as well as its control and administration, are clearly two separate questions which cannot be amalgamated into one.

3. The Chinese Government holds that under the present condition the Shantung Railway cannot be profitably used by German troops if its connection with Tsingtao is severed. But from the attacking troops’ point of view, Weihsien, being situated immediately behind it and in view of the present situation, it is a serious danger to the military operations to leave a railway owned by the enemy perfectly free. We are, therefore, compelled to secure the railway with energy. Moreover, the Chinese Government has often failed to stop the assistance of the enemy on this railway, which fact is beyond our understanding.

4. In the documents the Chinese Government emphatically declared its readiness to protect Weihsien and Tsinan and asked our Government to recognize its requests, etc. The Imperial Government will not give its consent, no matter what facts are held up before us. In this wise we reply.

The second day of the tenth month of the third year of Ta Cheng.

Hioki
Minister, etc., of Imperial Japanese Government

[Enclosure 2]

Extract from the “Peking Gazette,” October 5, 1914—The Tsan Cheng Yuan—Interpolation regarding Japanese action in Shantung

The Tsan Cheng Yuan held its fifteenth sitting on the 2d October at 2:50 p.m. The meeting was presided over by the chairman, General Li Yuan-hung, and the bill under discussion was the committee report on the bill requesting recognition of the law on the punishment for using morphia.

Mr. Liang Ch’i-ch’iao moved that in accordance with the provisions made in the eighth clause of the 31st Article of the Constitutional Compact an interpellation be addressed to the Government regarding the actions of Japan in Shantung. Upon the authority of the Legislature an answer should be demanded from the President. It is hereby moved that the program of the day be altered to discuss this most urgent problem. The motion was seconded by five other Tsan Cheng and unanimously carried.

mr. liang ch’i-ch’iao’s speech

At the request of Wang Chia-hsiang, Mr. Liang Ch’i-ch’iao delivered the following speech:

After the outbreak of the great European War the President once gathered all the Tsan Cheng in his residence and gave a detailed report on the circumstances. Although some points regarding the President’s report were not satisfactory, however, on account of the present situation of China, and the skill in management shown by the Government to cope with its difficulties, the Government might be considered to have done all that was possible, therefore the report was unanimously passed. However, from our observation of what has passed in the last few days, we feel that the confidence expressed in the said report is rather unreliable. The future is therefore gloomy, and the change wrought in the past twenty days, is sufficient to show the fact that the future will be unthinkable. On account of the necessity of strict secrecy in connection with diplomatic affairs it is natural that many things should have been kept secret from the public. In view of the intense indignation existing among the people of the country, this Yuan, as representing the people of this country, deems it absolutely necessary to show the Government their points of doubt and their expectations of the Government under such circumstances, and respectfully to demand a reply from the President.

According to my opinion, there are many points which require explanations from the Government, but in order to be concise, let me dwell on the following most important points:

The first notifications of the Waichiaopu fixing the war zone. Three times the Waichiaopu sent out notifications, first, the declaration of neutrality; then the declaration of partial neutrality owing to war operations of Japan and Germany in Shantung; and then the declaration of the extension of the war zone to Lungkow and Laichow when Japanese troops were landed there. It is possible that the text of the declaration sent to the belligerent powers by the Waichiaopu was not very definite in terms, but we think that it would have been absurd if the Waichiaopu should have failed to give despatches or verbal statements to belligerents regarding the same, so that some definite proof may be had. It is now generally known that the Japanese troops have not acted in accordance with the limits set. A few days ago the railway station of Weihsien was occupied by them. Let us look at the reports of the foreign and Chinese newspapers. It is recorded in the Shun Tien Shish Pao that a special telegram was received from Tsinan to the effect that the Japanese residents there were preparing for a reception (to Japanese troops) for the capture of the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway. In the Peking Gazette it is stated that the Japanese Minister has in his private capacity informed the Waichiaopu to the effect that Japan is going to occupy the whole Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway. Although these are reports of newspapers, it must be borne in mind that the former is the organ of a party which is known to every man; the latter paper has an Englishman for editor, therefore the reports contained in that paper cannot be mere forgeries., Again, according to reports received from various quarters, the Japanese troops have been all the time marching towards the west, where not a single German soldier could be found. Therefore the reason must be found why the Japanese troops have been marching to the west of Weihsien instead of towards their objective, Tsingtao. Geographically speaking, the Japanese troops should march towards Kiaochow through Ping-tu after landing at Lungkow and Laichow, thus reaching their destination without any obstacle from German troops. When the Waichiaopu sent out its notification it only gave consent to the Japanese troops to move between Laichow and Lungkow, and does not the Waichiaopu now notice that the Japanese troops have marched to places which have not been included in the fighting zone? Judging from the action of the Japanese troops, it is not Kiaochow alone which they have set their mind on, but they are going to convert Shantung province into their military base of operations, making it a second Three Eastern Provinces. He who runs may read the intentions of the Japanese. As our Government had sent to the Japanese authorities the notification beforehand limiting the war zone, has the Government lodged any protest in the Japanese Legation?

The responsibility of Great Britain. Japan has more troops marching to Kiaochow, but being an ally of Great Britain, the movements of the Japanese troops in Shantung must have first been arranged with the British authorities. Hence regarding the actions of the Japanese troops in Shantung, Great Britain must share the responsibility. It must be remembered that the cause which actuated Great Britain to take up arms in Europe, was respect for the neutrality of Belgium. When the British Premier made a speech in Parliament about the war, he said that there were no other reasons for the British nation to take part in the war than to enforce respect for international law, the cause of humanity and the civilization of the world. We Chinese have hitherto admired Great Britain for her principles, and we have admired her more on account of her recent actions in the war. Unfortunately, Britain has held to the above principle in Europe but has not done so in the Far East. In Shantung the allied army has done everything to break the neutrality declared by our nation. We have failed to find out the cause why her attitude towards China has been so contradictory to that she maintained towards the European nations. When our Government lodged a protest in the Japanese Legation did we also lodge a similar protest in the British Legation?

With regard to the lawlessness practiced by the Japanese troops in Shantung, the Government has already received a joint petition from the natives there. We hesitated, to believe all the atrocities and so forth, because we thought that Japan claimed to be a civilized, nation; but in the petition the names and addresses of the persons who were murdered or injured have been plainly set forth. The circumstances of molestation have been minutely described, and does our Government take notice of them? We wonder whether these most pitiable appeals embodied in this petition have reached the ears of the Government. It may be said that a little loss to the inhabitants in the fighting zone does not matter much; but the point we want to emphasize is that such lawless actions are open defiance to the authority and rights of our Government. Should they consider us as their equals they would not have done so. It is therefore imperative for the Government to find out the real intention of the British and Japanese allied army, when they have indulged in atrocities. It will be remembered that last year when we were engaged in the suppression of internal rebellion, and when a few Japanese ventured into the fighting area and were accidentally killed, the Japanese Minister demanded that the commanders of the regiment be disgraced and our most respectable troops submitted to the humiliation of making apologies. We are not going to remember our former grievance, but what we want to say is that Japan would not act lawlessly, if she had any respect for our nationality. As the Government has the responsibility to protect the life of the people, it should make a protest against such actions. Has the Government made any decision regarding this matter?

Japanese military notes. Great amounts of military notes have been issued by the Japanese army in Shantung. According to usage during the time of war a belligerent nation may exercise temporary control over the places occupied, and issue temporary paper money. But with the case of Japanese troops in Shantung the Japanese have only the right to pass our territory on account of the circumstances. What right have they to force so large an amount of paper money into our market? Who knows when these paper notes will be allowed to exchange for ready money? During the time of the Russo-Japanese War an amount of $50,000,000 of such paper money was circulated in the market of Fengtien by the Japanese military authorities, and these notes were only exchanged for the notes of Yokohama Specie Bank instead of ready money. Therefore the influx of Japanese military notes will do great harm to Shantung, making the prices of articles much dearer than before, and causing great consternation in the market. Does the Government approve such actions?

The above are a few points which have roused the indignation of the people. People may say that on account of weakness we have to bear these things patiently; but the persons who represent the powers that be should not adopt such an attitude as they are the persons responsible for all these troubles.

In conclusion Mr. Jiang said that:

According to my opinion the first thing we should do is to address an interpellation to the Government demanding an immediate reply, and at the same time this House should offer suggestions to the Government, rendering all assistance we can. It is necessary that a protest should be addressed to the Japanese authorities, but we have entertained greater doubts regarding the action of the Great Britain, which has adopted a very different policy between the neutrality of Belgium and that of China. Why has our Government not yet made any protest to Great Britain? The interpellation should show that the House, in its capacity as the representatives of the people, is perfectly willing to take any responsibility. Should the Government recognize its responsibility, this House will render all assistance required. If the Government should adopt an indifferent attitude, this House though acting as representatives of the people, will not be able to effect anything. This is my opinion, and should my fellow Tsan Cheng have the same feeling, we should proceed to frame the interpellation and consider the suggestions.

Mr. Liang’s long speech was greeted with frequent applause all the time.

the interpellation drafted

The Chairman then asked the opinion of the House regarding motion of Tsan Cheng Jiang, and Teng Yung said that he fully agreed with the views of Mr. Jiang. When the Government issued the regulations governing neutrality, it was then hinted by some more experienced men that such regulations would not be able to attain their desired end. The Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway is an enterprise started by the merchants of Germany and China, therefore it must be pointed out that this line has not been owned by the German Government. Hence the Japanese can have no excuse for capturing it. Mr. Liang suggested that the interpellation be signed by ten. Tsan Cheng and addressed to the Government, according to the procedure set forth in the regulations governing the organization of the House; but the best way is that the interpellation should be sent in the name of the whole House, so as to invest it with greater weight. Therefore the Chairman is requested to appoint some members to draw up a draft of it.

Chu Wen-shao said that Mr. Liang’s opinion has not only received the unanimous approval of the House but it should be agreed to by all Chinese in this country, therefore the only thing left is for the Chairman to appoint the members immediately to make the draft. The motion was unanimously carried, and Messrs. Liang Ch’i-ch’iao, Chen Kun-hsiang, Hsiung Hsiling, Wang Chiahsiang, and Pao Hsi were appointed. An interval of 30 minutes took place, and the meeting was resumed at 4:15 p.m.

When the Chairman called for the draft, Mr. Chen Kuo-hsiang read the interpellation aloud.

GENERAL TSAI AO

Upon the opinion of the members regarding the draft of interpellation being called for, General Tsai Ao said that the interpellation contained all questions put to the Government regarding the present diplomatic dealings. It must not be forgotten that all diplomatic dealings of the nation must be backed by military prowess, otherwise there will be no good result. With regard to the case of Tsingtao, the attitude of Japan is known to everybody. She wants to enforce her continental policy, which has been cherished for the last twenty years. Japan is confined by sea from every side, therefore in order to get room for extension, she must adopt an aggressive policy. Accordingly her object is to swallow up China. The first master stroke dealt to this country by her was the occupation of Formosa, and at that time she was reluctantly obliged to give up Liaotung at the request of Russia, France, and Germany. The second master stroke was the occupation of Southern Manchuria, which though it nominally belongs to China, is in fact Japanese territory. Now the third master stroke is to seize the rare opportunity for the occupation of Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway. When the war is over she will include the control of the northern Tientsin-Pukow Railway by Japan in the treaty of peace. With so great an aggressive desire, wherever there are Japanese troops stationed the place will become another Eastern Provinces. Moreover the war in Europe will drag on for a long period of at least one or two years, therefore the Japanese would like to act freely during this busy time. In view of the above what should our country do? Now the balance of power in the Far East will exist no longer, and the only nation which can play a check to the ambition of Japan is the United States. The United States have a much superior navy to that of Japan, and they have a large army of men; but their army has to be distributed in Mexico, Philippines, etc. Nor have they a good harbor in the East. If Japan should land 300,000 men in China before the influence of the United States reaches here, China will be conquered. Should the United States then try to come to help China, they will be of very little use. It is therefore idle to look to the United States for assistance in our present diplomatic intercourse with Japan. The situation of China to-day is tenfold more critical than at the time of the Boxer Rising, Russo-Japanese War, or the Revolution. If nothing can be had from diplomatic intercourse, we are then thrown upon own resources. Of course there is not the least objection to the draft of the interpellation; but we should also like to know what provisions have the Government made regarding the military and financial affairs of the nation. What would the Government do if the Japanese should try to convert Shantung into another Three Eastern Provinces? At this most critical juncture of the nation, unless the hearts of the people of the country be bound together in one accord to effect the national salvation, there will be no hope. Therefore we want to know what the Government has decided to do in connection with the above points.

GENERAL HSU’S SPEECH

General Hsu Hsao-cheng then spoke as follows:

I fully agree with the view of General Tsai Ao. This is indeed a day of life and death to China. Since the year 1894 Japan has been entertaining the ambition of swallowing up China. What enabled China to remain until this day has been the counterbalancing and counterchecking influence of the powers and not the successful workings of Chinese diplomats. But this factor is no longer reliable at the present moment because the effects of the European war are world-shocking and the losses and destructions to the different powers are beyond imagination. The defeated nation naturally has no strength to cope with the affairs of China but the victorious nations, being pressed by the affairs of their own countries, also have not sufficient strength to pay attention to Chinese affairs at once. The European powers will surely incur enormous expenses for the war and in consequence some one is bound to be in an exceedingly difficult financial condition. The so-called counterbalancing and counterchecking influence will just as surely disappear. Under such circumstances Japan has an excellent opportunity to fulfil her wild ambition. Therefore, to China this day is the most critical and most dangerous. What we fear is not only the occupation of the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway and its consequent occupation of Shantung, but also the safety of the whole of China will be threatened. The Government, which carries the important responsibilities of the nation for the citizens, carries also an immense personal responsibility. It is its unshakable duty to plan for the safety of the citizens. The view, expressed by General Tsai Ao that the people, high and low, should be one in mind is truly an important point. I presume the Government must have definite views regarding the points emphasized in this interpellation but it is also the duty of this Yuan to supply the Government with what we know to be helpful in saving the dangerous situation. May this be the last interpellation.

MR. CHAO WEI-HSI

Mr. Chao Wei-hsi then rose and delivered the following speech:

I endorse the interpolation because I believe that the principal support to diplomacy is military strength and national spirit. Indeed we have nothing to fall back on as far as military strength is concerned, but we have ample national spirit to rely upon. Formerly we were defeated in war because the people had no patriotism but now the patriotic spirit of the people has made quick strides. This fact is amply proved by the successful issue of the domestic loan. When it was first proposed those who knew very little of the real conditions predicted that it would be a failure. At that time I declared that it would be a success, and lo, the whole amount was subscribed for before one month had elapsed. This is only looking at the situation so far as China is concerned. Now let us look at Japan. Japan is a small country of three islands. Within 20 years, however, it has three times plunged into war. The Chinese proverb says, “warfare is like fire; if not extinguished it will burn you.” Napoleon though winning victory after victory, finally was defeated at Waterloo. This shows that military strength, when overtaxed, becomes unstable. Japan secured financial recuperation, after the 1894 war, from the indemnity paid by China but the Russo-Japanese war was a serious financial loss to Japan. Her soldiers have become arrogant, and arrogance is bound to result in defeat. With the national spirit of China of the present day I don’t see wherein we lack hold of the situation if compared with Japan. I fully agree with what General Tsai Ao said about a nation’s asset in self-maintenance. But in order to be independent we must have the means to achieve it. I am a simple student and not an expert of military affairs, but I know a few military principles. The means to achieve independence is to be willing to sacrifice one’s life. In the event of final severance of diplomatic relations I am willing to sacrifice my life though it may be of little value. As all of us are earnestly patriotic I predict there would not be a single person who is not willing to sacrifice his life. Jet us carefully consider the steps we are going to take after the presentation of the interpellation, so that one day China may become strong. The population of China is ten times that of Japan. If everyone is patriotic and unwilling to become slaves and beasts of burden, who shall say we a big nation, are unfit to be independent and incapable of independence? Death would be sweeter than to be humilated by Japan (Applause).

STRENGTH AND DIPLOMACY

Mr. Wang Yi-tang then said:

Mr. Tsai has spoken well. What I wish to ask is about our diplomacy but diplomacy must have military strength as its reserve support. Whether the question of military affairs should be included in the same or a separate interpellation we must carefully consider. Mr. Chao’s words are indeed soul-stirring and stimulating but my idea is that we should present the interpellation as it is without any addition and only discuss it after we receive the reply of the Government.

Mr. Wang Yin-chuan spoke to the following effect:

The interpellation as presented by Mr. Liang contains important points but what Mr. Tsai said is of even more importance, because military strength and financial ability are two mainstays of diplomacy. Unless we stand on sound ground in these two things we will meet with disaster. The result of a disaster after so many disasters would be indeed disastrous. Now Japan has already captured the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway, though situated in neutral territory, as a war prize. If this action is right, then what else cannot be held as a war prize? To hold a place in the world we need to have a permanent goal but under the present urgent situation long and permanent schemes are not suitable to save the emergency. We have, therefore, to look for a method that will save us for the moment. Although our military strength is not so efficient as that of the foreign countries, when we are hard pressed by a powerful neighbour it would be better to make a last effort than to sit down to wait for the inevitable death. If we fight we may be vanquished; if we do not fight we will also be vanquished, but our name will be preserved if we are vanquished after we have fought. However, it is necessary to make the necessary preparations before we can say that we will stake everything. What have we to stake if we make no preparations? Military efficiency is of course the first consideration but in order to make military strength achieve success we need to have adequate financial support. The question of finance, therefore, must receive our serious attention. And if we are to succeed in this instance we must use the citizens’ patriotism to a good purpose. It is truly important that we should lodge an interpellation but we must not forget that it behooves us to be of one mind and soul at this life and death moment.

Mr. Wang Yu-lin then rose and brought the meeting to a close by suggesting that the interpellation should be presented as it was and a special meeting be held on the next day (Sunday) to discuss the necessary military and financial preparations to be made. The suggestion was loudly approved by the members. The chairman then put the original interpellation to vote. It was unanimously passed. Motions were then made to postpone the discussion of the bill on the punishment for the sale of morphia and immediately adjourn the session to begin the secret session. The motions were passed and the meeting adjourned at 4.50. The hall was cleared and the secret session began.

THE SECRET SESSION

At the secret session of the Tsan Cheng Yuan it is understood that the discussions were confined to the points brought up by Mr. Tsai Ao regarding the necessary steps which must be taken in view of Japanese aggressive movements. For a time it looked as if a separate interpellation was to be lodged regarding the preparedness, military and financial, of the Chinese Government, but finally it was decided that this should be postponed until the reply of the Government to the first interpellation had been received. The majority of the members seemed to hold the view that the only solution is an appeal to arms, and in this connection the discussions drifted into the military and finally financial conditions of China. There were a few, however, who expressed the view that China is in no circumstances to take up arms. They were unanimous in maintaining that Japanese arrogance is becoming unbearable and hostile measures can only be abandoned for lack of money. The view was expressed that the occupation of the railway would mean military occupation of Tsinan, and the occupation of Tsinan by a belligerent country would result in the disregard of China’s neutrality by all the other nations. Intense feeling of indignation was shown to a marked degree and bitterness in speech was characteristic throughout the meeting. “Fight we will if forced to fight” may be said [to be] the keynote to the general opinion.

[Enclosure 3]

Editorial from the “Peking Gazette,” October 5, 1914—The interpolation

After the outbreak of the European war, our country declared strict neutrality according to international usage. Unfortunately on account of the war at Tsingtao, we have had to declare neutrality towards the belligerents in our territory. After this on account of the extension of the war zone we had again to compromise and the Waichiaopu issued a notification fixing the fighting zone. At this juncture the indignation and fear of the people were aroused, and public opinion was extraordinarily excited. A meeting of Tsan Cheng was called in the President’s office to discuss the situation, and they were told that as the situation had become more and more critical they should persuade the people to be patient, and to leave the responsibility of diplomatic affairs to the Government, etc. The members of this House then thought that the officials who were responsible for the diplomatic dealings would be able to follow out the desire of the President by arriving at a friendly settlement of the diplomatic questions involved and the preservation of the integrity of the country and that they would be able to manage diplomatic intercourse with the belligerents without failure. However we have been surprised to receive all kinds of alarming reports from Shantung.

First, the Japanese troops have occupied the railway station at Weihsien, and are now marching to the west of it in the notification of the Waichiaopu, the fighting zone is limited to Lungkow, Laichow and the minimum area in the vicinity of Kiaochow Bay absolutely necessary for military operations. Weihsien is 400 li distant from Kiaochow, therefore it is plain that it is not a point where the troops should pass, hence it is undoubtedly neutral ground, pure and simple. Now the actions of the Japanese troops are unexpected. With regard to the notification sent out by our country, it was approved by the Japanese Minister in an official reply. We want to know whether our Government made any protest; what was the reply given by the Japanese authorities; whether a reply was received; if there is no reply, or if the reply be unsatisfactory or be not intended to be carried out, what measures would be adopted by our Government. In order to clear the doubt’s of the people let the Government make answers to the above queries.

Secondly, in the Shun Tien Shih Pao, it is recorded that a special telegram was received from Tsinan to the effect that on account of the forthcoming arrival of the Eighth Regiment of the Japanese troops there the Japanese residents have made preparations for a reception. According to the Peking Gazette the Japanese Minister has communicated to the Waichiaopu the intention of Japan to occupy the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway. We want to know whether these reports are true. The objective of the war is Tsingtao and why should the Japanese troops march towards Tsi, Ching and thereabouts? Did our Government hear anything about it? And did it make any protest? In the Kiaochow-Tsinan Railway the merchants of this country have many shares and how can it be regarded as a war prize? Should this line be fully recognized as the property of the German Government, we should like to ask whether Japan, has any right to, occupy all the German settlements in Chinese territory, or capture the German men-of-war which have been dismantled in Chinese waters, and their arms which have been detained? If she has such rights, then Great Britain, Russia, France, Germany, Austria, Belgium, will have the similar right of free movements in the territory of China. Are then the Japanese actions regarded as a respect for, or a breach of neutrality? Did our Government receive any assurance from Japan guaranteeing not to repeat such actions in future? And should such actions occur again, what measures would be adopted by the Government?

Thirdly, when Great Britain declared war against Germany, she announced that the cause was to maintain the neutrality of Belgium. She has staked her revenue, lives and everything on that issue. With regard to Tsingtao, it is plainly a war between the allied forces of Japan and Great Britain, and those of Germany. The high officials of Japan have declared in Parliament that the declaration of war was made after consultation with Great Britain. Hence it is plain that Great Britain is equally responsible for the actions done in Shantung. It is surprising to note that in Europe Britain has done her utmost to maintain international law, but in China she has leagued herself together with Japan to break the neutrality of China. Did our Government lodge a protest in the British Legation regarding the above? And if it has, what has been the result of the diplomatic intercourse?

Fourthly, wherever the Japanese troops passed, they have always murdered innocent people and outraged women and girls. As the members of this House have always had a great respect for the civilization of Japan, we did not give credit to such reports; but according to the joint petition of the natives of these places, the names, age, addresses, and the, circumstances of the sufferers have been plainly set down. Did our Government institute any investigation? Did it make any complaint for redress? If it be said that the unintentional carelessness of the troops does not require severe censure, but it still lingers in our memory that last year when our country was engaged in the suppression of rebellion at Nanking, where some Japanese were accidentally wounded and killed because of their venturing into the fighting zone, the Japanese forced us to undergo severe humiliation. Now on account of the preservation of the general situation we have been obliged to compromise and let the Japanese troops pass through our territory; and we have been most benevolent and amenable. Had such actions of the Japanese troops been true, did our Government protest strongly against them so that they might not be repeated again, and our people henceforth might have a little more peace?

Fifthly, wherever the Japanese come they have issued freely military notes, and what right have the Japanese to force into the market in our territory such notes of uncertain price? If it be said that the same may be exchanged into specie, where is the ready money and when can these notes be exchanged? It will be remembered that during the Russo-Japanese War the Japanese issued a great amount of such notes in Fengtien, and when the war was over, they were exchanged for the notes of the Yokohama Specie Bank. At present there are tens of millions of dollars of the bad notes of this bank in Fengtien, and was there any real exchange for ready money? They were only issuing inconvertible paper money in our market, making the prices of articles very high and the conditions of living harder for the people. The wound is now felt to be a terrible one. Now the same thing is repeated in Shantung. Did the Japanese Government notify us beforehand? Did our Government protest against the issue of such notes? The opinion of this House is that a strong protest should be lodged in the Japanese Legation, demanding that all the articles bought by the troops should be paid for with ready money. If it be inconvenient to bring with them ready money, they should fix the amount of the military notes issued, and send to our Government an equal amount of money as security against the redemption of same in the future, before the amount is issued.

All the above points represent the doubts and fears of the people of the whole country. On account of our regret for the diplomatic failure of the Government, and the fear that our national existence may cease in the near future, the troops and people of all localities have organized for themselves bands of dare-to-dies for the salvation of the country, or have agitated for a boycott. The more experienced scholars have planned daily to stop them, and after great exertions they have almost succeeded in persuading them from such actions. If the officials who have the charge of diplomatic affairs, are unable to show to our people the real measures for the protection of national rights, who shall be responsible, if forced by indignation and doubts, the people should, resort to violence? This House is now acting for the Li, Fa Yuan, which represents the opinion of the people, therefore it cannot remain silent with regard to the present political situation. Therefore in accordance with the provisions made in clause 8 of Article 31 of the Constitutional Compact and Article 39 of the Regulations governing the session of the Tsan Cheng Yuan, we hereby request the President to give explanations regarding the foregoing points.

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1220

[Document 343]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, November 14, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I have received the following telegram:

On the request of the direction of the Shantung Railway, I have the honor to submit to your excellency the following petition, asking you to be so kind and bring it to the knowledge of the Foreign Office in Tokyo:

In view of the fall of Tsingtao, the Shantung Railway Company, a private limited company, without German Government’s participation in its capital,requests that the railway and mines seized by Japanese military expedition be now restored to the company so far as consistent with present military necessity so that traffic and mining may be resumed under control and for benefit of the company; and so that claim for damage by and during seizure and attention [sic] may be minimized, a detailed claim is being prepared and will be forwarded through your good services in due course. An earlier restoration will, of course, be without prejudice to such claim. Schmidt, Bruecher, Maltzan.

The signers are not known to me, but the British Ambassador has told me that he has heard from Peking that such a message had been sent me by the officers of the Shantung Railroad. The property claimed is in China, and I assume the claimants to be German subjects residing in China. The petition is made to me direct by the claimants and is not accompanied by any official recommendation.

Guthrie

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) File No. 763.72/1220

[Document 344]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of November 14, 10 a.m.

Schmidt and Bruecher appear to be officers of the Shantung Railway. Maltzan is the name of the German Chargé d’Affaires at Peking. These are possibly the signers of the petition. Since you are charged with the care of German interests you may transmit the request to the Foreign Office but make perfectly clear that you do so simply as an act of courtesy and that you have no knowledge of the facts.

Bryan

The Ambassador, in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1315

[Document 345]

The Ambassador, in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, November 23, 1914.
[Received December 17.]

No. 161]

Sir: Much space has naturally been given by the vernacular newspapers here to the question of the eventual disposition of Kiaochow. While much of this comment has been chauvinistic in tone, that of the more responsible papers has, on the whole, been temperate and discreet.

The Japan Times, which is the mouthpiece of the present Government, has all along rested on the assumption that the territory would eventually be restored to China, while keeping silent as to the terms and time of this restoration. The other more influential organs point out that in any case restoration is out of the question so long as the war lasts, that Germany must first be made to recognize the absolute forfeiture of her lease, and that the ultimate future of Kiaochow is a matter to be decided, after hostilities cease by Japan, China, and Great Britain.

The Hochi Shimbun, the Niroku and other “yellow” newspapers, with the Kokumin Shimbun, which is the organ of the militarists, flatly declare that the Government’s phrase, “with a view to eventual restoration,” was nullified by Germany’s resistance and that Tsingtao is and should be Japan’s war prize.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1316

[Document 346]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, November 23, 1914
[Received December 17.]

Sir: As addenda to my despatch No. 161 of even date, reporting newspaper comment here on the subject of the future disposition of Kiaochow, I have the honor to enclose in duplicate a clipping from the Japan Advertiser of the 19th instant, which is a translation of an interview given to a representative of the Jiji Shimpo by Baron Kato, Minister for Foreign Affairs.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

[Enclosure]

Beetroot from the “Japan Advertiser,” November 19, 1914

The Jiji reports a conversation with Baron Kato, foreign minister, who has gone to Osaka by train. Baron Kato said in part—

That we were obliged to fight against Germany was because we wanted to maintain peace in the Orient. But where is the necessity for sending our Japanese troops to Europe when we are not directly interested from the point of view of our nation’s safety and the peace of the Orient? Beside, in sending several hundred thousand troops, we should require an enormous amount of money for expenses. From the financial consideration alone it is a matter which should not be discussed carelessly. Even if the Allies win, we would perhaps find it difficult to get a war indemnity from Germany. So we must prepare for that emergency when we talk about sending troops to Europe. As for allowing the Allies to bear the expenses, it would be a great loss of prestige on our part to do so. For these reasons I am, Sir, one who is opposed to sending troops to Europe.

Silent Baron Kato must have been very free of speech, for he continued:

About the disposition of Tsingtao, whether we establish a military rule or a civil rule, we must at an early date open that port to free commerce. But we must keep that place until the war in Europe is over. In the peace conference which will be held after the war, China may not be invited to participate, because she is not a belligerent nation. I cannot speak about the diplomatic questions involving Manchuria and Mongolia. I am criticized as being cold and lacking in civility. But the other day when a magazine unknown to us printed an article purporting to give the diplomatic views of Count Okuma, the Chinese Government addressed a note to us asking as [to] the truth or falsehood of the article. So I must be very careful.

We have not gone so far as to form an alliance with Russia on account of the present war.

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1320

[Document 347]

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, December 18, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 10:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Items for the information of the Department. There is a serious controversy between Japanese and Chinese, former demanding right to appoint customs officials Tsingtao, latter unwilling to relinquish power of appointment though ready to name Japanese officials. Aglen is much concerned as question involves unity of customs service.

Consul General at Mukden reports that six regiments of Japanese troops [are] to be stationed at Mukden.

The Japanese commander in chief Tsingtao expressed American [military attachés?] visiting there that he had been expecting return of American Consul for some time.

Reinsch

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1334

[Document 348]

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, December 23, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

Referring to my cable of December 18, 7 p.m., Japanese now demand appointment to Tsingtao customs of forty-nine officials taken from Japanese customs administration. This affects the treaty powers as such action would break up the organization of Maritime Customs Service.

Reinsch

The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Reinsch) [Document 349]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Reinsch)

Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of December 23, 2 p.m.

Has China informed British Government of the demand?

Bryan

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1351

[Document 350]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, December 7, 1914.
[Received December 30.]

No. 164]

Sir: The Department’s telegram of December 1 6 p.m.,1 having transmitted an inquiry from the German Government concerning press reports that one of the German islands in the Pacific occupied by the Japanese had been handed over to Australia for administration, I called upon the British Ambassador, Sir Conyngham Greene, and asked him if he cared to make any communication on which a reply might be framed.

He assured me of his willingness to give to me personally information on the subject, but said that he felt it would not be proper to give it for transmission to Berlin. As this was the case, I requested him not to tell it to me personally as the information might be a cause of embarrassment to me. He expressed the opinion that while the German inquiry was couched as an inquiry regarding the prisoners of war, the form was simply a cover.

While I was with him he received a cable from the Foreign Office in London asking him to ascertain from me what statement Baron Kato had made to me as to Japan’s purposes, at the time she had served the ultimatum on Germany. I told him my recollection of what Baron Kato had said, and he told me that it corresponded with what had been said to him and had been reported by him to his Foreign Office. Later I confirmed my recollection by referring to my confidential telegram to the Department of August 15, 12 p.m.,2 and sent him, by Mr. Wheeler, the following memorandum, which he read and returned by the bearer.

memorandum

On August 15, 1914, the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs handed the American Ambassador a statement regarding the Japanese ultimatum to Germany.

In doing so he expressed verbally a strong desire to perpetuate the friendship between Japan and the United States, requesting the American Ambassador to impress upon the Government at Washington as strongly as possible, that in taking the present action, Japan was not animated by any selfish purpose but was acting strictly in pursuance of the alliance with Great Britain, would not seek any territorial aggrandizement for selfish advantage in China, and would carefully respect all neutral interests.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306].

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1363

[Document 351]

The Minister in China (Reinsch) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Peking, January 2, 1915, 6 p.m.
[Received 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your December 30, 6 p.m., British Legation was informed only unofficially and, I understand, made informal representations to Japanese.

Reinsch

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1391

[Document 352]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, December 12, 1914.
[Received January 14, 1916.]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a translation of the reply of Baron Kato, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to an interpolation on Chino–Japanese relations, made by a member of the opposition in the lower House on the 8th instant.

Answering inquiries in regard to the disposition of Kiaochow the Minister denied the existence of any agreement with any foreign nation by which Japan was bound to retrocede that territory to China. He stated that the question whether Kiaochow will be returned, and whether Japan will succeed to Germany’s rights in Shantung, would be left to future negotiations.

The Minister, moreover while reiterating the adherence of Japan to the preservation of the territorial integrity of China, expressed the desire of the present cabinet like its predecessors to strengthen her foothold in Manchuria and Mongolia.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

[Enclosure—Translation]

Extract from the Parliamentary Supplement to the “Official Gazette,” December 9, 1914—Speech of the Minister for Foreign Affair (Baron Kato)

Mr. Ogawa has made a verbose interpellation about all sorts of questions. The first inquiry was whether the Government has any intention of effecting a fundamental solution of the Chinese question. Although on the face of the words this question seems simple, it involves a deep meaning, and may be regarded from several viewpoints. According to Mr. Ogawa the preservation of the territorial integrity of China has been maintained as the continuous policy of our Government regardless of China’s wishes in the matter. This policy was not initiated by the present Government, but has existed for several years. The cabinet supported by the Seiyukwai, of which Mr. Ogawa is a member, took the same attitude in regard to it. In this respect, therefore, the present Government has not done anything new. We are constantly exerting our efforts with a view to realizing to the fullest extent the preservation of the territorial integrity of China and of maintaining the most cordial relations with that country. Mr. Ogawa said that the Chinese Government and people are all antagonistic to Japan. (Mr. Ogawa: I did not say “antagonistic.”) I, however, cannot regard it as so. He also said that the anti-Japanese feeling is very prevalent in China. (Mr. Ogawa: I did not say “antagonistic.” You must have misheard.) I may have misheard, but that is the way in which I heard it. China has an immense area and a large population. Naturally there must be all sorts of people, but I cannot regard the attitude of the Chinese Government as anti-Japanese. I am confident that just as our Government is constantly exerting its efforts to maintain cordial relations with China, so the Chinese Government is exerting its efforts to the same end. In regard to Chinese newspapers which publish articles prejudicial to Japan, formerly there were indications that they existed to a considerable extent, but our Government duly called the attention of the Chinese authorities to the fact. As a result the Peking Government took various measures, and if the cases have not entirely disappeared, they have certainly lessened in number.

The second interpellation was about the retrocession of Kiaochow. I believe it was whether Kiaochow would be returned or not, or whether there was any agreement necessitating its retrocession. Whether Kiaochow will be restored or not is a question for the future; two-day is not the time to make a definite declaration. As to whether there is any agreement necessitating the retrocession of Kiaochow, I can state definitely that there is no such agreement, either with any European or American nation or with China.

The next question was why the ultimatum was sent to Germany. The reason for sending the ultimatum was that if by peaceful means we could cause Germany to evacuate Kiaochow, and make her withdraw her fleet from Oriental waters, that would have been the best thing we could do. Although this seemed extremely difficult, the Government decided that it was proper to try peaceful means first, and therefore took this step. (Mr. Ogawa: What did you mean by inserting the words “with the purpose of returning”?) The motive for inserting the words” with the purpose of returning” was that, if Germany returned the place peacefully, there would be no reason for Japan’s taking it. The object was to expel Germany from the Orient, because with a base there, she would be a perpetual menace to the peace of the Far East. It would therefore have been only natural to return the place to China, which was the original owner thereof. For Japan to cause Germany upon her advice to restore the place to China, had the same purport as the action of Germany, which some years ago caused Japan upon her advice to return Liaotung.

You further asked what would have happened, if Germany had peacefully returned the territory to China in obedience to our ultimatum, although as a matter of fact she did not. In my opinion nothing could have been so excellent as for her to return it without the hostile action that has since taken place. Unfortunately, however, she refused to listen to our terms.

The next inquiry was whether China would have fulfilled the conditions of the treaty relating to the leased territory of Kiaochow in case Germany had returned it to China. Such a question would never have arisen, if Germany had restored the place to. China unconditionally and without compensation, as was stipulated in our ultimatum, which you will probably recall.

You then asked whether Japan was content with the condition in which she to-day finds herself in Manchuria and Mongolia. Of course there are still many things to be desired in Manchuria and Mongolia, but this state of affairs has not arisen to-day for the first time. It has constantly existed before and after the Russo-Japanese war, and still continues to exist. The present Cabinet like its predecessors, when an available opportunity occurs, wishes to exert its best efforts, and to strengthen Japan’s foothold there as far as possible. I wish you to understand that this is a hope cherished by this Cabinet.

In reference to your next inquiry, whether Great Britain has taken over from Germany the northern end of the Chinp’u railway, I saw such a report in the newspapers. I have received no authoritative advices to that effect, and although I have made some investigation of the matter, I do not discover the existence of any such fact.

The next matter concerned the Weiyen railway, and the project of certain Britishers and other foreigners—not only British, but also other foreigners—to construct a line connecting Chefoo and a certain point on the Shantung Railroad. I investigated the matter, and to be sure, found that such a plan had in part been made by some people. However, if the present circumstances—the condition of the money market and the state of restlessness in Shantung—may be taken into consideration, it is not at all likely that the project can be carried out.

As to whether Japan will succeed to the rights of Germany in Shantung, that will be left to future negotiations, and no definite statement can be made in regard thereto at the present time.

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1392

[Document 353]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo December 18, 1914.
[Received January 14 1915.]

No. 170]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a translation of an interpellation of Mr. Genii Matsuda, a parliamentary member of the opposition, and the reply of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, made on the 9th instant in the lower House, with reference to the question whether Japan had restricted her action in the war by guarantees to America and Great Britain.

Mr. Matsuda at first charged the Cabinet, with having made a guarantee to Great Britain that Kiaochow would be retroceded to China, basing his charge upon an editorial alleged to; have appeared in the London, Times to the effect that the guarantee had given satisfaction to England and America, that Japanese diplomacy assisted Great Britain and feared the United States, and that the guarantee was necessary to dispel suspicion in Australia and America.

The interpellator then asserted that when the occupation of Jaluit Island by the Japanese Fleet was published in America, it provoked a loud, protest, Japan being accused of having violated her promise to limit her sphere of warlike operations; but that as the result of a guarantee from the Japanese Government that the occupation was only temporary, and for strategical, purposes intended to protect commerce and navigation, the feeling against Japan was somewhat softened. Mr. Matsuda added that if such a guarantee was given to the United States, it was a very humiliating one, impairing the independence and sovereignty of Japan. He concluded by asking whether the Minister for Foreign Affairs could deny the statements of Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State, and President Wilson, who had publicly announced that they had received such a guarantee from the Japanese Government.

The Minister briefly replied that he had never given any guarantee to the United States in regard to the South Sea Islands, or made any promise to Great Britain respecting the retrocession of Kiaochow.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

[Enclosure—Translation]

Extract from the Parliamentary Supplement to the “Official Gazette,” December 10, 1914

INTERPOLATION OF MR. MATSUDA

The London Times had an article concluding with the statement that “the guarantee of the retrocession of Kiaochow is a matter of satisfaction to the English people as well as to America.” If you say that the London Times published a falsehood, that is the end of the question. A telegram in regard to this matter should have been received by the Foreign Office. Do you wish to say that the statement in the editorial of the London Times, to the effect that the guarantee of the retrocession of Kiaochow was a matter of satisfaction both to England and to America, was based on a false report? However, judging from conditions existing before and after, I believe to my regret, that the guarantee is not a fact.1 Japanese diplomacy assisted Great Britain it feared the United States—that is what the newspapers in England say. They concluded with the following statement. “Is it not to the interest of Japan to limit the sphere of operations? Is it not necessary in order to dispel the suspicions of Australia and America?” Although the guarantee of the retrocession of Kiaochow is a matter of deep regret to the country, it nevertheless seems that such a pledge has been given to Great Britain. As this point will become an important question in the peace conference, as a matter of caution, I have requested an answer from the, Minister for Foreign Affairs in regard thereto.

The next inquiry concerns the movements connected with Japan’s work of occupation in the South Sea. When our navy occupied Jaluit Island in the South Sea, the public opinion of America became clamorous, and the following statement appeared in the American press, and was at the time telegraphed to Japan. “As soon as the telegram reporting the occupation of Jaluit Island in the Marshall Archipelago by the Japanese Fleet was received in Washington, it provoked a clamorous discussion, to the effect that Japan had broken her guarantee to limit the sphere of warlike action. However, as the result of a subsequent report from Tokyo, stating that the occupation of Jaluit by the Japanese Fleet would not be permanent, and the explanation by Ambassador Chinda that the occupation of the island was only for the purpose of destroying the naval base of Germany, and of protecting commerce and navigation, the feeling against Japan was somewhat softened.” The newspapers at the same time also said that the British Ambassador at Washington was expecting from the British Foreign Office a similar declaration with reference to the movements of Japan. The Foreign Office must also have had such a report.

Again, in reference to our occupation in the South Sea, Mr. Bryan, American Secretary of State, at that time made the following statement. It was just when the discussion became clamorous, with respect to Japan’s breach of the limitation of the sphere of military operations, in regard to which Great Britain had been consulted, that Mr. Bryan made the following statement. “In connection with the movements of Japan in Jaluit Island, German territory, I obtained a guarantee from the Japanese Government, and made it public on the afternoon of the 7th, and said that it was a matter of satisfaction to America. According to the said guarantee the action of Japan in Jaluit Island is a temporary measure taken for purely strategical purposes, etc.” That is what Mr. Bryan said. That is to say, Mr. Bryan announced his satisfaction in having obtained from the Japanese Government the guarantee that it was a military act, that it was a temporary occupation, which had for its purpose the protection of commerce and navigation, and the protection of the safety of the navigation routes of various nations, and that it was not a permanent occupation. This was announced in America on October 7.

Now what did Mr. Wilson., President of the United States, say about this matter? The press states that he said he had obtained a satisfactory guarantee from the Japanese Government in regard to Japan’s action in the Pacific, and that nothing had yet arisen which he considered as likely to create apprehension on the part of the American Government. This was published on October 8.

Mention is made of the public opinion of America, of Ambassador Chinda’s explanation that Japan’s occupation in the South Sea was temporary and not permanent, of Mr. Bryan’s announcement that he had obtained a pledge from the Japanese Government, and again of Mr. Wilson’s statement that he had obtained a guarantee.

Did or did not the Japanese Government give such a guarantee to the American Government? If we admit that such a guarantee was given, I believe that I may positively assert that it is a very humiliating guarantee, impairing the independence and sovereignty of Japan. (Applause–someone exclaims: “A perishing country!”) Did you give such a guarantee? Do you deny the explanation made by Mr. Bryan? Can the Minister for Foreign Affairs deny the statement of Mr. Wilson? The foregoing is my third interpellation.

REPLY OF THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

In regard to the occupation of the South Sea Islands-that Ambassador Chinda had given some guarantee to the American Government, that Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State, had said something—I also have seen published in the newspapers. With reference to the foregoing, however, I definitely declare that I have never given any guarantee to the American Government.

You ask me whether I have given a guarantee to Great Britain in regard to the retrocession of Kiaocbow, and refer to something published in the London Times. I try to read the London Times as much as I can but recently I have been, very busy, and have not been able to read every issue, so that I did not read the editorial to which Mr. Matsuda refers. I do not know what it said, but I have never made any promise to Great Britain in regard to the retrocession of Kiaochow. (Hear, hear!) Whatever may be said in the London Times, the declarations in the Diet of the Imperial Minister for Foreign Affairs, who has been favored with the confidence of His Majesty, must in my opinion be taken as trustworthy.

1 The interpolator evidently intended to say, “I believe to my regret that the guarantee is a fact.”—Translator.

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1413.

[Document 354]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Tokyo, December 31, 1914.
[Received January 27, 1915.]

Sir: Supplementing my previous despatches on the subject I have the honor to enclose a summary of further replies by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to interpellation in the Diet, principally on questions connected with Japan’s participation in the war.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

[Enclosure]

Summaries (paraphrase) of replies by the Minister of Foreign, Affairs to interpellations in the Diet, December 10, 1914

QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE WAR

Retrocession of Kiaochow. With reference to the report in the London Times regarding the negotiations preceding the declaration of war by Japan against Germany, while Japan and England had consulted in regard to joint action against Germany, in the presentation of the ultimatum Japan acted independently, and not as the result of consultation with England. Japan has made no promise to England respecting the retrocession to China of Kiaochow to which reference was made in the ultimatum. Count Okuma and I have on several occasions declared that the war was undertaken in pursuance of the alliance and not for the purpose of territorial aggrandizement. The London Times may have interpreted this declaration as an unquestionable intention to retrocede Kiaochow, but it does not in any way constitute a promise to do so.

That the United States should have felt satisfaction at our declaration is: excellent, and in view of Japan’s justice and impartiality, which I have often mentioned in the Diet, it is in my opinion only natural that the United States would be satisfied.

The South Sea Islands. The occupation of the South Sea Islands, was a military measure, and no diplomatic action in connection therewith has been taken. Just as in the case of Great Britain, so in the case of Japan the occupation of German territory is temporary, and its disposition will be decided at the peace conference.

The Sphere of Warlike Operations. The Government has not limited its sphere of warlike operations by any agreement with England. The British Press Bureau published a report to the effect that it had done so, but in reply to my inquiry the British Government denied the existence of any such agreement, implying, however, that the intent of Japan’s declaration had been taken in that sense. I definitely expressed my refusal to make any promise of that kind, even should the British colonies entertain anxiety on account of Japan’s movements, and informed the British Foreign Office that I would disclaim such promise if interpellated in the Diet.

The Anglo-Japanese Alliance. With regard to the recent memorandum issued by the British Government announcing that England, Russia, and France had agreed to consult in making terms of peace with Germany, there was no necessity for including Japan in the agreement, as this matter was already covered by the treaty of alliance. Where and how the peace negotiations will be conducted are questions for future determination.

The Anglo-Japanese alliance is as necessary to Japan to-day as ever, and will continue to be so, as long as no great change occurs in conditions. While in the present war the Japanese and British military authorities are consulting and cooperating without reserve, Japan is in no sense performing duties under the orders of England.

Chino-Japanese Relations. With reference to the Interpolation whether the Government intends to effect a fundamental solution of the Chinese question, the present Cabinet like its predecessors is using its efforts to cultivate the friendship and promote the common interests of our two countries. The Government does not, however, as my interpellator seems to expect, intend to lead China, which is entitled to respect as an independent country.

In reply to your question whether I feel easy of mind with such a man as Yuan Shih-kai at the head of the Chinese Government, I believe that President Yuan is a patriot, and as desirous as the Japanese authorities to strengthen the relations of our two countries.

The Conflict of Races. In regard to the question whether the yellow races are determined to confront the white, in my opinion, because a race is yellow it is not necessarily a friend of Japan. Whether yellow or white Japan’s safety lies in cultivating the friendship of peoples whose interests are common with her own.

Part II: Neutral RightsPart II: Neutral Rights

Contents

Shipments of Grain and Foodstuffs—Marine Insurance (Documents 418-422)

Shipments of Copper (Documents 423-431)

Shipments of Cotton (Documents 432-448)

Shipments of Illuminating Oil (Documents 449-452)

Shipments of Naval Stores (Documents 453-457)

Shipments of Tobacco (Documents 458-460)

Cases Arising under the British Proclamation Of August 4 and Order In Council Of August 20 . (Documents 461-481)

Cases Arising under the Additional Proclamation of September (Documents 482-515)

Cases Arising under the Proclamation and Order in Council of October 29 (Documents 516-541)

The Proposed “Working Arrangement” with Great Britain (Documents 542-558)

Note to Great Britain of December 26, Protesting against Seizures and Detentions Regarded as Unwarranted (Documents 559-569)

Special Cases: The “Sturmfels”, “Birkenfels”, and “Schneefels” (Documents 570-575)

Efforts toward recognition of the Declaration of London—Proclamations, orders, and decrees of belligerent governments on contraband of war and trade with enemy countriesEfforts toward recognition of the Declaration of London—Proclamations, orders, and decrees of belligerent governments on contraband of war and trade with enemy countries

[355] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 5, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 6, 6:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/26

[356] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 6, 1914, 1. p.m.

File No. 763.72112/48a

[357] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 10, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received August 11, 4:45 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/68

[358] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, August 13, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received August 14, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/81

[359] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, Germany, and the Minister in Belgium

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/81

[360] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 19, 1914. [Received August 20, 6:40 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/100

[361] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 20, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 4:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/102

[362] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, August 23, 1914. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/107

[363] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 22, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received August 24, 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/108

[364] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, undated. [Received August 26, 1914, 9:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/111

[365] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, undated. [Received August 27, 1914, 10:02 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/112

[366] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 28, 1914 11 a.m. [Received August 29 5:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/115

[367] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 28, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received August 29, 9 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/116

[368] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 1, 1914. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/119

[369] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, September 3, 1914. [Received September 4, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/120

[370] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, September 7, 1914. [Received September 8, 10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/124

[371] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 8, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/116

[372] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 8, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/115

[373] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 2, 1914. [Received September 15.]

File No. 763.72112/128

[374] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 2, 1914. [Received September 16.]

File No. 763.72/888

[375] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 26, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/126

[376] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 28, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/359a

[377] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 29, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 7:55 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/360

[378] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of Stake

September 29, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/12929

[379] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 30, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 7:55 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/361

[380] The Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 30, 1914. [Received 7:50 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/138

[381] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office, London, September 28, 1914. [Handed to the Acting Secretary of State by the British Ambassador, October 1, 3 p.m. ]

File No. 763.72112/12928

[382] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

September 30, 1914. [Left at the Department of State, October 1, 1F914.]

File No. 763.72112/149

[383] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/361a

[384] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/360

[385] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/361

[386] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, October 2, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/12930a

[387] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State of a conference with the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) at the British Embassy, October 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

October 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 768.72112/12930a

[388] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs ( Grey )

British Embassy, Washington, October 2, 1914 [Communicated to the Acting Secretary of State by the British Ambassador, October 3.]

[389] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 3, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/143

[390] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 4, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/361b

[391] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 9, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received October 10, 10:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/157

[392] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/180

[393] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 13, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/157

[394] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 15, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received October 16, 9:15 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/164

[395] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1914, 1 p.m.

[396] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/157

[397] The President to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/164

[398] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 19, 1914. [Received October 20, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/189

[399] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office, London , October 17, 1914 . [Handed to the Acting Secretary of State by the British Ambassador, October 20.]

File No. 763.72112/12930b

[400] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office, London, October 19, 1914. [Handed to the Acting Secretary of State by the British Ambassador, October 20.]

[401] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 20, 1914, 11 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/193

[402] The Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 21, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received 11:55 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/200

[403] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 22, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/189

[404] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 23, 1914 [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/213

[405] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 23, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/212

[406] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/226a

[407] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 24, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received October 25, 12:06 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/215

[408] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 28, 1914, 7 p.m.

[409] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 3, 1914. [Received November 16.]

File No. 763.72112/385

[410] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 21, 1914. [Received November 9.]

File No. 763.72112/342

[411] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 23, 1914. [Received December 14.]

File No. 763.72112/475

[412] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, November 20, 1914. [Received December 15.]

File No. 763.72112/478

[413] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 15, 1914 [Received December 16, 5:05 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/483

[414] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, undated [Received December 22, 1914, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/499

[415] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 24, 1914. [Received December 26, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/522

[416] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received December 24, 1914, 11:45 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/521

[417] The Ambassador in France (Sharp) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, January 5, 1915. [Received 9:50 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/579

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/26

[Document 355]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 5, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 6, 6:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

278. The Foreign Office has just transmitted to me the following list of articles which the British Government have declared to be absolute and conditional contraband, respectively, during the present war:1

[The following articles will be treated as absolute contraband:] 1. Arms of all kinds, including arms for sporting purposes, and their distinctive component parts.

2. Projectiles, charges, and cartridges of all kinds, and their distinctive component parts.

3. Powder and explosives specially prepared for use in war.

4. Gun mountings, limber boxes, limbers, military waggons, field forges, and their distinctive component parts.

5. Clothing and equipment of a distinctively military character.

6. All kinds of harness of a distinctively military character.

7. Saddle, draught, and pack animals suitable for use in war.

8. Articles of camp equipment and their distinctive component parts.

9. Armour plates.

10. Warships, includings boats, and their distinctive component parts of such a nature that they can only be used on a vessel of war.

11. Aeroplanes, airships, balloons, and aircraft of all kinds, and their component parts, together with accessories and articles recognisable as intended for use in connection with balloons and aircraft.

12. Implements and apparatus designed exclusively for the manufacture of munitions of war, for the manufacture or repair of arms, or war material for use on land and sea.

The following articles will be treated as conditional contraband: 1. Foodstuffs.

2. Forage and grain suitable for feeding animals.

3. Clothing, fabrics for clothing, and boots and shoes, suitable for use in war.

4. Gold and silver in coin or bullion; paper money.

5. Vehicles of all kinds available for use in war and their component parts.

6. Vessels, craft, and boats of all kinds; floating docks, parts of docks, and their component parts.

7. Railway material, both fixed and rolling stock, and materials for telegraphs, wireless telegraphs, and telephones.

8. Fuel; lubricants.

9. Powder and explosives not specially prepared for use in war.

10. Barbed wire, and implements for fixing and cutting the same.

11. Horseshoes and shoeing materials.

12. Harness and saddlery.

13. Field glasses, telescopes, chronometers, and all kinds of nautical instruments.

American Ambassador

1 These correspond to the lists in Articles 22 and 24 of the Declaration of London, with the exception of the transfer of aircraft from the conditional classification to the absolute. For the text of the Declaration of London, see Foreign Relations, 1909, pp. 318 et, seq.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/48a

[Document 356]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 6, 1914, 1. p.m.

[Telegram]

You are instructed to inquire of the British Government whether they are willing to agree that the laws of naval warfare laid down by the Declaration of London, 1909, shall be applicable to naval warfare during the, present European conflict, provided that the governments with whom Great Britain is or may be at war also agree to such application. You will further state that this Government believes that acceptance of these laws by the belligerents would prevent grave misunderstandings which may arise as to the relations between belligerent and neutral powers. It, therefore, earnestly hopes that this inquiry may receive favorable consideration.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Russia, France, Germany, and Austria-Hungary, and the Minister in Belgium.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/68

[Document 357]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 10, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received August 11, 4:45 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Foreign Office communicates list of articles and materials which the German Government, pursuant to Nos. 21 and 23 of the prize ordinance of September 30, 1909, Reichs-Gesetzblatt, page 275, declares contraband of war. They correspond exactly, as regards absolute contraband, to Article 22, Nos. 1 to 11 inclusive, of the Declaration of London; and, as regards conditional contraband, to Article 24, Nos. 1 to 14. They further state that the ordinance mentioned contains the substance of the Declaration of London; that Germany will apply these laws provided that the other belligerents do not disregard them.

Foreign Office requests to be informed regarding attitude of the other powers.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/81

[Document 358]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, August 13, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received August 14, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your August 6. Austro-Hungarian Government have instructed their forces to observe stipulations of Declaration of London as applied to naval as well as land warfare during present conflict conditional on like observance on part of the enemy.

Penfield

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, Germany, and the Minister in Belgium File No. 763.72112/81

[Document 359]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, Germany, and the Minister in Belgium

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Circular telegram]

Press Government for reply to Department’s August 6, 1 p.m. Austria has instructed its forces to observe Declaration of London conditional on like observance on part of enemy.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/100

[Document 360]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, August 19, 1914.
[Received August 20, 6:40 a.m.]

[Telegram]

413. Your August 6, 1 p.m. Sir Edward Grey asks you to inquire of the Austro-Hungarian and German Governments what attitude they intend to adopt towards the Declaration of London during the present war period.

American Ambassador

1 Transmitted to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary, August 20.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/102

[Document 361]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 20, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 4:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 19, 4 p.m. Russian Government still waiting for decision of British Government, as it will take similar action. However, Foreign Office does not expect British Government will decide to observe Declaration of London.

Wilson

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/107

[Document 362]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, August 23, 1914.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your August 21 [20] via Berlin. In all declarations of war Austro-Hungarian Government has announced adherence to provisions Declaration of London on condition reciprocity.

Penfield

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/108

[Document 363]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 22, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received August 24, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

With reference to your telegram of August 19, 4 p.m. My August 20 [10], 1 a.m., over Copenhagen reported that German Government will apply the Declaration of London provided other belligerents do not disregard its provisions.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/111

[Document 364]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, undated.
[Received August 26, 1914, 9:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

483. My 461 and yours of August 24.1 Following text of Foreign Office note regarding Declaration of London, together with explanation and order in council, telegraphed as instructed.

Foreign Office,
[ London ], August 22, 1914.

On the 7th instant you were so good as to address to me a note inquiring, pursuant to instructions from the Secretary of State at Washington, whether His Majesty’s Government [were] willing to agree that the laws of naval warfare, as laid down by the Declaration of London, 1909, should be applicable to naval warfare during the present European conflict, provided that the governments with whom Great Britain is at war, or with whom her relations are not normal, also agree to such application.

Your excellency added that it was [the] belief of your Government that the acceptance of these laws by the belligerents would prevent the possibility of grave misunderstandings [as] to the relations between belligerents and neutrals.

I have the honor to inform your excellency that His Majesty’s Government, who attach great importance to the views expressed in your excellency’s note and are animated by a keen desire to consult so far as possible the interests of neutral countries, have given this matter [their] most careful consideration and [I] have pleasure in stating that they have decided to adopt generally the rules of the declaration in question, subject to certain modifications and additions which they judge indispensable to the efficient conduct of their naval operations. A detailed explanation of these additions and modifications is contained in the inclosed memorandum.

The necessary steps to carry the above decision into effect have now been taken by the issue of an order in council, of which I have the honor to inclose copies herein for your excellency’s information and for transmission to your Government.

I may add that His Majesty’s Government in deciding to adhere to the rules of the Declaration of London, subject only to the aforesaid modifications and additions, have not waited to learn the intentions of the enemy governments, but have been actuated by a desire to terminate at the earliest moment the condition of uncertainty which has been prejudicing the interests of neutral trade.

I have [etc.]

E. A. Crowe

[Memorandum]

1. The lists of contraband already published, by His Majesty are substituted for those contained in Articles 22 and 24 of the Declaration of Loudon. Lists similar to those published by His Majesty have [already] been issued [by] the French Government.

2. His Majesty’s Government do not feel able to accept in its entirety the rule laid down in Article 38 of the declaration. It has been the practice of the British Navy to treat as liable to capture a vessel which carried contraband of war with false papers if she was encountered [while] on the return voyage, and to this exception His Majesty’s Government feel it necessary to adhere.

3. The peculiar conditions in the present war due to the fact that neutral ports such as Rotterdam are the chief means of access to a large part of Germany and that exceptional measures have been taken in the enemy country for the control by the Government of the entire supply of foodstuffs have convinced His Majesty’s Government that modifications are required in the applications of Articles 34 and 35 of the declaration. These modifications are contained in paragraphs 3 and 5 of the accompanying order in council.

4. Article 15 of the declaration contains a provision as to presumptive knowledge of the blockade in certain cases if the vessel has sailed from a neutral port. No mention is made of British or allied enemy ports. These omissions are supplied by Article 4 of the order in council.

5. The order in council also provides for the acceptance of the very valuable commentary on the declaration which was embodied in the general report prepared by Monsieur Renault.

Following is text of order in council:

At the Court at Buckingham Palace, the 20th day of August, 1914. Present, The King’s Most Excellent Majesty in Council.

Whereas during the present hostilities the naval forces of His Majesty will cooperate with the French and Russian naval forces; and

Whereas it is desirable that the naval operations of the Allied forces so far as they affect neutral ships and commerce should be conducted on similar principles; and

Whereas the Governments of France and Russia have informed His Majesty’s Government that during then present hostilities it is their intention to act in accordance with the provisions of the convention known as the Declaration of London, signed on the 26th day of February, 1909, so far as may be practicable;

Now, therefore, His Majesty, by and with the advice of his Privy Council, is pleased to order, and it is hereby ordered, that during the present hostilities the convention known as the Declaration of London shall, subject to the following additions and modifications, be adopted and put in force by His Majesty’s Government as if the same had been ratified by His Majesty.

The additions and modifications are as follows: (1) The lists of absolute and conditional contraband contained in the proclamation dated August 4, 1914, shall be substituted for the lists contained in Articles 22 and 24 of the said declaration.

(2) A neutral vessel which succeeded in carrying contraband to the enemy with false papers may be detained for having carried such contraband if she is encountered before she has completed her return [voyage].

(3) The destination referred to in Article 33 may be inferred from any sufficient evidence, and (in addition to [the] presumption laid down in Article 34) shall be presumed to exist if the goods are consigned to or for an agent of the enemy state or to or for a merchant or other person under the control of the authorities of the enemy state.

(4) The existence of a blockade shall be presumed to be known— (a) To all ships which sailed from or touched at an enemy [port] a sufficient time after the notification of the blockade to the local authorities to have enabled the enemy government to make known the existence of, the blockade;

(b) To all ships which sailed from or touched at a British or Allied port after the publication of the declaration of blockade.

(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 35 of the said declaration, conditional contraband, if shown to have the destination referred to in Article 33, is liable to capture, to whatever port the vessel is bound and at whatever port the cargo is to be discharged.

(6) The general report of the drafting committee on the said declaration presented to the naval conference and adopted by the conference at the eleventh plenary meeting on February 25, 1909, shall be considered by all prize courts as an authoritative statement of the meaning and intention of the said declaration, and such courts shall construe and interpret the provisions of the said declaration by the light of the commentary given therein.

And the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury, the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and each of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, the President of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division of the High Court of Justice, all other judges of His Majesty’s Prize Courts, and all governors, officers, and authorities whom it may concern are to give the necessary directions herein as to them may respectively appertain.

Almeric Fitzroy
American Ambassador

1 Neither printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/112

[Document 365]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, undated.
[Received August 27, 1914, 10:02 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Russian Government accepts Declaration of London with exact modifications adopted by England and France.

Wilson

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/115

[Document 366]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 28, 1914 11 a.m.
[Received August 29 5:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Foreign Office desires information as to the attitudes of England and France towards Declaration of London. Also in what light United States Government considers holding up of neutral vessels by England with special reference to legal points involved.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/116

[Document 367]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 28, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received August 29, 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Supplementing my August 28, 12 noon [11 a.m.]. Foreign Office recites following cases where England and France have not observed Declaration of London

(1) Aircraft and component parts, declared absolute contraband by both governments, contrary to Article 24, No. 8.

(2) British naval forces have seized as conditional contraband, contrary to Article 35: gold for German private banks found on Dutch vessel Tubantia bound for Amsterdam; asphalt shipment of German Trinidad Company found on Norwegian vessel Kylemore bound for Rotterdam; coal belonging to German firm on Norwegian vessel Ferm bound for Caleta Coloso. These shipments destined for private parties and not for German armed forces, so cannot be held to be conditional contraband or considered requisitions under paragraph 2 or remarks to Article 29.

(3) British and French naval forces are taking Germans of military age but not embodied in armed forces from neutral vessels as prisoners of war: thus from Dutch vessels Tubantia at Plymouth and Potsdam at Falmouth; from Italian vessels Re Vittorio and Ancona at Gibraltar; from Norwegian vessel Norwega at Bergen; from Spanish vessel Sister at Marseilles.

The German Government maintain this action [violates?] Article 45, since the persons arrested are not active military persons. The German Government inquire whether the American Government will acquiesce in such violations of the Declaration of London by Great Britain, France, or Russia.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/119

[Document 368]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, September 1, 1914.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

547. With reference to the attitude of the Austro-Hungarian and German Governments regarding the Declaration of London, the British Government ask that further inquiry be made as to whether the two Governments in question have specified the articles which they intend to treat as contraband of war.

American Ambassador

1 Transmitted to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary, September 2.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/120

[Document 369]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, September 3, 1914.
[Received September 4, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The French Government will observe the provisions of the. Declaration of London with following reservation:

Article 1. The declaration signed in London on February 26, 1909, concerning the legislation of naval war shall be applied during the war subject to the following additions and modifications: (1) The lists of absolute and conditional contraband notified by publication in the Journal officiel of August 11, 1914, are substituted for those contained in Articles 22 and 24 of the declaration. Notices published in the Journal officiel shall eventually make known any new additions or modifications to said lists.

(2) Any neutral ship which may have succeeded in carrying contraband to the enemy by means of false papers may be seized under this accusation if met with before completing its return journey.

(3) The purpose within the meaning of Article 33 of the declaration may be inferred from any sufficient proof, and (besides the assumption contained in Article 34) shall be considered as existing if the merchandise is consigned to or in the name of an agent of the enemy or to or in the name of any dealer or of any other person acting under the control of the authorities of the enemy.

(4) The existence of a blockade shall be deemed known (a) for all ships starting from or touching at an enemy’s port within a sufficient delay after notification of blockade to the local authorities to have allowed the enemy’s government to make known the existence of the blockade (b) for all ships which may have left or touched at a French or ally’s port after publication of declaration of blockade.

(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 35 of the declaration the conditional contraband, if it is proved that its destination comes within the meaning of Article 33, is liable to capture, whatever may be the port of destination of the ship and the port where the cargo is to be unloaded.

Only change made in Journal officiel of August 11, 1914, is transfer of balloons, flying machines, etc., from conditional contraband list to absolute contraband list. Article 22 still, then, contains 12 subdivisions, 12 referring to balloons and flying machines, and Article 24, 13 subdivisions, subdivision 8 being eliminated and becoming subdivision 12 of absolute contraband.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/124

[Document 370]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Vienna, September 7, 1914.
[Received September 8, 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

17. Your 21, September 2.2 Austro-Hungarian Government desires British Government be notified that they will treat as absolute or conditional contraband those objects and material which are enumerated in Articles 22 and 24 of Declaration of London.

Penfield

1 Repeated to the Ambassador in Great Britain, September 10. The reply to the British inquiry received from the Ambassador in Germany, dated September 4 (File No. 763.72112/121), was a repetition of his telegram of August 10, ante, p. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357].

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72112/116

[Document 371]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 8, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

88. Your August 28, 5 p.m. As to No. 1, this Government is giving the matter consideration. As to Nos. 2 and 3, this Government regrets that it must refuse to express an opinion, inasmuch as it does not appear that American interests are involved in the cases cited.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72112/115

[Document 372]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 8, 1914.

[Telegram]

87. Your August 28, 11 a.m. British Government has decided to adhere to the Declaration of London, subject to certain modifications and additions. These are explained in the following memoranda and order in council of the British Government:

[Here follow memoranda 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 and British order in council quoted from telegram No. 483 from London, undated.] 1

This Government is giving the proposed additions and modifications its attentive consideration.

Bryan

1  Ante, pp. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]-20 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/128

[Document 373]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 2, 1914.
[Received September 15.]

No. 428]

Sir: In confirmation of my telegram of the 1st instant, No. 547, I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a copy of the Foreign Office note, dated the 31st ultimo, upon which the same was based, together with the order in council referred to therein.2

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign, Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador ( Page )

No. 43613/14]
Foreign Office,
August 31, 1914.

Your Excellency: Under date of the 26th instant you were so good as to address to me a note stating that information had reached your excellency from the Secretary of State at Washington to the effect that the. German and Austro-Hungarian Governments would adhere to the rules of the Declaration of London during the present hostilities provided that other belligerents did not disregard its provisions.

Your excellency is aware that His Majesty’s Government have decided to observe the rules of the declaration in question subject to certain additions and modifications specified in the order in council of the 20th instant. It consequently becomes a matter of uncertainty what the attitude of the German and Austro-Hungarian Governments will be.

I shall be grateful if your excellency will be so good as to communicate to me any further information on the subject which may reach your Government and I would ask that further inquiry might in the meanwhile be made by your excellency as to whether the two Governments in question have not specified the articles which they intend to treat as contraband of war.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Ralph Paget

2  Ante, p. 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 364].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/888

[Document 374]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 2, 1914.
[Received September 16.]

No. 206]

[This despatch is printed ante, page 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 197]. The following memorandum, enclosed therein was summarized by the Ambassador in a telegram of August 28, ante, page 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368].]

[Enclosure-Translation]

Memorandum relative to the application of the London maritime war declaration in the present war

I

On August 7, 1914, the Imperial German Government replied to a verbal inquiry of the Ambassador of the United States of America that it was prepared to ratify immediately the London maritime war declaration of February 26, 1909. It likewise replied to a note of the Ambassador dated August 8 that it would observe the provisions of the Declaration of London provided the other belligerent powers did not disregard them accordingly the German prize ordinance, a copy of which was sent to the Ambassador on August 6, and a second copy of which is attached, embodies the substance of the Declaration of London.

II

According to the reports hitherto received, the provisions of the Declaration of London have not been observed by Great Britain and France in material points.

1. The British and the French Governments have declared aircraft and their component parts as absolute contraband of war, whereas pursuant to Article 24, No. 8, of the Declaration of London they can only be considered conditional contraband.

2. The British naval forces have repeatedly violated Article 35 of the Declaration of London in that they have taken away articles designated by them as conditional contraband from a ship bound for a neutral port. Thus they seized shipments of gold for German private banks on the Dutch ship Tubantia, bound for Amsterdam; a shipment of asphalt of the Deutsche Trinidad. Asphalt Gesellschaft, Ltd., on the Norwegian ship Kylemore, bound for Rotterdam; a shipment of coal of the German firm Krabbenhöft Bock on the Norwegian ship Ferm, bound for Caleta Coloso, Chile. These seizures likewise violate Article 33 of the Declaration of London, since the shipments were destined for private persons and not for the German armed forces or for German administrative authorities, so that they could not be defined as contraband at all.

Nor can the seizures be justified as requisitions, since according to the general report of the editing committee of the London_ maritime conference requisitions on board neutral ships, on the open seas are not permitted; see paragraph 2 of the remarks to Article 29.

3. The British and French naval forces are taking away Germans of military age, but not embodied in the German armed forces, as prisoners of war from neutral ships, in contravention of the principles laid down in Article 45, No. 2, and Article 47 of the Declaration of London. Thus the British naval forces have taken away Germans liable to military duty from the Dutch ships Tubantia at Plymouth and Potsdam at Falmouth, from the Italian, ships Revittoria and Ancona at Gibraltar, and from the Norwegian steamer Norwega in Bergen. French naval forces have taken like measures against the Spanish steamer Sister at Marseilles. In all these cases the, hostile armed forces have acted contrary to the provisions of the Declaration of London; for, as the, general report of the editing committee expressly states in the first paragraph of the remarks to Article 45, the whole conference was agreed for juridical as well as practical reasons that solely active military persons are liable to capture at sea, and not persons returning to their native country in order to fulfill their general military duty.

III

In view of this state of affairs the German Government has a very considerable interest in learning without delay whether Great Britain, France, and Russia are going to consider themselves bound by the provisions of the Declaration of London. Should this be the case the British Government would have to give back immediately the German goods seized on neutral ships, and the British and French Governments would have to set at liberty the Germans arrested on neutral ships. In the contrary case the German Government would have to reserve the right to disregard in the future for its part also provisions of the Declaration of London not in harmony with Germany’s military interests. It would accordingly be gratified if the Government of the United, States would cause the other belligerents to declare their, attitude toward the Declaration of London immediately.

In addition the German Government would be interested in learning what position the American Government now takes with regard to the Declaration of London, in particular whether it proposes to acquiesce in violations of its provisions by the naval forces of Great Britain, France, or Russia.

Berlin , August 27, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/126

[Document 375]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 26, 1914.

Sir: On August 6 last this Government sent telegraphic instructions to its missions at London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, St. Petersburg, and Brussels to inquire whether the governments at those capitals were willing to agree that the laws of naval warfare laid down by the Declaration of London 1909, shall be applicable to the present European conflict provided that the countries at war all agree to such application.1 This Government expressed the belief that the acceptance of the declaration by the belligerents would prevent grave misunderstandings which might arise as to the relations between belligerents and, neutral powers, and it, therefore, earnestly hoped that its inquiry might receive favorable consideration.

To this inquiry the governments at Berlin and Vienna replied that the Declaration of London would be observed by them upon condition of a like observance on the part of their adversaries.1 This Government has now been informed by a note of the British Foreign Office,” dated August 22, inclosing a memorandum of the British Government and also an order in council, dated the 20th ultimo, that the British Government have adopted the Declaration of London, of 1909, with certain modifications and additions.2 Advices have also reached this Government that the French and Russian Governments have adhered to the position of the British Government in respect to the Declaration of London. As yet, however, no reply to the American inquiry has been received from the Government of Belgium.

As the inquiry of this Government had no reference to the adoption of the Declaration of London except in its entirety and by all of the great powers at war, the announcement that the Government of Great Britain would adopt the declaration with certain modifications and additions regardless of the attitude of their adversaries, is not, I regret to say, an acceptance of the American proposition. The inquiry was made in the hope that by unanimous consent of the interested governments the differences of opinion as to the rights and duties of nations in time of war, which have heretofore vexed belligerent and neutral governments and been the cause of controversy long after war has ended, would be removed in the present conflict by the acceptance of a definite naval code governing international relations while a state of war continued. The act of this Government in making this inquiry was one of expediency. It did not, and does not now, consider the Declaration of London standing alone as the best and most equitable of naval war codes, particularly as respects neutral nations, but it seemed available in the emergency and most probable of acceptance by the maritime powers involved in or effected by the war and signatories to the instrument.

While the Government of the United States felt keen disappointment that His Majesty’s Government deemed it necessary to refuse to accept the Declaration of London without amendment, it has given to the new code proposed by His Majesty’s Government, which consists of the declaration modified and enlarged, careful and friendly examination in the hope that it might be found to impose no additional burdens upon neutral commerce and to change so slightly the relationship between belligerents and neutrals that this Government might advocate its general acceptance. I regret to say, however, that such is not the conclusion which this Government has reached from its examination. The reasons for this conclusion will be briefly set forth.

Naturally and properly this Government has examined the proposed modifications and additions from the viewpoint of a neutral, whose, normal rights in time of peace have already been restricted by new duties imposed upon it because of a state of war. The Declaration of London contemplated a state of war, but it also contemplated the special machinery for the application of its rules in specific cases, as provided in Article 7 of the Hague convention of 1907 for the establishment of an International Prize Court. It will be recalled that Great Britain objected to that article and made their acceptance of the convention conditional upon an agreement of the powers as to certain definite rules of law which should be binding upon the proposed prize court. The reason stated for insisting upon this condition was the uncertainty of the law of naval warfare which might be applied by an international court composed of jurists of different nationalities, having contrary views as to certain important rules of naval warfare, which lacked the sanction of general acceptance.

In order to remove this uncertainty and at the instance of Great Britain, the naval conference was called at London in 1908. It resulted in the signature of the Declaration of London in 1909. It is, however, well known that the Declaration of London has not been ratified by any country represented at the conference, and no ratifications have been deposited in London in accordance with Article 67 of the declaration. All of the other signatory powers have awaited the affirmative action of Great Britain, which, it is understood, has been indefinitely postponed. As a consequence of this failure to accept the declaration, the International Prize Court, whose establishment was conditional upon this acceptance, has not been organized.

A great safeguard of neutral rights is therefore wanting. The International Prize Court was to consist of not less than nine or more than fifteen judges, a majority of whom, with substantial certainty, would be of neutral nationalities. A court thus constituted was regarded by the nations as especially fitted to render impartial decisions in matters affecting the relations of belligerents and neutrals, Without the power to appeal to a tribunal so constituted, the application of the declaration by the national courts of the belligerents would impose sufficient hardship upon neutral commerce, but the enforcement by those courts of the declaration changed and modified, so that belligerent rights are enlarged at the expense of neutral rights, would be manifestly objectionable to neutral nations whose rights are impaired.

Although the International Prize Court has not been constituted and although it cannot well be called into being during the present conflict, the United States stands ready either to accept the declaration as a whole, provided all of the belligerents accept it, or to accept it for the period, of the war with modifications and additions acceptable, on the one hand, to the United States and the Netherlands, the two neutral signatories, and, on the other hand, to all of the belligerents.

This Government in seeking general acceptance of the declaration as a code of naval warfare for the present war had in mind the adoption of the declaration as a whole and not such part of it as might be acceptable to certain belligerents and not to other belligerents. It considered that the declaration was to be applied as a complete code of which no rule could be ignored or supplemented, and in so doing it followed Article 65 of the declaration, which stipulates: “The provisions of the present declaration must be treated as a whole and cannot be separated.”

The only reasonable explanation for the inclusion in the declaration of this requirement is that the instrument is composed largely of compromises on the part of the governments represented at the conference. Although the declaration is introduced with a general statement that “the signatory powers are agreed” that the rules contained in the declaration “correspond in substance with the generally recognized principles of international law,” the proceedings of the conference as well as the documents relating to it prove that an agreement on many of the articles was reached through reciprocal concessions. Being conceived in compromise and concession the declaration was accepted by the Government of the United States at the conference in London in the earnest hope that it might finally compose the differences which existed as to neutral rights and neutral duties, although in so accepting this Government was compelled to abandon certain rules of conduct which it had heretofore always maintained.

As might be expected in a settlement of divergent views and practices by mutual concession the Declaration of London contains provisions both advantageous and disadvantageous to the respective interests of neutrals and belligerents. But it is now proposed by Great Britain to retain all the provisions favorable to belligerents and to recast other provisions so that they will be less favorable to neutral interests. The result is a set of rules which limits neutrals’ rights far more than does the declaration itself treated as a whole. War, in any event, bears heavily upon a neutral nation. The interruption of its commerce and the limitations placed upon its trade are sufficiently burdensome under the rules of the Declaration of London. In consenting to those rules the Government of the United States made great concessions on its part and it does not feel that it can, in justice to its own people, go further. It cannot consent to the retention of a part of this compromise settlement and to the rejection of another part. The adoption of the declaration so modified is contrary to the customary procedure incident to compromise settlements, to the express provisions of the declaration itself, and to the spirit which induced its signature.

Passing now to a consideration of the modifications and additions proposed by Great Britain, this Government is constrained to state that Articles 3, 5 and 6 of the order in council are wholly unacceptable. As to the other articles of the order in council it is not deemed necessary at present to express the views of this Government.

Articles 3 and 5 read as follows:

(3) The destination referred to in Article 33 (of the Declaration of London) may be inferred from any sufficient evidence, and (in addition to the presumption laid down in Article 34) shall be presumed to exist if the goods are consigned to or for an agent of the enemy state or to or for a merchant or other person under the control of the authorities of the enemy state.

(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 35 of the said declaration, conditional contraband, if shown to have the destination referred to in Article 33, is liable to capture to whatever port the vessel is bound and at whatever port the cargo is to be discharged.

These articles strike at the very root of the indubitable right of neutrals to continue their industrial and commercial enterprises with the minimum inconvenience and confusion, which are inevitable consequences of a maritime war. To concede the existence of such a right as is asserted by these articles of the order in council, would be to make neutral trade between neutral ports dependent upon the pleasure of belligerents, and give to the latter the advantages of an established blockade without the necessity of maintaining it with an adequate naval force. The effect of this asserted right suggests the result which was sought by the so-called “paper blockades” which have been discredited for a century, and were repudiated by the declaration of Paris.

Furthermore, serious misunderstandings may be anticipated from the wording of Article 3 of the order in council. The expression “any sufficient evidence” is vague and indefinite. With a belligerent as the sole judge of what is “sufficient evidence” to create an inference as to destination it will be difficult, if not impossible, for neutrals to know in advance the meaning to be given these words, and this element of uncertainty will be a serious deterrent to the free exercise of those commercial rights, of which neutrals ought not to be deprived. Again, the phrase “to or for an agent of the enemy state” fails to define whether the agent intended is one located in enemy or neutral territory, although the language of Article 5 is open to either construction. Furthermore the expression “to or for a merchant or other person under the control of the authorities of the enemy state” is broad enough to cover any person within enemy jurisdiction, including aliens as well as nationals. It may even be interpreted to apply to a subject or citizen of the enemy state in neutral territory, if such person acts under the instructions of his Government. It is evident that the use of language which is so uncertain in meaning and which is capable of such latitude of interpretation, is in itself highly prejudicial to the neutral rights of commerce.

Passing now to Article 5 of the order in council, it is manifest that this article nullifies the words “and when it is not to be discharged in an intervening neutral port” which appear in Article 35 of the Declaration of London. This then is a reversion to the doctrine of continuous voyage in the matter of conditional contraband, which was abandoned by the London conference according to the official report of the drafting committee. Destination to enemy territory is not, and cannot properly be, considered a good and sufficient ground for seizure of foodstuffs or other conditional contraband, unless they are destined for the use of the armed forces or of a government department of the enemy state. Yet it is, proposed by this article of the order in council to expose to capture all classes of conditional contraband on an inference based upon “any sufficient evidence,” with presumptive guilt if consigned “to or for a merchant or other person under the control of the authorities of the enemy state”; and upon such an inference and presumption it is further proposed that all classes of conditional contraband shall be “liable to capture to whatever port the vessel is bound and at whatever port the cargo is discharged.”

The United States has always insisted that foodstuffs are legitimate articles of commerce, and that mere destination to an enemy port is not of itself justification for their seizure or confiscation. The claim now advanced by Great Britain is not only opposed to the traditional policy of the United States, but it appears to be inconsistent with the position formerly maintained by Great Britain, both as a neutral and as a belligerent. In 1885 France notified foreign powers that “in view of the conditions under which the war with China was being actually conducted,” it had decided to treat rice as contraband of war. Lord Granville, at that time Her Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, admitted that provisions might acquire a contraband character under particular circumstances—if, for example, they were consigned directly to the fleet of a belligerent, or to a port where such a fleet was lying—but he declared there must be, in any event, “circumstances relative to any particular cargo, or its destination, to displace the presumption that articles of this kind are intended for the ordinary use of life and to show, prima facie, at all events, that they are destined for military use.”

During the recent war in South Africa, when Great Britain was a belligerent, the language of Lord Salisbury, speaking as Prime Minister and Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, was in striking accord with the language used by Lord Granville, when Great Britain was neutral. Lord Salisbury then said, in an incident in which the United States was involved, that “Foodstuffs, with a hostile destination, can be considered contraband of war only if they are supplies for the enemy’s forces. It is not sufficient that they are capable of being so used; it must be shown that this was in fact their destination at the time of the seizure.”

Both of these distinguished statesmen laid down a doctrine as to neutral trade in conditional contraband, which was undoubtedly in accord with the generally accepted principles of international law. It was that doctrine which was written into the Declaration of London, and which His Majesty’s Government are now apparently seeking to change upon grounds similar to those advanced by France in 1885, which Lord Granville considered insufficient.

This Government, therefore, feels compelled to state that Articles 3 and 5 of the order in council are inadmissible in themselves, and that the purpose for which they have apparently been devised, as explained by the memorandum of the Foreign Office, namely, to intercept neutral commerce on its way to a neutral nation, is, in the opinion of this Government, equally inadmissible.

Turning now to Article 6 of the order in council it will be observed that this article proposes to make the “joint report of the drafting committee,” which is a series of comments upon the articles of the declaration, binding upon all prize courts. The report is in the language of the order in council to be “considered by all prize courts as an authoritative statement of the meaning and intention of the declaration, and such courts shall construe and interpret the provisions of the declaration by the light of the commentary given therein.” It is the intent, therefore, to give to this commentary equal authority in law with the declaration itself. In giving its consent to the ratification of the declaration the Senate of the United States did not include the report in that consent. It is also contrary to the long-established practice of the system of jurisprudence of this country to make any commentary upon the law binding upon the courts of justice. In view of the lack of senatorial sanction and the uniform practice of its tribunals, the Government of the United States cannot acquiesce in the proposal to make the views of a committee of the conference, however sanctioned by the conference, an integral part of the declaration itself.

In addition to the foregoing reasons the Government of the United States feels that its acquiescence in the position of Great Britain in regard to the Declaration of London might create or tend to create duties or incapacities on the part of the United States as a neutral nation, which the adversaries of Great Britain, having upon the suggestion of the United States expressed their willingness to adopt the Declaration of London without change, might regard as evidence of unfriendliness to them. The United States cannot permit itself to be placed in a position where its neutrality and impartiality are doubtful or open to question.

Furthermore, if the modifications were acceptable to this Government, it would be unwilling, by accepting them, to prejudice the rights of the Netherlands, the other signatory of the declaration neutral in the present war, whose interests, as the memorandum of the Foreign Office discloses, will be vitally affected by the changes proposed.

Finally this Government considers that the Declaration of London, as changed by the order in council, would result in such an interference with the customary rights of neutral commerce that the United States could not assent to it or submit to its enforcement, for the reason that to recognize it as a measure of the neutral rights of the United States would, in the opinion of this Government, be a manifest failure on its part to safeguard the interests of American citizens engaged in legitimate traffic with the subjects of belligerent and neutral nations.

In view of these considerations this Government is obliged to inform the Government of His Britannic Majesty that the United States would be unable to accept the declaration as thus modified though all the belligerents should concur in the modifications suggested by Great Britain. The Government of the United States, therefore, reserves all the rights which it has under the law of nations in relation to any losses or damages which may occur by reason of captures or condemnations made by the Government of Great Britain under the provisions of the Declaration of London as modified by the order in council of August 20, 1914.

You will inform His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the contents of the foregoing instruction and, if he should so desire, leave a copy with him for his consideration.

You will not fail to impress upon his excellency the gravity of the issues which the enforcement of the order in council seems to presage, and say to him in substance as follows:

It is a matter of grave concern to this Government that the particular conditions of this unfortunate war should be considered by His Britannic Majesty’s Government to be such as to justify them in advancing doctrines and advocating practices which in the past aroused strong opposition on the part of the Government of the United States, and bitter feeling among the American people. This Government feels bound to express the fear, though it does so reluctantly, that the publicity, which must be given to the rules which His Majesty’s Government announce that they intend to enforce, will awaken memories of controversies, which it is the earnest desire of the United States to forget or to pass over in silence. This Government in view of these considerations ventures to suggest in no unkindly spirit and with the sole purpose of preserving the mutual good will which now exists between the people of the United States and the people of Great Britain, that the British Government may find it possible to modify their intention before it has been put into practice, as its realization seems fraught with possible misunderstandings which the United States desires at all times to avoid, and especially at the present when the relations of the two countries are so cordial and when their friendship rests upon the secure foundation of the mutual esteem and common ideals of their respective peoples.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

1  Ante, p. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

2 Telegram No. 483, Ante, p. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/359a

[Document 376]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 28, 1914, 9 p.m.

[Telegram]

218. You will immediately see Sir Edward Grey and state to him informally and confidentially that this Government is greatly disturbed by the intention of the British Government to change the provisions of the Declaration of London by the order in council of the 20th August and to adopt the declaration thus changed as the code of naval warfare for the present war. This Government feels grave concern at all of the proposed changes, especially those in Articles 3 and 5 of the order in council, which so materially affect the rights of neutral commerce. If the proposed rules are sought to be put into force and the matter becomes the subject of public discussion in this country, as it undoubtedly will, it is to be confidently expected that it will arouse a spirit of resentment among the American people toward Great Britain which this Government would extremely regret but which it would be unable to prevent. You will also point out that the enforcement of these rules by the British Government would furnish to those inimical to Great Britain an opportunity which they would not be slow to seize, and which they are already using in our press upon the mere publication of the order.

You will further say that the President earnestly desires to avoid a formal protest to the proposed rules and their enforcement and hopes that the British Government will be willing to consider the advisability of modifying these features of the order in council which possesses such latent possibilities.

You will impress upon Sir Edward Grey the President’s conviction of the extreme gravity of the situation and his earnest wish to avoid every cause of irritation and controversy between this Government and the Government of His Majesty.

In presenting the substance of this instruction to Sir Edward Grey you will assure him of the earnest spirit of friendship in which it is sent. The President is anxious that he should realize the terms of the Declaration of London represent the limit to which this Government could go with the approbation and support of its people.

Telegraph result of interview as soon as possible.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/360

[Document 377]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 29, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 7:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

758. I promptly took up your No. 218, September 38, with Sir Edward Grey. He expresses the most earnest wish to avoid every action that will give offense to our Government or cause public criticism in the United States. But he pointed out first that the Declaration of London was never ratified by the British Government, and, secondly, that the modifications of the Declaration of London which are criticized were promulgated before his communication to me transmitted to you in my No. 483 of the 26th August.1 The British purpose he went on to say was to prevent the enemy from receiving food and materials for military use and nothing more. I explained that the people of the United States had a trade with Holland apart from supplies and materials meant for Germany and that our Government could not be expected to see that sacrificed or interfered with. In addition to the intrinsic merits of the case I reminded him of the grave danger of American public criticism which I was sure he did not wish to provoke.

He proposed a discussion of the whole matter with a view to arriving at a satisfactory understanding. This discussion begins tomorrow between him and his attorney general on one side and Anderson 2 and me on our side.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

2  Chandler P. Anderson, appointed, since the beginning of the war, special legal adviser to the American Embassy.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of Stake File No. 763.72112/12929

[Document 378]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of Stake

September 29, 1914.

In compliance with a telegraphic request from the President I called last night at 9.30 on the British Ambassador after sending a telegraphic instruction to London directing the American Ambassador to take up informally and confidentially with Sir Edward Grey the subject of the order in council modifying the Declaration of London and its menace to the friendly feeling of the American people for Great Britain.

I asked the Ambassador if he had seen the editorial in the Washington Post of that morning relative to the order in council. He said that he had and that he appreciated the effect of such criticism on public opinion. I then told him of the instruction sent to London and asked him if he would not lend his aid to secure the cancellation or modification of the order in council, which I was sure would arouse a storm of protest when its provisions were understood and would be successfully used by the enemies of Great Britain in this country.

The Ambassador replied that he certainly would assist in any way that he could, that he fully appreciated the gravity of the situation, and that he had already telegraphed his Government several times in relation to the matter but would do so again immediately in view of the instruction sent to Ambassador Page.

A discussion of the provisions of the order in council followed in which the Ambassador said that he agreed that the order in council practically made foodstuffs absolute contraband, which was contrary to the British traditional policy as well as to that of the United States. He said that the immediate cause had been the introduction through Rotterdam in first days of the war of large quantities of food supplies for the German army in Belgium, and that it seemed absolutely necessary to stop this traffic.

I replied that, while I appreciated that such reasons must weigh very heavily with those responsible for the successful conduct of the war, it seemed unfortunate that some other means could not have been found to accomplish the desired purpose, either by getting the Netherlands to place an embargo on foodstuffs and other conditional contraband or by agreeing not to reexport such articles. The Ambassador said that he agreed that would be much the better way, and that he believed it could be done.

He said that now the chief anxiety seemed to be in regard to shipments of copper and petroleum and also of Swedish iron, and that the British Government was stopping vessels with such cargoes and purchasing them. He suggested that possibly the difficulty created by the order in council could be removed by rescinding it and adding to the list of absolute contraband petroleum products, copper, barbed wire and other articles of like nature now used almost exclusively for war purposes.

I said that as to this suggestion I could not speak for the Government but that it seemed worthy of consideration as it might offer a means of getting rid of the order in council which certainly menaced the very friendly relations existing if it became the subject of discussion by the press. I told him that I did not think that the feeling which the order in council would arouse when generally understood, would be among the shippers as much as among the American public at large; and that, even if no case arose under it, the fact that the British Government had issued a decree, which menaced the commercial rights of the United States as a neutral, in violation of the generally accepted rules of international law, would undoubtedly cause irritation, if not indignation, and might change the sentiment of the American people, of which Great Britain had no reason to complain at the present time.

The Ambassador said that he realized that, and that he would do everything in his power to remove any cause of complaint against his Government for threatened interruption of our commerce with a neutral country, and he appreciated the consideration shown by the President in taking up the matter informally and not lodging a formal protest against the order in council. He felt that the Foreign Office must see how expedient it was to change its action, which was entirely contrary to the attitude previously held by the British Government, and had been so frankly stated by Lord Granville in 1885. He hoped that it would turn out in the way we both wanted.

Robert Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/361

[Document 379]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 30, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 7:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

763. At conference to-day Grey showed me Spring Rice’s cable explaining the suggestion made by the Counselor of the State Department and took that as the basis of discussion.1 He agrees to two points: (1) To make a new list of absolute contraband, and (2) to prepare a new order in council to replace all the orders which have been issued modifying the Declaration of London. In this new order he will endeavor to meet our wishes so far as that is possible. The new list of contraband and the draft of the new order, he will discuss with me as soon as they are ready.

He further stated that the British Government have accepted an assurance from the Netherlands Government that the exportation of foodstuffs from Holland will be prevented by the existing embargo against such exportation. This will open the way for American cargoes of foodstuffs consigned to Holland to go there without interference and any cargoes of foodstuffs now detained by Great Britain, if any are now detained, will be released. This last seems to me an important concession in our favor. I suggested to Grey that the publication of this fact might have a good effect and he consents for you to give this last fact to the press if you so desire.

This whole subject was discussed at a cabinet meeting this morning and it was evident at our conference that the Government desire to meet our wishes so far as the most relentless war ever waged will permit them.

American Ambassador

1 For explanation of the misunderstanding concerning this suggestion, see post: Grey’s telegram to the British Ambassador, September 30, with the Ambassador’s appended memorandum, p. 237; Department’s 226, October 1, p. 238; the British Ambassador’s letter of October 12 to the Counselor, p. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]; and Department’s 302, October 13, p. 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393].

The Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/138

[Document 380]

The Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 30, 1914.
[Received 7:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Following proclamation regarding contraband of war has been received from the Foreign Office: By the King—A Proclamation specifying certain additional articles which are to be treated as contraband of war

George R. I.

Whereas on the 4th day of August last, we did issue our Royal Proclamation specifying the articles which it was our intention to treat as contraband of war during the war between us and the German Emperor;

And whereas on the 12th day of August last we did by our Royal Proclamation of that date extend our Proclamation aforementioned to the war between us and the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary;

And whereas by an Order in Council of the 20th day of August, 1914, it was ordered that during the present hostilities the convention known as the Declaration of London should, subject to certain additions and modifications therein specified, be adopted and put in force as if the same had been ratified by us;

And whereas it is desirable to add to the list of articles to be treated as contraband of war during the present war;

And whereas it is expedient to introduce certain further modifications in the Declaration of London as adopted and put into force:

Now, therefore, we do hereby declare, by and with the advice of our Privy Council, that during the continuance of the war, or until we do give further public notice, the articles enumerated in the schedule hereto will, notwithstanding anything contained in Article 28 of the Declaration of London, be treated as conditional contraband.1

SCHEDULE

Copper, unwrought Magnetic iron ore

Lead, pig, sheet, or pipe Rubber

Glycerine Hides and skins, raw or rough tanned (but not including dressed leather)

Ferrochrome

Haematite iron ore

Given at our Court at Buckingham Palace, this 21st day September, in the year of our Lord 1914, etc., etc.

American Ambassador

1 Notice of similar additions by the French Government was received on October 5 in a telegram from the Consul General in Paris (File No. 763.72112/144)

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/12928

[Document 381]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office,
London, September 28, 1914.
[Handed to the Acting Secretary of State
by the British Ambassador, October 1, 3 p.m. ]

[Telegram—Copy]

United States Ambassador has spoken to me.

I said Declaration of London had not been ratified. Parliament had opposed it. It was analogous to something which the Senate opposed and which had therefore never been ratified or come into force.

Previous to the Declaration of London doctrine of continuous voyage had been part of international law; I believed that it had been upheld by the United States courts and it therefore must remain part of international law until abrogated by some rational agreement binding on governments. Since August 20 we had issued another proclamation also departing from Declaration of London. I claimed that our proclamation should be judged by the rules of international law as hitherto accepted and acted on by court, and applied in previous wars.

Germany had not observed the Declaration of London for she treated all pit props as contraband of war though they were consigned entirely to private firms.

We had only two objects in our proclamations. To restrict supplies for German army and to restrict supply to Germany of materials essential for making of munitions of war. We wished to attain these objects with the minimum of interference with the United States and other neutral commerce.

The British Government could not offer to withdraw their proclamations at once and declare complete absence of interference with everything destined for Germany but we felt it essential to have some agreement with the United States Government. It might be stated at once that the United States Government had raised the question of interference with trade under rules of contraband of war and that we had agreed to discuss the matter without delay.

This discussion will begin tomorrow with the Ambassador and Mr. Chandler Anderson with the view to come to an agreement.

Meanwhile I have pointed out that we have not confiscated a single cargo. Any cargo diverted has been sold at its full value without loss to the exporter. We will at once examine any case about which there is complaint pending an agreement and consequent revision of our proclamations.

The Ambassador said that there was no desire to press the case of people who traded deliberately and directly with Germany, but there was great feeling against stopping legitimate American trade with Holland which had always been large, and it was difficult to disentangle the two questions.

When I instanced detention of two vessels full of copper consigned direct to Krupp, the Ambassador said that no objection could be taken to detaining that.

[File copy not signed]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/149

[Document 382]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

September 30, 1914.
[Left at the Department of State, October 1, 1F914.]

[Telegram]

I have proposed to United States Ambassador that we should draw up a new proclamation of contraband to supersede previous ones in this respect: We should not mention Declaration of London as we do not think an unratified document to which great exception was taken in Parliament here should be constituted a new doctrine of international law.

But the proclamation would be on lines of suggestions conveyed in your telegram of September 28 1 and when the draft is ready we will communicate it to the United States Ambassador and discuss its provisions if necessary before finally settling it.

Meanwhile relying on embargo of Netherlands Government on export of foodstuffs, any foodstuffs consigned to Holland and at present detained will be released and neutral ships will not be detained on ground of containing foodstuffs.

There remain certain cargoes of copper and petroleum, former I believe consigned direct to Germany and to Krupps which we are detaining.

Ambassador asked that to calm public opinion something should be made known by United States Government and I agreed to its being stated that it is understood that British Government intend to revise their proclamation with regard to contraband, and meanwhile in neutral ships goods such as foodstuffs consigned to Holland in respect of which the Netherlands Government have placed an embargo on exportation will not be treated as contraband.

1 Suggestions for contraband contained in a telegram of the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the British Government, September 28, 1914, after a conversation with the Acting Secretary of State (Lansing): (1) Certain articles like motor oil, wire fencing, motors, etc., which may be shown by recent events as exclusively used for military purposes in the present operations might be added to the list of absolute contraband as contemplated in Article 23 of the Declaration of London.

(2) Articles like foodstuffs, if the Dutch Government prohibits their supply to either belligerent, could be freely imported into Holland if consigned to the Dutch Government or persons designated by them.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/361a

[Document 383]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914, 3 p.m.

[Telegram]

226. Department’s cable September 28, Declaration of London.2 In discussion between Counselor of Department and British Ambassador, latter said he agreed order in council practically made foodstuffs absolute contraband which was contrary to British traditional policy as well as that of United States; that immediate cause of order has been the introduction through Rotterdam in first days of war of quantities of food supplies for German army in Belgium and that it seemed absolutely necessary to stop this traffic. The Counselor said some other means might be found to accomplish the desired purpose either by persuading the Netherlands to place an embargo upon foodstuffs and other conditional contraband or to agree not to reexport such articles. The Ambassador said he thought this would be much the better way and he believed it could be done. He added that the chief anxiety now was in regard to shipments of copper, petroleum, and also Swedish iron and that British Government was stopping vessels with such cargoes and purchasing them. He suggested that possible difficulty created by order in council could be removed by rescinding it, and by adding to the list of absolute contraband petroleum products, copper, barbed wire, and other articles of like nature almost exclusively for war purposes. The Counselor said that these suggestions seemed worthy of consideration as a means of avoiding the order in council which would certainly menace good relationship if it became a subject of discussion by the press; and that the order itself menacing commercial rights of neutrals in violation of international law would undoubtedly cause irritation, if not indignation, thus changing the present sentiment of American people.

The Ambassador appreciated the consideration shown by the President in taking up the matter informally and not lodging a formal protest against the order in council.

Bryan

2  Ante, p. 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/360

[Document 384]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram]

227. Your 758, September 29, 7 p.m.1 The Department’s instruction of September 26,2 in re the Declaration of London and order in council, which has been mailed to you, you will not present to Sir Edward Grey until you are specifically instructed to do so by telegraph. You should use the instruction, however, for your own information in the informal discussions in which you are engaged as it defines the position of this Government as to the acceptance of the Declaration of London as a code of naval warfare for this war and states the objections of this Government to the order in council and the reasons for this Government’s refusal to agree to any material modification of the declaration, of which reasons not the least is the view which the German and Austrian Governments would undoubtedly hold of an acceptance of modifications of the declaration which would be of special advantage to their enemies.

The press of this country is beginning to discuss the question and will undoubtedly do so more and more as complaints are being made of seizures of cargoes destined to Netherlands ports.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378].

2  Ante, p. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/361

[Document 385]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

228. Yours 763, September 30, 7 p.m.1 Gratified by disposition of British Government to remove possible causes of irritation by promulgation of new order in council to remove all orders which have been issued modifying the Declaration of London.

Please telegraph full text of proposed new order as soon as received and await instructions before definitely approving or suggesting changes.

Announcement by British Government that shipments to Netherlands of foodstuffs in neutral bottoms will not be interfered with and that any such shipments now detained will be released has been made public through the press and will undoubtedly allay apprehension as to possible interruption of commerce between neutrals under order in council.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/12930a

[Document 386]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, October 2, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The inquiry made of the belligerents early in August in regard to the adoption of the Declaration of London, was in the hope that a code of naval warfare might be adopted by all the nations at war so that causes of controversy would be reduced as far as possible and neutrals, as well as belligerents, would not be in doubt as to the rules which would be enforced during hostilities.

Germany and Austria agreed to the adoption of the declaration conditioned upon adoption by their enemies. The order in council of August 20 prevented the object sought by our inquiry. As a result the declaration is non-effective as a naval code.

I have examined the declaration and order in council in view of our recent conferences on the subject, and I wish to make the following suggestions which seem to me to be worthy of consideration.

Under Articles 23 and 25, if the London declaration is adopted, a belligerent has the right to add to the lists of absolute and conditional contraband given in Articles 22 and 24. This right appears to be arbitrary, except that notification must be given, and except that in the case of absolute contraband the added articles must be those “exclusively used for war.” This latter phrase may be open to more than one interpretation, but it is manifest that “exclusively” can not be literally interpreted; for example, a literal interpretation would exclude dynamite sticks used in mining from being declared to be absolute contraband as they do not seem to fall under the term “explosives specially prepared for use in war” (Article 22, section 3). Manifestly such an exclusion was not intended. My personal view is that in interpreting “exclusively used in war” there must be taken into consideration the methods of warfare, the locality to which articles are presumably destined, and the situation which exists at the time of declaration and notification of the articles added to the absolute contraband list. This seems to me the common-sense point of view of Article 23.

If my view is the correct one, then Article 1 of the order in council is not a modification of the declaration but merely an act performed under its provisions.

Now the point I am driving at is just this. Do not the powers conferred upon a belligerent by Articles 23 and 25 furnish sufficient means to protect the interests of your Government without; modifying the declaration at all? If I understand your main object it is that you are seeking to apply the doctrine of “continuous voyage” to certain articles now listed as conditional contraband, but which you consider munitions of war. If such articles can be treated as absolute contraband upon notice, what is the use of modifying the articles of the declaration?

As to the other provisions of the order in council, namely Articles 2, 4, and 6, are they of sufficient importance to interfere with the great advantage to all parties, both belligerents and neutrals, to be gained by a unanimous agreement to abide by the rules of the declaration during the continuance of hostilities?

If in place of the order in council of August 20 and those supplemental to it, the British Government would issue an order in council, and obtain from their allies similar decrees, accepting the Declaration of London without change, the German and Austrian Governments would be bound to do so. Then your Government could act under Articles 23 and 25, which do not require assent either by an enemy or a neutral.

I offer the foregoing suggestions in an entirely unofficial and personal way for your own consideration, and I will be glad to talk them over whenever you wish.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State of a conference with the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) at the British Embassy, October 2, 1914, 9 p.m. File No. 768.72112/12930a

[Document 387]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State of a conference with the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) at the British Embassy, October 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

October 2, 1914, 9 p.m.

The suggestions in my “personal and confidential” letter of the 3d [2d] were discussed.

The Ambassador said that he personally considered the suggestions an excellent solution of the difficulties raised by the order in council of August 20, and that he would present them to his Government by telegraph. He said that he did not think that the Foreign Office appreciated that Germany and Austria had agreed to abide by the Declaration of London if the Allies also agreed; that he fully understood the great advantage it would be to have a uniform code of naval warfare; and that he realized the especial importance of it to the United States in order that Americans engaged in commerce with belligerents would know exactly what they might rely upon as a measure of their rights and duties as neutrals.

In view of the importance of submitting these considerations to the Foreign Office before any steps were taken in London to modify the order in council of August 20, the Ambassador said that he would draft a telegram to Sir Edward Grey at once, and he asked me to remain until the telegram was drafted.

He then proceeded to draft a telegram along the lines of the suggestions in my letter to him. This we went over together and made certain changes, and the Ambassador added a statement of his own as to the satisfaction with which an unqualified acceptance of the declaration by Great Britain and her allies would be received in this country.

The Ambassador said that he would send me a copy of the telegram as sent the next morning.

Robert Lansing

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs ( Grey ) [Document 388]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs ( Grey )

British Embassy,
Washington, October 2, 1914
[Communicated to the Acting Secretary of State
by the British Ambassador, October 3.]

[Telegram—Copy]

Declaration of London. My telegram No. —. Following is result of conversation with Counsellor of State Department:

The enquiry made by the U. S. G. [United States Government] of the belligerents early in August in regard to adoption of Declaration of London was made in hope of reducing causes of controversy in present war. Germany and Austria agreed on condition that the others did also. Consequently it is very important that allies should agree.

If G. B. [Great Britain] after accepting declaration without change added under Articles 23 and 25 to the list of absolute and conditional contraband, she would gain what appears to be her chief object while only using powers conferred in the declaration. It is true Article 23 uses words, “exclusively used for war,” but this cannot be literally interpreted, e. g., case of dynamite sticks. In interpreting this expression there must be taken into consideration methods of warfare, destination and conditions existing at time of the additions.

Do not the powers under Articles 23 and 25 furnish sufficient means to protect British interests without modifying declaration at all? Articles 2, 4, and 6 of the O. in C. [order in council] seem hardly important enough to justify sacrifice of principle of unanimous agreement. For if G. B. [Great Britain] and her allies issue order accepting Declaration of London, Germany and Austria are bound to do the same.

I presume embargo of the export of certain articles could be arranged separately with certain countries under a threat of taking other measures, on the principle that, e. g., Holland cannot allow her territory to become the base for military operations.

I have little doubt that the acceptance by G. B. [Great Britain] of the declaration without modification for this war only for reasons stated in first para[graph] would be taken as satisfactory solution of the present difficulty and create widespread satisfaction.

[File copy not signed]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/143

[Document 389]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 3, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

776. Conference with Grey continued to-day. He has given instructions for a new order in council to be drawn as follows: The list of absolute contraband will include articles used for manufacture of things for military use such as copper, hides, nickel, petroleum and rubber. There will also be a list of conditional contraband. The order will accept the Netherlands Government embargo on foodstuffs and will, as I previously telegraphed you, not detain cargoes of foodstuffs consigned to the Netherlands Government or to bona fide merchants in the Netherlands. If the last Netherlands embargo cannot be made effective, the British Government will revise its list of conditional contraband. I infer from Grey’s conversation that his Government will not be captious with the Netherlands Government about the movement of foodstuffs. His main purpose is to prevent the Germans from receiving war materials. The text of the new order in council he expects to have ready on Monday when he will give it to me.

The laying of anchored mines by the British may make the safest route for ships from America to Holland the route around Scotland, but the Admiralty is reported to have said to-day that a safe course will be left open [through?] the British Channel.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/361b

[Document 390]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 4, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

246. Ambassador Spring Rice telegraphed to Sir Edward Grey October 2 in substance the result of a conversation between Ambassador and Counselor of State Department as follows: If Great Britain accepts declaration without change and then adds under Articles 21 and 25 to the list of absolute and conditional contraband she would gain what appears to be her chief object while only using powers conferred in the declaration. Words, “exclusively used for war,” in Article 23 cannot be literally interpreted, for example, case of dynamite sticks. In interpreting this expression consideration must be given to methods of warfare, the destination, and conditions existing at time of additions to contraband lists. Do not powers under Articles 23 and 25 furnish sufficient means to protect British interests without modifying declaration at all? Articles 3, 4 and 6 of order in council seem hardly important enough to justify sacrifice of principle of unanimous agreement, for if Great Britain and her allies accept declaration Germany and Austria are bound to do same under their assurance of reciprocity. Presumably embargo on export of certain articles could be arranged with certain countries under threat of taking other measures on the principle that such countries could not allow their territory to become base for military operations. Little doubt that acceptance by Great Britain of declaration without modification for this war would be solution of present difficulty and create widespread satisfaction. End of substance of conversation.

This Government would view with eminent satisfaction British acceptance of declaration without change in order that for the present war uniform set of rules of naval warfare could be put in force defining relations between neutrals and belligerents. It would also quiet public unrest, which is increasing, as to present British action. After such unconditional acceptance, modifications of lists of contraband under powers given by Articles 23 and 25 could be made, but as to the propriety of additions made by the British Government to lists of contraband, this Government must reserve opinion until duly notified of such additions.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/157

[Document 391]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 9, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received October 10, 10:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

806. Grey has just handed me the following, which is self-explanatory. It is draft, and will not be issued till it has been discussed and, he hopes, approved by you:

Draft Contraband Order in Council

Whereas, on the 4th day of August, 1914, His Majesty was pleased to issue a proclamation specifying the articles which it was His Majesty’s intention to treat as contraband during the present war; and

Whereas, on the 20th day of August, 1914, an order of His Majesty in Council was issued to the effect that during the present hostilities the convention known as the Declaration of London should, subject to certain additions and modifications therein specified, be adopted and put in force as if the same had been ratified by His Majesty; and

Whereas, on the. 21st day of September His Majesty was pleased to issue a proclamation specifying certain additional articles which were to be treated as contraband of war; and

Whereas, it is desirable to amend the provisions of the said proclamations and the said order in council.

Now, therefore, His Majesty, by and with the advice of his Privy Council, is pleased to order, and it is hereby ordered as follows:

SECTION 1 [ABSOLUTE CONTRABAND]

The following list is substituted for the list of absolute contraband contained in Schedule 1 to His Majesty’s proclamation of the 14th [4th] August, 1914: Article 1. Arms of all kinds, including arms for sporting purposes, and their distinctive component parts.

Article 2. Projectiles, charges and cartridges of all kinds, and their distinctive component parts.

Article 3. Powder and explosives specially prepared for use in war.

Article 4. Gun mountings, limber boxes, limbers, military waggons, field forges, and their distinctive component parts.

Article 5. Range finders and their distinctive component parts.

Article 6. Clothing and equipment of a distinctively military character.

Article 7. Saddle, draught and pack animals suitable for use in war.

Article 8. All kinds of harness of a distinctively military character.

Article 9. Articles of camp equipment and their distinctive component parts.

Article 10. Armour plates.

Article 11. Haematite iron ore and hæmatite pig iron.

Article 12. Nickel ore and nickel.

Article 13. Ferrochrome and chrome ore.

Article 14. Copper, unwrought.

Article 15. Lead, pig, sheet or pipe.

Article 16. Warships, including boats and their distinctive component parts of such a nature that they can be used only on a vessel of war.

Article 17. Aeroplanes, airships, balloons, and aircraft of all kinds, and their component parts, together with accessories and articles recognisable as intended for use in connection with balloons and aircraft.

Article 18. Motor vehicles of all kinds and their component parts.

Article 19. Motor tyres; rubber.

Article 20. Mineral oils and motor spirit, except lubricating oils.

Article 21. Implements and apparatus designed exclusively for the manufacture of munitions of war, for the manufacture or repair of arms, or war material for use on land and sea.

SECTION 2 [CONDITIONAL CONTRABAND]

The following list is substituted for the list of conditional contraband contained in Schedule 2 to His Majesty’s proclamation of the 4th August, 1914, and for the additions thereto contained in the schedule to His Majesty’s proclamation of the 30th (?) September, 1914: Article 1. Foodstuffs.

Article 2. Forage and grain suitable for feeding animals.

Article 3. Clothing, fabrics for clothing, and boots and shoes suitable for use in war.

Article 4. Gold and silver in coin or bullion, paper money.

Article 5. Vehicles of all kinds, other than motor vehicles, available for use in war, and their component parts.

Article 6. Vessels, craft, and boats of all kinds; floating docks, parts of docks and their component parts.

Article 7. Railway materials, both fixed and rolling stock, and materials for telegraphs, wireless telegraphs, and telephones.

Article 8. Fuel, other than mineral oils. lubricants.

Article 9. Powder and explosives not especially prepared for use in war.

Article 10. Glycerine.

Article 11. Barbed wire, and implements for fixing and cutting the same.

Article 12. Horseshoes and shoeing materials.

Article 13. Harness and saddlery.

Article 14. Hides of all kinds, dry or wet; pigskins, raw or dressed; leather, undressed or dressed, suitable for saddlery, harness, or military boots.

Article 15. Field glasses, telescopes, chronometers, and all kinds of nautical instruments.

SECTION 3

Article 1. The additions and modifications numbered 1 and 5 in the order in council dated the 20th August, 1914, relating to the application during the present hostilities of the convention known as the Declaration of London, are hereby repealed.

Article 2. The following provisions shall take effect in lieu thereof:

Sub Article A. The lists of absolute and conditional contraband contained in Articles [Sections] 1 and 2 of this order are substituted for the lists contained in Articles 22 and 24 of the said declaration.

Sub Article B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 35 of the said declaration, a vessel bound for a neutral port shall be liable to capture on the ground that cargo which she is carrying is conditional contraband, if no consignee in that country of the goods alleged to be conditional contraband is disclosed in the ship’s papers.

SECTION 4

One of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, if satisfied that the enemy government is drawing supplies or munitions of war for its armed forces from or through a neutral country, may, by notification in the London Gazette, direct that in respect of ships bound for a port in that country, Article 35 of the said declaration shall not apply, and from and after the date of such notification, and so long as the same is not withdrawn, a vessel which is carrying conditional contraband to a port in that country shall not be immune from capture.

And the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury, the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and each of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, the President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Divisions of the High Court of Justice, all other judges [of] His Majesty’s Prize Courts, and all governors, officers, and authorities whom it may concern, are to give the necessary directions herein as to them may respectively appertain.

The following explanatory matter accompanies the foregoing draft:

The order in council has been drafted in accordance with the communication made to the United States Ambassador on October 3. It provides an enlarged list of absolute contraband as there indicated.

The additions consist of: Munitions of war [sic 1 ] and motors, as suggested by the United States Government, certain ores and metals which are largely used in the manufacture of munitions of war and for which our own use must have practically entirely ceased during the present struggle; these are haematite iron, nickel, ferrochrome, copper and conduct [sic], motor tires and rubber.

With regard to conditional contraband, Article 35 of the Declaration of London is left standing and will, therefore, exclude the application of the doctrine of continuous voyage in respect of goods consigned to a neutral firm at a neutral port. The right to seize conditional contraband on a ship bound for a neutral port is maintained by Article 3, 2, B [Section 3, Article 2, Sub-article B], in respect of cases where no consignee in the neutral country is disclosed in the ship’s papers. A great proportion of the cargo shipped to Rotterdam is consigned merely “to order” and may be intended for transit to the enemy country. In such cases, and where the goods are carried with a through bill of lading to the enemy country, Article 35 would not apply.

Article 4 [Section 4] of the draft order is intended to cover the cases where no satisfactory arrangement can be come to with a neutral power to lay an embargo on the export of goods required in the enemy country for use in the war, and there is reason to believe that the country is being used by the enemy as a source of supplies for his armed forces.

American Ambassador

1 Should be “motor oil”: see footnote 1, ante, p. 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72112/180

[Document 392]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

My dear Mr. Counsellor: I notice in Sir E. Grey’s telegram respecting the Declaration of London, the text of which I communicated to you last night, a statement to the effect that the United States Government had made certain proposals as to unconditional contraband.

This statement of course as it stands is misleading and I have pointed out to Sir E. Grey at once by telegram that (as I had already explained by letter), no proposals were made by your Government as to articles to be placed on the lists of contraband.

As you recollect, in the course of an informal conversation which I had with you at the Embassy on the night of the 28th September we discussed the subject of the Declaration of London, and among other points as to the powers conferred under Article 23. As instances of articles “exclusively used for war” I named by way of illustration certain articles which, as recent experience had proved, came under this description, for instance motor oil, wire fencing and motors.

You stated at the time that you could not speak for the Government but that some such suggestion seemed worthy of consideration as it might offer a convenient means for getting rid of the order in council which was the main object in view during our informal discussion.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/157

[Document 393]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 13, 1914.

[Telegram]

302. Your 806 of October 9 contains statement that additions of petroleum and motors to contraband list “suggested by the United States Government.” Department advised by British Ambassador that he has telegraphed to Sir Edward Grey that proposals were not made by United States as to articles to be placed on lists of contraband, but were made by Spring Rice himself. This is the fact.

Department is considering draft order in council, and will state its views at earliest moment.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/164

[Document 394]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 15, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received October 16, 9:15 a.m.]

[Telegram ]

For the President:

Present controversy about shipping. I cannot help fearing we are getting into deep water needlessly. The British Government has yielded without question to all our requests and has shown a sincere desire to meet all our wishes short of admitting war materials into Germany. That it will not yield. We would not yield it if we were in their place. Neither would the Germans. The English will risk a serious quarrel or even war with us rather than yield. This you may regard as final.

Since the last lists of contraband and conditional contraband were made, such articles as rubber and copper and petroleum have come to play an entirely new part in war. They simply will not admit them. Nothing that can be used for war purposes in Germany now will be used for anything else. Representatives of Spain, Holland, and all the Scandinavian states have conferred with me. They agree they can do nothing but acquiesce and file protests and claims. They admit that England has the right to revise the list. This is not a war in the sense we have hitherto used the word. It is a world-clash of systems of government, a struggle to the extermination of English civilization or of Prussian military autocracy. Precedents have gone to the scrap heap. There is a new measure for military and diplomatic action. Suppose we press for a few shippers’ theoretical rights. The American people as a whole gain nothing and the result is friction with Great Britain which is precisely what a very small minority of agitators would like. Great Britain can any day close the Channel to all shipping or can drive Holland to the enemy and blockade her ports.

Look a little further ahead. If Germany wins, it will make no matter what position Great Britain took on the Declaration of London. We shall see the Monroe Doctrine shot through. We shall have to have a great army and a great navy. If England wins, and we have an ugly academic dispute with her because of this controversy, we shall be in a bad position for helping to compose the quarrel or for any other service.

The present controversy seems here, close to the struggle, academic and of the smallest practical consequence compared with the grave danger we incur of shutting ourselves off from a position to be of some service to civilization and to the peace of the world.

There is no practical need to consult other neutral governments. If we accept the proposed new order in council all the others will accept it and thank us after the event. Their representatives all come to me for advice and leadership here.

The question seems wholly different here from what it probably seems in Washington. There it is a more or less academic discussion. Here it is a matter of life and death for English-speaking civilization. It is not a happy time to raise controversies that can be avoided or postponed. Nothing can be gained and every chance for useful cooperation for peace can easily be thrown away and is now in jeopardy. In jeopardy also are our friendly relations with Great Britain in the sorest time of need in her history. I know that this is the correct, larger view. I recommend most earnestly the substantial acceptance of the new order in council or our acquiescence with a reservation of whatever rights we may have; and I recommend prompt information to the British Government of such action. I should like so to inform Grey.

So far as our neutrality obligations are concerned I do not believe that they require us to demand that Great Britain should adopt for our benefit the Declaration of London which has never been ratified by Great Britain or any other nation except the United States and the effect of which in its application to the situation presented by this war is altogether to the advantage of Germany.

I have delayed to send this perhaps too long for fear I might possibly seem influenced by sympathy with England and by the atmosphere here. But I write of course solely with reference to our own country’s interest and its position after the reorganization of Europe. Anderson and Laughlin agree with me emphatically.

Page

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 395]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 16, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

323. This telegram will be followed by another in reply to your telegram No. 806, October 9,1 stating the objections of this Government to the proposed order in council, which the Department’s unnumbered instruction of September 262 will make clear.

The desire of this Government is to obtain from the British Government the issuance of an order in council adopting the declaration without any amendment whatsoever and to obtain from France and Russia like decrees, which they will undoubtedly issue if Great Britain sets the example. Such an adoption by the allied Governments will put in force the acceptance of the Declaration of London by Germany and Austria which will thus become for all the belligerent powers the code of naval warfare during the present conflict. This is the aim of the United States.

It cannot be accomplished if the declaration is changed in any way as Germany and Austria would not give their consent to a change.

In the frequent informal and confidential conversations which have taken place here and in the admirable frankness with which Sir Edward Grey has stated the reasons for the action which Great Britain has deemed it necessary to take in regard to the declaration, this Government feels that it fully understands and appreciates the British position, and is not disposed to place obstacles in the way of the accomplishment of the purposes which the British representatives have so frankly stated.

The confidence thus reported in this Government makes it appreciate more than ever the staunch friendship of Great Britain for the United States, which it hopes always to deserve.

This Government would not feel warranted in offering any suggestion to the British Government as to a course which would meet the wishes of this Government and at the same time accomplish the ends which Great Britain seeks, but you might in the strictest confidence intimate to Sir Edward Grey the following plan, at the same time stating very explicitly that it is your personal suggestion and not one for which your Government is responsible.

Let the British Government issue an order in council accepting the Declaration of London without change or addition, and repealing all previous conflicting orders in council.

Let this order in council be followed by a proclamation adding articles to the lists of absolute and conditional contraband by virtue of the authority conferred by Articles 23 and 25 of the declaration.

Let the proclamation be followed by another order in council, of which the United States need not be previously advised, declaring that, when one of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State is convinced that a port or the territory of a neutral country is being used as a base for the transit of supplies for an enemy government a proclamation shall issue declaring that such port or territory has acquired enemy character in so far as trade in contraband is concerned and that vessels trading therewith shall be thereafter subject to the rules of the declaration governing trade to enemy’s territory.

It is true that the latter order in council would be based on a new principle. The excuse would be that the Declaration of London failing to provide for such an exceptional condition as exists, a belligerent has a right to give a reasonable interpretation to the rules of the declaration so that they will not leave him helpless to prevent an enemy from obtaining supplies for his military forces although the belligerent may possess the power and would have the right to do so if the port or territory was occupied by the enemy.

When the last-mentioned order in council is issued, I am convinced that a full explanation of its nature and necessity would meet with liberal consideration by this Government and not be the subject of serious objection.

I repeat that any suggestion, which you may make to Sir Edward Grey, must be done in an entirely personal way and with the distinct understanding that this Government is in no way responsible for what you may say.

Lansing

1  Ante, p. 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

2  Ante, p. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/157

[Document 396]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 16, 1914, 3 p.m.

[Telegram]

324. Your telegram No. 806 of October 9.1 You may say to Sir Edward Grey that it is the earnest desire of this Government to reach an agreement as to the Declaration of London which will be mutually satisfactory, and that it is a matter of sincere gratification that the British Government have shown equal anxiety to meet the wishes of this Government in revising the order in council which seemed objectionable to this Government.

Nevertheless the United States is bound to recognize the rights of neutrals and to avoid accepting rules which it considers will place undue restrictions upon their exercise, not only because by accepting them undesirable precedents may be created for the future but also because acceptance by this Government might be construed by the enemies of Great Britain to be contrary to that strict neutrality which it is the earnest wish of the President to preserve throughout the present war.

It is, therefore, in no unfriendly spirit but in the hope and confident expectation that some more acceptable way may be found to accomplish the ends sought by the British Government that this Government offers the following objections to the order in council which has been proposed as a substitute for the order in council of August 20.

1. The proposed order in council does not accept the Declaration of London without change, hence this Government is convinced that such modified acceptance would not be satisfactory to other belligerents, who have accepted the Declaration of London upon the condition that it is accepted by all the belligerent powers. As to the provisions of the proposed order in council this Government as a neutral and in the interest of neutral commerce is constrained to make the following objections.

2. The proposed order in council leaves unrepealed Articles 2, 3, 4 and 6 of the order in council of August 20. Of these, Articles 3 and 6 are especially objectionable to this Government for reasons which have already been stated.

3. The proposed order in council, while it purports to repeal Article 1 of the order in council of. August 20, in fact reenacts that article and extends the lists of contraband set forth by many additions. These additions could have been made under Articles 23 and 25 of the declaration if it had been adopted without change, hence it was needless to modify the declaration itself. This same objection was made to Article 1 of the order in council of August 20, and applies equally to its reenactment in an amended form.

4. The substitution of Subarticle B of Article 2 of Section 3 of the proposed order in council for Article 5 of the order in council of August 20 seems to be more restrictive of neutral rights than the repealed Article 5. Article 5 was intended to preserve the doctrine of “continuous voyage” in relation to conditional contraband. Although Subarticle B purports to do away with this doctrine, it in fact appears to go even further than Article 5 in applying it. If “continuous voyage” is eliminated, no ship carrying articles listed as conditional contraband is liable to capture when its cargo is to be discharged in a neutral port even if the ultimate destination of the cargo is the enemy government. By Article 5 of the order in council of August 20 a ship destined to a neutral port is liable to seizure if the consignee of conditional contraband on board is not only an enemy government or its agent but even a person under its control. By Subarticle B in the proposed order in council a ship and cargo are liable to capture if the goods carried are in the list of conditional contraband, even though they are to be discharged at a neutral port provided, “no consignee in that country of the goods alleged to be conditional contraband is disclosed in the ship’s papers.” In fact the terms of the subarticle permit capture or a ship bound for the port of one neutral country if the cargo is consigned to a person resident in another country not at war.

5. Section 4 of the proposed order in council introduces a new doctrine into naval warfare and imposes upon neutral commerce a restriction which appears to be without precedent. An analysis of the provisions of this section shows that, in the discretion of one of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, a neutral country may be clothed with enemy character and that the legitimate trade of another neutral with such country may be subjected to the rules which are applied to contraband trade with enemy territory. In brief, this section appears to declare that articles, listed as conditional contraband, shipped in a neutral vessel to a neutral country make the vessel and its cargo liable to seizure if certain members of the British Government are satisfied that supplies on munitions of war are entering enemy territory from the neutral country to which the vessel is bound, even though the consignee is within the neutral country. The effect of this provision would seem to be that a belligerent would gain all the rights over neutral commerce with enemy territory without declaring war against the neutral country which is claimed to be a base of supply for the military forces of an enemy. It seems inconsistent to declare a nation to be neutral and treat it as an enemy; and, if it does so, other neutral nations can hardly be expected to permit their commerce to be subject to rules which only apply to commerce with a belligerent.

You may also say to Sir Edward Grey that the President is convinced that if the same forbearance and cordiality continue which each Government has shown up to this time in the discussion of this question, a solution will speedily be reached which will be acceptable to both.

Lansing

1  Ante, p. 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

The President to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/164

[Document 397]

The President to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your October 15, 11 p.m.

Beg that you will not regard the position of this Government as merely academic. Contact with opinion on this side the water would materially alter your view. Lansing has pointed out to you in personal confidential despatch of this date how completely all the British Government seeks can accomplished without the least friction with this Government and without touching opinion on this side the water on an exceedingly tender spot. I must urge you to realize this aspect of the master and to use your utmost persuasive efforts to effect an understanding, which we earnestly desire, by the method we have gone out of our way to suggest, which will put the whole case in unimpeachable form.

This is private and for your guidance.

Woodrow Wilson

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/189

[Document 398]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 19, 1914.
[Received October 20, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

864. Your 323, October 16. I followed your instructions literally. Sir Edward Grey will not accept Declaration of London without amendment:

First, for the same reason that he will not accept report of the drafting committee on declaration, namely, that Parliament declined to ratify it; and

Secondly, because the declaration itself forbids the addition to the contraband list of articles such as rubber and iron ore, that are now necessary for the manufacture of war materials.

He could not accept the second proposed item in your telegram because to accept the declaration entire and then to issue a proclamation contradicting a part of it would of course be impossible.

This finally ends all hope of his acceptance of the declaration entire. He is courteous, appreciative, and willing to go any length he can to meet us, but he will not accept the declaration for the reasons given.

I presented your objections to the new order in council.

Up to this point the situation stood thus: He had declined to accept your proposal of the Declaration of London entire, and you had declined his request for your approval of the new order in council. We stood, then, just where we stood before the controversy began, with all that had been proposed wiped off the slate.

Grey made a new start in the best spirit and temper. He said his aim was to meet our wishes, and to disturb and derange neutral commerce the least possible in the necessary conduct of the war. He reminded me that he has confiscated no American cargo.

He made a new start by proposing the following:

He will accept the Declaration of London with two amendments: (1). The addition to the contraband and conditional contraband lists of the articles, proposed in the draft of a new order in council previously telegraphed to you1 to which you made no objection. These articles cannot be added if he accept the declaration in its entirety.

(2). He reserves the right to stop cargoes of contraband or conditional contraband consigned in blank to a neutral country which are evidently destined for the enemy country. He expects to perfect arrangements with Scandinavian states and Holland to guarantee non-exportation of supplies of military material to enemy country.

He proposes to issue a proclamation to the foregoing effect, repealing all preceding proclamations. He does not ask our acceptance of this proclamation, but he hopes we will not protest against it, and that we will be content to declare that we reserve all rights under international law and usage if in its execution any harm be done to our commerce, and that we will take up cases of damage, if any occur, as they arise. He reminded me that this would be the procedure under any arrangement that could be made, and he expressed the conviction that no cases of actual damage would occur after the proclamation had gone into effect.

Sir Edward has telegraphed this plan to Spring Rice.

Sir Edward hopes also that our explanation that we reserve all our rights in international law and usage will allay and prevent criticism of our Government at home.

If we withhold our assent to the proclamation, we will throw responsibility on the British Government.

American Ambassador

1 Telegram No. 806 of October 9, ante, p. 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/12930b

[Document 399]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office,
London , October 17, 1914 .
[Handed to the Acting Secretary of State
by the British Ambassador, October 20.]

[Telegram—Copy ]

A simple acceptance of the Declaration of London would in effect bind us to carry out every detail of an instrument which we have never ratified and to which objection has been taken in Parliament.

Experience of war has shown that free list of Declaration of London contains some articles that are now used in Germany exclusively or mainly for purposes of war.

We also want to reserve right to apply doctrine of continuous voyage where we can get no satisfactory agreement with a neutral country that will prevent it becoming base of supplies for enemy government or army.

We cannot accept all definitions in Monsieur Renault’s report. I believe this has not been accepted in United States.

I see difficulty of United States Government binding itself beforehand to accept text of our order in council; on the other hand we do not wish to issue an order that will lead to a protest from United States Government.

Order does in effect accept Declaration of London departing substantially only from specific lists of contraband and non-contraband and reserving right under certain conditions to apply doctrine of continuous voyage, which I believe up to and even during discussion on Declaration of London every authority in United States upheld.

I think simplest course would be for us to issue new proclamation and for United States Government not to enter any protest on understanding that it will not in practice be used to prevent bona fide trade with neutral countries. United States Government would not then be bound by a partisan acceptance of our proclamation, and would reserve right to deal with application of it on merits of particular cases; but we should not be confronted with an objection in principle that could only be met by withdrawal of proclamation.

I am informed that paragraph 3 of proposed proclamation could not be made a matter of interpretation by courts as suggested by State Department.

[File copy not signed]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) [Document 400]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office,
London, October 19, 1914.
[Handed to the Acting Secretary of State
by the British Ambassador, October 20.]

[Telegram—Copy]

Result of discussion with United States Ambassador and Mr. Anderson is that to proceed on lines of my telegram No. 116 treaty seems the most practicable course.

Our new list of contraband conflicts with Article 28 of the Declaration of London and therefore prevents an unqualified acceptance of the declaration.

We proposed, however, to draw up a more general proclamation repealing all royal proclamations, accepting the Declaration of London in general terms but making the exceptions contained in draft proclamation already submitted.

We should be willing to make it clear to the United States Government that our object was solely to prevent contraband goods from reaching an enemy and not to interfere with bona fide commerce with any neutral state.

We should not ask United States Government to accept proclamation but should like it to be understood that while reserving all rights under international law as regards treatment of any particular cargo, they would not enter any protest against the proclamation itself or the list of contraband as being invalid.

You should explain this and my telegram No. 116 to State Department. United States Ambassador is also telegraphing.

[File copy not signed]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/193

[Document 401]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 20, 1914, 11 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your 323.1 To be deciphered Lansing only and shown to the President. I hope we can find Sir Edward Grey’s proposal acceptable as an emergency working plan. Our Government in dealing with our shippers can throw the whole responsibility Great Britain. I believe that the practical working of the plan will develop few grievances and interruptions.

There are certain large facts to remember. Every other belligerent government than Great Britain is now wholly military. Their foreign secretaries have ceased to act independently. Many departments of this Government also have been taken under the control of the War Department and the Foreign Office would no doubt have before now been so controlled but for the strong personality of Sir Edward Grey. If the War Department should control the Foreign Office, as it may in case of military or naval disaster, negotiations such as these would be practically suspended and it would probably be impossible to make any satisfactory diplomatic arrangement. It is no time for arguing a case for general conduct but only for the best action possible in a great emergency. We have practically no direct commerce with Germany; and we have commerce with neutral countries on the North Sea only because Great Britain has been unwilling to have that sea mined and because Sir Edward Grey has held his department as no other belligerent foreign secretary has. If we have a quarrel now, the new peace treaty will require its submission to a commission and we can recover only the same damages which we may recover under Grey’s proposal without a quarrel. Our own Government upheld the doctrine of continuous voyage during the Civil War which Grey now, in a similar necessity, wishes us to let pass without formal protest.

Anderson was with me at yesterday’s conference and concurs in this telegram and at my request is sending one of his own.

If you cannot accept Grey’s proposal, please ask President to send House here for a conference before further action is taken. Grey will go the furthest length under these unprecedented conditions to respect our rights and wishes but he will not consent to admit war materials to Germany. It seems to me that it would be the greatest misfortune in the world to permit a serious difference now between these two Governments. Under Grey’s plan we can throw full responsibility on British Government and we will suffer the least possible delay or damage or indignity. But if we assume that we are working under normal conditions and proceed with elaborate arguments on that assumption, we shall have a break, gain no substantial advantage, and alienate the two Governments and peoples for a generation. The hope of every patriotic man on either side of the ocean will be disappointed and such good will as is now left in the world will be gone.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

The Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/200

[Document 402]

The Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 21, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received 11:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 300, October 13,1 and 324, October 16.2 In our discussion with Grey about the adoption of the Declaration of London hessigned as reasons why it could not be adopted without modification, that (1) Parliament had rejected it as unsatisfactory; (2) Article 28 Assured [sic] rubber, metallic ores, and hides from treatment as contraband, whereas in present circumstances these materials were being imported to Germany solely for military purposes; (3) Holland is being used as a base for military supplies for Germany under the Rhine treaty of 1869, which in effect makes Rotterdam practically a German port for certain purposes, thus presenting a situation not anticipated or covered by the provision of the declaration.

My impression is that Grey thinks that inasmuch as the declaration admittedly is a compromise arrangement which has never been ratified by any of the parties and in its present application is highly advantageous to Germany, we are rather inconsiderate ininsisting that Great Britain should be bound by it. It seems likely that he will insist that in these circumstances the principles of international law governing neutral trade must be ascertained independently of the declaration, and that in view of the existing differences between nations in regard to these rules, Great Britain is within its rights in adopting now the rules which it proposes to adhere to, independently of the declaration, on the understanding that if we disagree about these rules in their application to individual cases our right to contest their legality is fully reserved to us and any question of resulting damages may be settled by arbitration if that should ultimately be necessary.

He expressed the hope that differences as to international law questions should not be made the basis of protest by the United States, but that we should be content with a distinct understanding that whatever rights we may have are fully reserved.

Is it not probable that most of the shippers in the United States of supplies available for war purposes have been paid in advance on account of the risk of seizure, and consequently that the seized cargoes really belong either to the German Government if the payments have been made on its account, or to foreign dealers whose interest the United States is not required to protect?

Chandler Anderson
American Ambassador

1  Post, p. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

2  Ante, p. 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/189

[Document 403]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 22, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram]

373. Your No. 864, October 19, Declaration of London.

Inasmuch as the British Government consider that the conditions of the present European conflict make it impossible for them to accept without modification the Declaration of London, you are requested to inform His Majesty’s Government that in the circumstances the Government of the United States feels obliged to withdraw its suggestion that the Declaration of London be adopted as a temporary code of naval warfare to be observed by belligerents and neutrals during the present war; that, therefore, this Government will insist that the rights and duties of the United States and its citizens in the present war be defined by the existing rules of international law and the treaties of the United States irrespective of the provisions of the Declaration of London; and that this Government reserves to itself the right to enter a protest or demand in each case in which those rights and duties so defined are violated or their free exercise interfered with by the authorities of His Britannic Majesty’s Government.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/213

[Document 404]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 23, 1914
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

893. Your 373, October 22, 4 p.m. conveyed to Sir Edward Grey. He understands that you will not make formal protest against new order in council and list of contraband and conditional contraband but reserve all rights under international law and usage and treaties and right to enter protest in any case where the Government of the United States thinks any rights and duties are violated or their free exercise interfered with. On this understanding he expressed great satisfaction and assured me that His Majesty’s Government will endeavor to cause the United States and citizens of the United States the very least trouble that the exigencies of a great war will permit, and that he will meet us in a friendly spirit in all cases that come up for consideration or controversy.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/212

[Document 405]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 23, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

894. Continuous Cabinet meetings and meetings of Cabinet committees and overwhelming military problems absorb this Government beyond any precedent. Foreign Office is prompt but finds it hard to get prompt information from some other departments about several subjects that I have presented. In spite of this enormous pressure and overwork I think I shall have greater promptness hereafter.

The withdrawal of the Declaration of London has most admirable effect all around.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72112/226a

[Document 406]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)1

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

489. Department’s August 6, 1 p.m.,2 [and your October 22],3 Declaration of London. Please inform the Government to which you are accredited that Department’s suggestion to belligerents as to adoption, for the sake of uniformity, of the declaration as a temporary code of naval warfare during the present war, has been withdrawn because of the unwillingness of some of the belligerents to accept the declaration without modification, and that therefore this Government will insist that the rights and duties of the United States and its citizens in the present war be defined by the existing rules of international law and the treaties of the United States, irrespective of the provisions of the declaration, and that this Government reserves to itself the right to enter a protest or demand in each case in which those rights and duties so defined are violated, or their free exercise interfered with by the authorities of the belligerent governments.

Lansing

1 The same to the Ambassadors in Austria–Hungary, France, and Russia and the Minister in Belgium; and on October 29 to the Ambassadors in Argentina and Brazil (File No. 763.72112/370b).

2  Ante, p. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357].

3 The Ambassador’s telegram of October 22 (File No. 763.72112/214) not printed; it conveyed a summary of the German memorial printed in full as enclosure to his despatch No. 234 of October 21, post, p. 263 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/215

[Document 407]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 24, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received October 25, 12:06 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Sir Edward Grey informed me to-day that the new order in council substantially as I telegraphed it to you will be issued as soon as a conference about it with the French Government is concluded. He will add to contraband list aluminum, ferrosilica, barbed wire, and implements for fixing and cutting the same.

His understanding is that our Government neither accepts nor formally protests against the order in council, but reserves all rights to make protests and demands, case by case, under international law and usages and treaties.

I strongly urged upon Sir Edward Grey to permit publication in the United States of the lists of contraband and conditional contraband at earliest possible moment, so as to end uncertainty of shippers. He consents as soon as conference with French Government is concluded. I urged him also to have the Admiralty’s reasons for every detention of a ship made known to me in full and immediately, so that no time may be lost in each Government’s getting at the facts.

I suggested also that while any detention is a cause of irritation, the detention of a ship or cargo on this side of the Atlantic may in many cases be less irritating than detention just outside of New York. He promised me to convey this to the Admiralty. I suggested further that a proper and prompt publicity, inspired by each Government, of the facts in every case as soon as they could be ascertained would prevent erroneous versions from becoming fixed in the public mind.

In general I reminded Sir Edward of the delicacy and danger of all detention, and I expressed the hope that it was not too much to ask that he would remind the Admiralty of the need of the utmost caution.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 408]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 28, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

418. Your Nos. 893 and 894 of October 23, and your October 24, 7 p.m. Declaration of London. This Government cannot foretell effect of proposed order in council or new list of contraband upon public opinion in this country as to the rights of neutral trade, and therefore does not wish to be understood as waiving the right to protest against inclusion of any particular article in the list of contraband if the Government thinks that its neutral trade is being injured thereby.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/385

[Document 409]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, November 3, 1914.
[Received November 16.]

No. 549]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a proclamation containing a revised list of articles which the British Government have decided to declare absolute or conditional contraband, respectively, during the present war, as well as a copy of an order in council defining the attitude of His Majesty’s Government toward the Declaration of London during the present hostilities and the rules which have been decided to be adopted in modification of the declaration.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure 1]

Proclamation revising the list of contraband o f war 1

George R. I.

Whereas, on the 4th day of August, 1914, we did issue our Royal Proclamation specifying the articles which it was our intention to treat as contraband of war during the war between us and the German Emperor; and

Whereas, on the 12th day of August, 1914, we did by our Royal Proclamation of that date extend our Proclamation aforementioned to the war between us and the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary; and

Whereas on the 21st day of September, 1914, we did by our Royal Proclamation of that date make certain additions to the list of articles to be treated as contraband of war; and

Whereas it is expedient to consolidate the said lists and to make certain additions thereto:

Now, therefore, we do hereby declare, by and with the advice of our Privy Council, that the lists of contraband contained in the schedules to our Royal Proclamations of the 4th day of August and the 21st day of September aforementioned are hereby withdrawn, and that in lieu thereof during the continuance of the war or until we do give further public notice the articles enumerated in Schedule 1 hereto will be treated as absolute contraband, and the articles enumerated in Schedule 2 hereto will be treated [as] conditional contraband.

SCHEDULE 1

1. Arms of all kinds, including arms for sporting purposes, and their distinctive component parts.

2. Projectiles, charges, and cartridges of all kinds and their distinctive component parts.

3. Powder and explosives specially prepared for use in war.

4. Sulphuric acid.

5. Gun mountings, limber boxes, limbers, military waggons, field forges and their distinctive component parts.

6. Range finders and their distinctive component parts.

7. Clothing and equipment of a distinctively military character.

8. Saddle, draught, and pack animals suitable for use in war.

9. All kinds of harness of a distinctively military character.

10. Articles of camp equipment and their distinctive component parts.

11. Armour plates.

12. Haematite iron ore and hæmatite pig iron.

13. Iron pyrites.

14. Nickel ore and nickel.

15. Ferrochrome and chrome ore.

16. Copper, unwrought.

17. Lead, pig, sheet, or pipe.

18. Aluminium.

19. Ferrosilica.

20. Barbed wire, and implements for fixing and cutting the same.

21. Warships, including boats and their distinctive component parts of such a nature that they can only be used on a vessel of war.

22. Aeroplanes, airships, balloons, and aircraft of all kinds, and their component parts, together with accessories and articles recognisable as intended for use in connection with balloons and aircraft.

23. Motor vehicles of all kinds and their component parts.

24. Motor tyres; rubber.

25. Mineral oils and motor spirit, except lubricating oils.

26. Implements and apparatus designed exclusively for the manufacture of munitions of war, for the manufacture or repair of arms, or war material for use on land and sea.

SCHEDULE 2

1. Foodstuffs.

2. Forage and feeding stuffs for animals.

3. Clothing, fabrics for clothing, and boots and shoes suitable for use in war

4. Gold and silver in coin or bullion; paper money.

5. Vehicles of all kinds, other than motor vehicles, available for use in war, and their component parts.

6. Vessels, craft, and boats of all kinds; floating docks, parts of docks, and their component parts.

7. Railway materials, both fixed and rolling stock, and materials for telegraphs, wireless telegraphs, and telephones.

8. Fuel, other than mineral oils. Lubricants.

9. Powder and explosives not specially prepared for use in war.

10. Sulphur.

11. Glycerine.

12. Horseshoes and shoeing materials.

13. Harness and saddlery.

14. Hides of all kinds, dry or wet; pigskins, raw or dressed; leather, undressed or dressed, suitable for saddlery, harness, or military boots.

15. Field glasses, telescopes, chronometers, and all kinds of nautical instruments.

Given at our Court at Buckingham Palace, this 29th day of October, in the year of our Lord 1914, etc., etc.

[Enclosure 2]

Order in Council 1

At the Court at Buckingham Palace, the 29th day of October, 1914. Present, The King’s Most Excellent Majesty in Council.

Whereas by an order in council dated the 20th day of August, 1914, His Majesty was pleased to declare that during the present hostilities the convention known as the Declaration of London should, subject to certain additions and modifications therein specified, be adopted and put in force by His Majesty’s Government; and

Whereas the said additions and modifications were rendered necessary by the special conditions of the present war; and

Whereas it is desirable and possible now to reenact the said order in council with amendments in order to minimize, so far as possible, the interference with innocent neutral trade occasioned by the war:

Now, therefore, His Majesty, by and with the advice of his Privy Council, is pleased to order, and it is hereby ordered, as follows: 1. During the present hostilities the provisions of the convention known as the Declaration of London shall, subject to the exclusion of the lists of contraband and non-contraband, and to the modifications hereinafter set out, be adopted and put in force by His Majesty’s Government.

The modifications are as follows: (i). A neutral vessel, with papers indicating a neutral destination, which, notwithstanding the destination shown on the papers, proceeds to an enemy port, shall be liable to capture and condemnation if she is encountered before the end of her next voyage.

(ii). The destination referred to in Article 33 of the said declaration shall (in addition to the presumptions laid down in Article 34) be presumed to exist if the goods are consigned to or for an agent of the enemy state.

(iii). Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 35 of the said declaration, conditional contraband shall be liable to capture on board a vessel bound for a neutral port if the goods are consigned “to order,” or if the ship’s papers do not show who is the consignee of the goods, or if they show a consignee of the goods in territory belonging to or occupied by the enemy.

(iv). In the eases covered by the preceding paragraph (iii) it shall lie upon the owners of the goods to prove that their destination was innocent.

2. Where it is shown to the satisfaction of one of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State that the enemy Government is drawing supplies for its armed forces from or through a neutral country, he may direct that in respect of ships bound for a port in that country, Article 35 of the said Declaration shall not apply. Such direction shall be notified in the London Gazette and shall operate until the same is withdrawn. So long as such direction is in force, a vessel which is carrying conditional contraband to a port in that country shall not be immune from capture.

3. The order in council of the 20th August, 1914, directing the adoption and enforcement during the present hostilities of the convention known as the Declaration of London, subject to the additions and modifications therein specified, is hereby repealed.

4. This order may be cited as “the Declaration of London Order in Council, No. 2, 1914.”

And the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury, the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and each of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, the President of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division of the High Court of Justice, all other judges of His Majesty’s Prize Courts, and all governors, officers, and authorities whom it may concern, are to give the necessary directions herein as to them may respectively appertain.

Almeric Fitzroy

1 The list of contraband articles contained in this proclamation reached the Department on October 30, at 9.30 p.m., in a telegram from the consul General in London (File No. 763.72112/270). The full text of the proclamation was telegraphed by the Ambassador on November 6 (received 11:45 p.m., File No. 763.72112/315); and that of the order in council on November 5 (received 11:40 p.m., File No. 763.72112/303). A decree in substantially identical terms was published by the French Government on November 6 (File No. 763.72112/339)

1 No. 1613

1 No. 1614.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/342

[Document 410]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 21, 1914.
[Received November 9.]

No. 234]

Sir: With reference to the Department’s telegram No. 87, dated September 8, 1914,1 I have the honor to transmit herewith a translation of a memorial prepared by the Imperial German Foreign Office on the subject of the attitude of the British and French Governments respecting the Declaration of London. At the request of the Foreign Office I have telegraphed you a résumé of the memorial.2

With regard to Point V of the memorial I beg to point out that from a statement made in the London Morning Post of October 12, 1914, the British Admiralty have now issued orders that enemy reservists are not to be captured if traveling in neutral ships.

I have [etc.]

James W. Gerard

[Enclosure—Translation]

Memorial of the German Foreign Office relative to the position of England and France touching the London maritime declaration

In accordance with an order in council of August 20, 1914, the British Government will observe the Declaration of London of February 26, 1909, during the present hostilities, subject to certain additions and modifications. These additions and modifications, however, are of such a nature as to vitiate the Declaration of London in material points, and thereby likewise violate modern international law. Further very considerable modifications of the Declaration of London are contained in a British proclamation dated September 21, 1914.

I

The most incisive modification of the Declaration of London is to be found in the provisions concerning conditional contraband contained under Nos. 3 and 5 of the order in council.

The Declaration of London provides in Article 33 that the definition of conditional contraband should not apply, except when the goods shipped are destined for the use of the administration or the armed forces of the enemy country. Furthermore pursuant to Article 35, the definition of conditional contraband is excluded when the ship is on a voyage to a neutral port.

These provisions which are in the main declarative of existing international law, and rest upon an equitable consideration of the interests of belligerents and neutrals, are as good as vitiated by the order in council. For, according to No. 3 of the order, the destination of goods to the enemy shall be presumed in all cases where the recipient of the goods is under the control of the authorities of the enemy state; this means nothing else than that any shipment consigned to the enemy country is subject to capture, since all residents of the enemy country are under the control of the authorities of the country. This provision is supplemented by No. 5 of the order, which provides that a ship bound for a neutral port can also be captured because of conditional contraband. Thus the doctrine of continuous voyage which is only applicable to absolute contraband under Article 35 of the Declaration of London, is extended to apply to conditional contraband.

In this manner the milder rules of the Declaration of London, relative to conditional contraband, are eliminated, and conditional contraband is placed in effect upon the same footing as absolute contraband. Through this procedure neutral trade with objects which constitute conditional contraband, especially food for the provision of the population of a belligerent state, which is recognized as legitimate by existing international law, is made practically illusory, and thus the interests of the belligerent as well as the neutral are injured, contrary to international law. As is shown by the events at the seat of maritime war, England’s practice in this direction is most regardless in that it even assumes control of supplies required for Germany’s neighbors, and thereby renders insecure the provision of these countries.

II

The British Government believes that it can disregard without further formality the lists of absolute contraband, conditional contraband, and articles not to be declared contraband contained in Articles 22, 24 and 28 of the Declaration of London. In the declaration of contraband dated August 5 [4], 1914, and upheld by No. 1 of the order in council, aircraft and their distinctive component parts are described as absolute contraband, whereas they can only be considered relative contraband under Article 24, No. 8, of the Declaration of London. Above all the British Government has by a proclamation dated September 21, 1914, declared rubber, hides and skins and various kinds of iron ore to be conditional contraband, although these articles are not, or only very remotely, adapted to warlike purposes and are therefore on the free list of Article 28 (see Nos. 3, 4, 6). This is at the same time a direct violation of generally accepted rules of international law which provide that neutral trade in articles serving exclusively peaceable purposes cannot be interfered with by belligerents.

III

A further accentuation of the provisions relative to contraband results from No. 2 of the order in council. For Article 38 of the Declaration of London in concurrence with existing international law does not permit the capture of a ship because of contraband unless the contraband is on board the ship; it is however the intention of the British Government to seize the ship at any time during its whole voyage if it succeeded in carrying contraband with false papers. This being the case, neutral shipping with territory of the enemy is subject to continual molestation, since ships will be detained not only on the ground of a patent fact, such as the presence of contraband, but also on the ground of an assertion as to the earlier conduct of the ship often not demonstrable.

IV

The provisions of No. 4 of the order in council leave undue latitude to capture for breach of blockade, since the existence of a blockade is to be presumed to be known to all ships which sailed from or touched at an enemy port a sufficient time after notification of the blockade to the local authorities of the port blockaded. By this provision the British Government intends to draw the authorities of the enemy country into the service of its own naval forces to an extent reaching beyond the limits drawn by international law, and to force such service by the capture of neutral ships.

V

Pursuant to a principle of international law which found confirmation in the Declaration of London only such persons found on board a neutral merchant ship can be made prisoners of war as are already embodied in the armed forces of the enemy. This rule results from Article 45, paragraph 1, No. 2, taken in connection with Article 47, and is more precisely defined in the general report of the drafting committee of the Conference of London in the first paragraph of the notes to Article 45; as the general report remarks, the whole conference agreed for juridical as well as practical reasons that only active military persons are liable to capture on a neutral ship, but not persons such as reservists, for example, who are proceeding to their native country in order to fulfill their general military duty. Although the British order in council recognizes the two articles specified as well as the commentary contained in the general report as binding on the Government, the British naval forces have nevertheless taken from merchant vessels under the Dutch, the Norwegian, and the Italian flags Germans liable to military service who were not embodied in the armed forces and made them prisoners of war. In this manner they have not merely directly violated the principles of international law affirmed by the Declaration of London but also the provisions of their own public law.

According to a decree of the President of the French Republic published in the Journal officiel of August 26, 1914, France has taken the same position as Great Britain in its order in council. French naval forces have then in the same manner as the British taken Germans liable to military duty from neutral ships, particularly Dutch and Spanish ships.

Thus these ordinances, and more particularly the naval forces of Great Britain and France, disregard in the most arbitrary manner the rules laid down in the London maritime war declaration. Their object is quite plainly to strike not only the military establishment but also the economic system of their enemies by crippling neutral trade, and in so doing they encroach without warrant upon the legitimate trade of neutrals with the enemy as well as upon the trade of neutrals with each other. It is true that the Declaration of London has not yet been ratified; but as the plenipotentiaries of the signatory powers, including the British and French plenipotentiaries, expressly declared in the preliminary provision, the rules of the Declaration of London are substantially responsive to the generally accepted principles of international law. The violations of the Declaration of London which Great Britain and France have thought fit to commit must therefore be considered in the light of violations of international law, which are all the more grievous in view of the fact that in the wars where Great Britain was a neutral—the Russian-Japanese War, for instance—she protested most emphatically against such violations of law.1

The Imperial German Government has hitherto strictly observed the provisions of the Declaration of London and has faithfully reproduced its substance in the German prize ordinance,2 a copy of which is attached; it has not permitted itself to relax from this attitude even in the face of the flagrant violations of law on the part of its adversaries. The Imperial Government is forced however to question whether it can persist in this attitude if the enemy powers continue the practice hitherto adopted by them; and the neutral powers acquiesce in such violations of neutrality to the disfavor of German interests. The German Government accordingly esteems it of great value to learn what position the Government of the United States of America proposes to take respecting the attitude assumed by Great Britain and France contrary to international law.

Berlin , October 10, 1914.

1  Ante, p. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

2 See footnote 3, Ante, p. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407].

1 See English Blue Book, Russia No. 1, 1905,” Correspondence respecting contraband of war,” pp. 8 et seq.

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/475

[Document 411]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 23, 1914.
[Received December 14.]

No. 280]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit to you herewith translations of two notes received from the Imperial Foreign Office conveying notification of additions to the original lists of articles regarded as contraband by the German Government, which, as reported in my telegram of August 10, 1 p.m., [a.m.] 1 corresponded in all respects with Articles 22 and 24 of the Declaration of London.

I have [etc.]

James W. Gerard

[Enclosure 1—Translation2 ]

Foreign Office, No. IIIa.17064/81116

NOTE VERBALE

In supplement to its note verbale of August 6, 1914, IIIa.9222, the Foreign Office has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America that during the present hostilities the following materials will be considered as conditional contraband by Germany in addition to the articles and materials designated under No. 11, 1-14:

15. Copper (unworked), and

16. Lead in blocks, plates or tubes.

The Foreign Office begs that the Embassy of the United States of America will kindly inform its Government of the above as soon as possible.

Berlin , October 22, 1914.

[Enclosure 2—Translation3 .]

Foreign Office, No. 111a.19785/02997

NOTE VERBALE

In supplement to its notes verbales of August 6, 1914, and October 22, 1914, IIIa.9222 and 17064, the Foreign Office has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America that during the present hostilities the following will be considered by Germany as conditional contraband in addition to the articles and materials designated under 11, 1-16:

17. Woods of all kinds, rough or worked (in particular hewn, sawed, planed, grooved), charcoal cylinder tar.

18. Sulphur, crude or refined, sulphuric acid.

The Foreign Office begs that the Embassy will kindly notify its Government of the above as soon as possible.

Berlin , November 23, 1914.

1  Ante, p. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357]

2 The Department was first informed by the German Embassy on October 23 that “copper and lead” had been declared contraband (File No. 763.72112/210).

3 These two additions were telegraphed by the Ambassador on November 23 (received November 24, File No. 763.72112/410)

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/478

[Document 412]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, November 20, 1914.
[Received December 15.]

No. 239]

Sir: Upon the request of the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Office, November 17, 1914, I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a memorandum, with translation, concerning the attitude assumed by Great Britain and France in regard to the Declaration of London relative to the laws of maritime warfare.

I have [etc.]

Frederic C. Penfield

[Enclosure—Translation]

Memorandum of the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Office concerning the attitude assumed by Great Britain and France in regard to the Declaration of London relative to the laws of maritime warfare

By an order in council of August 20, 1914, the British Government declared itself willing to observe, during the present war, the provisions of the Declaration of London of February 26, 1909, relative to the laws of naval warfare, at the same time introducing certain additions and modifications, and expressed the intention of giving to these provisions an interpretation in conformity with the spirit prevailing in the general report which was submitted to the naval conference and unanimously approved by it.

According to the terms of a decree of the President of the French Republic published in the Journal officiel of August 26, 1914, France agreed with the point of view adopted by Great Britain in regard to the observation of the Declaration of London. In the course of the war Great Britain, and France as well, have made still other modifications in the provisions of the said declaration.

As has already been stated in detail in the memorandum of the Imperial German Government under date of October 10, 1914, which memorandum has been communicated to the interested neutral Governments and which deals with the attitude assumed by England and France toward the Declaration of London, the additions and modifications effected by these two powers in the said declaration are of such a nature as to annul its provisions in essential respects, and thereby to infringe, at the same time, upon the international law actually in force; the representatives of the most important maritime powers convened at the naval conference having, by common accord, expressly stated that the rules contained in the Declaration of London correspond in substance to the generally recognized principles of international law.

Agreeing entirely with the views expressed in the German memorandum, the Imperial and Royal Government has on its part to state that, contrary to the provisions of the Declaration of London and to the explanations contained in the said general report, and even in contradiction to the regulations of their respective Governments, the British and French naval forces have made prisoners of Austro-Hungarian reservists found on board of neutral merchant ships.

In view of the attitude of the British and French Governments, as it has been described in the foregoing, the Imperial and Royal Government feels itself called upon to confine itself for the time being to bringing to the attention of the interested neutral powers the fact that the assurances given by this Government, at the beginning of the war, declaring that Austria-Hungary will conform to the provisions of the Declaration of London, were expressly qualified by the condition of reciprocity.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/483

[Document 413]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 15, 1914
[Received December 16, 5:05 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1099. By proclamation dated 14th instant German Government has added aluminum and nickel to list of conditional contraband as numbers 19 and 20, respectively.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/499

[Document 414]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, undated
[Received December 22, 1914, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Ottoman Government contraband declaration included, in addition to things mentioned in Articles 22 and 24, Declaration of London, following as absolute contraband:

Pontoons, bridge materials, all machine projectiles, lamps, all electric apparatus, military kitchens, tents and accessories, cranes, floating docks, motor boats, lead, sheet iron, platinum, iron bars, copper plates, screws, iron, zinc, tin plates and rods, wood, coal, and anything mentioned in third, fifth, eighth, and tenth sections, Article 24, of Declaration of London.

As conditional contraband:

Wines, cereals, military and naval books, pictures, charts, Décauville railway material, automobiles, bicycles, motor cycles, apparatus and material for cables.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/522

[Document 415]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 24, 1914.
[Received December 26, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

206. My 166, sixteenth.1 Ottoman Government communicates following additional list of conditional contraband articles:

Crude copper; lead, pig, plates and pipes; glycerine; ferrochrome; hematite; magnetic iron ore; rubber; leather; and raw or partially tanned skins, not including dressed skins.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/521

[Document 416]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received December 24, 1914, 11:45 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s 18th.1 Report transmitted 22d per Arabic. For contraband therein submitted substitute radically amended list promulgated December 23 as follows:

ABSOLUTE CONTRABAND

1. Arms of all kinds, including arms for sporting purposes, and their distinctive component parts.

2. Projectiles, charges, and cartridges of all kinds and their distinctive component parts.

3. Powder and explosives specially prepared for use in war.

4. Ingredients of explosives, viz., nitric acid, sulphuric acid, glycerine, acetone, calcium acetate and all other metallic acetates, sulphur, potassium nitrate, the fractions of the distillation products of coal tar between benzol and cresol inclusive, aniline, methylaniline, dimethylaniline, ammonium perchlorate, sodium perchlorate, sodium chlorate, barium chlorate, ammonium nitrate, cyanamide, potassium chlorate, calcium nitrate, mercury.

5. Resinous products, camphor, and turpentine (oil and spirit).

6. Gun mountings, limber boxes, limbers, military waggons, field forges, and their distinctive component parts.

7. Range finders and their distinctive component parts.

8. Clothing and equipment of a distinctively military character.

9. Saddle, draught, and pack animals suitable for use in war.

10. All kinds of harness of a distinctively military character.

11. Articles of camp equipment and their distinctive component parts.

12. Armour plates.

13. Ferro alloys, including ferrotungsten, ferromolybdenum, ferromanganese, ferrovanadium, ferrochrome.

14. The following metals: Tungsten, molybdenum, vanadium, nickel, selenium, cobalt, haematite, pig iron, manganese.

15. The following ores: Wolframite, scheelite, molybdenite, manganese ore, nickel ore, chrome ore, hæmatite iron ore, zinc ore, lead ore, bauxite.

16. Aluminium, alumina, and salts aluminium.

17. Antimony, together with the sulphides and oxides of antimony.

18. Copper, unwrought and part wrought, and copper wire.

19. Lead, pig, sheet, or pipe.

20. Barbed wire, and implements for fixing and cutting the same.

21. Warships, including boats and their distinctive component parts of such a nature that they can only be used on a vessel of war.

22. Submarine sound signalling apparatus.

23. Aeroplanes, airships, balloons, and aircraft of all kinds, and their component parts, together with accessories and articles recognisable as intended for use in connection with balloons and aircraft.

24. Motor vehicles of all kinds and their component parts.

25. Tyres for motor vehicles and for cycles, together with articles or materials especially adapted for use in the manufacture or repair of tyres.

26. Rubber (including raw, waste, and reclaimed rubber) and goods made wholly of rubber.

27. Iron pyrites.

28. Mineral oils and motor spirit, except lubricating oils.

29. Implements and apparatus designed exclusively for the manufacture of munitions of war, for the manufacture or repair of arms, or war material for use on land and sea.

CONDITIONAL CONTRABAND

1. Foodstuffs.

2. Forage and feeding stuffs for animals.

3. Clothing, fabrics for clothing, and boots and shoes suitable for use in war.

4. Gold and silver in coin or bullion; paper money.

5. Vehicles of all kinds, other than motor vehicles, available for use in war, and their component parts.

6. Vessels, craft, and boats of all kinds; floating docks, parts of docks, and their component parts.

7. Railway materials, both fixed and rolling stock, and materials for telegraphs, wireless telegraphs and telephones.

8. Fuel, other than mineral oils. Lubricants.

9. Powder and explosives not specially prepared for use in war.

10. Horseshoes and shoeing materials.

11. Harness and saddlery.

12. Hides of all kinds, dry or wet; pigskins, raw or dressed; leather, undressed or dressed, suitable for saddlery, harness, or military boots.

13. Field glasses, telescopes, chronometers, and all kinds of nautical instruments.

Another proclamation prohibits export to all destinations explosives of all kinds, valonia grindery [hides and leather?] used in making boots and shoes. Export prohibited except to British possessions of vessels, craft, and boats, floating docks, parts of docks, and component parts.

Skinner

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in France (Sharp) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/579

[Document 417]

The Ambassador in France (Sharp) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, January 5, 1915.
[Received 9:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

428. Your 13th [30th].1 British Embassy informs me that British and French lists of contraband now correspond absolutely.2

Sharp

1 Not printed.

2 The French list published January 3, corresponding to the British list of December 23, was forwarded by the consul General in Paris, January 4 (File No. 763.72112/570)

Correspondence with American citizens, firms, and organizations whose interests were affected by the proclamations and orders of belligerent governments regarding contraband and trade with enemy countries—Action on particular commoditiesCorrespondence with American citizens, firms, and organizations whose interests were affected by the proclamations and orders of belligerent governments regarding contraband and trade with enemy countries—Action on particular commodities

[From the beginning of the war in Europe, many communications reached the Department of State from private citizens and their political representatives: inquiries as to their rights and duties; requests for action in behalf of their interests, both general and particular; protests against measures of the belligerent governments prejudicial to American business; claims for redress of injuries. The volume of this correspondence is so immense that only limited selections from it can be printed. In each case where such correspondence comes into question, in this section and in others, an effort is made to include the most illustrative and representative documents.]

Contents

Shipments of Grain and Foodstuffs—Marine Insurance Shipments of Grain and Foodstuffs—Marine Insurance

[418] The Board of Trade of Kansas City to the Secretary of State

Kansas City, Missouri, July 31, 1914. [Received August 1, 8:55 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/1

[419] The Secretary of State to the Vice President of the Board of Trade of Kansas City (D. F. Piazzek)

Department of State, Washington, August 5, 1914.

[420] The Insurance Company of North America to the Secretary of State

Philadelphia, August 3, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/9

[421] Representative Stephens to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/64

[422] Public circular issued by the Department of State August 15, 1914, regarding neutrality, contraband, and the seizure of ships and cargo

Washington, August 15, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/161

The Board of Trade of Kansas City to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/1

[Document 418]

The Board of Trade of Kansas City to the Secretary of State

Kansas City, Missouri, July 31, 1914.
[Received August 1, 8:55 a.m.]

[Telegram]

In view of the fact that the buying of grain has been greatly curtailed and the various ports are being congested with wheat by reason of the fact that the exporters of grain are fearful of the war situation and do not consider it safe to load grain ships or forward any grain for export by reason of the uncertainty as to the position the foreign powers may take as to whether or not grain will or will not be considered contraband of war, we believe that the United States Government should now approach the powers who may become involved in war to the end that a declaration may be obtained from the powers to the effect that grain may proceed in neutral vessels without molestation to destination whatever same may be. Furthermore that grain shipped for export should remain safe from seizure even if shipped in a vessel belonging to one or the other of the powers that may be at war whatever its destination. Further that ships which have sailed or are being loaded for export before a possible declaration of war should be respected in any case for whatever port they may be destined or to whatever flag they may belong, We earnestly trust that the State Department will take some immediate action in reference to this matter as the uncertainty of the position which the powers may take regarding grain and foodstuffs is paralyzing the grain business of the west and is causing an acute financial situation.

Board of Trade of Kansas City
By D. F. Piazzek , Vice President

The Secretary of State to the Vice President of the Board of Trade of Kansas City (D. F. Piazzek) [Document 419]

The Secretary of State to the Vice President of the Board of Trade of Kansas City (D. F. Piazzek)

Department of State,
Washington, August 5, 1914.

Sir: The Department begs to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram of July 31, referring to shipment of grain from this country to Europe and requesting the United States Government to approach the powers who may be involved in war to the end that a declaration may be obtained from the powers to the effect that grain may proceed in neutral vessels without molestation to destination whatever same may be. Furthermore that grain shipped for export should remain safe from seizure even if shipped in a vessel belonging to one or the other of the powers that may be at war whatever its destination; further that ships which have sailed or are being loaded for export before a possible declaration of war should be respected in any case for whatever port they may be destined or to whatever flag they may belong.

It is not probable that the countries now engaged in war would consent at this time to any modification of the rules of international law respecting the relations between belligerents and the rights of neutrals.

Under generally accepted principles of international law, grain may be shipped by a neutral to a country at war unless such grain is intended for the use of the army or navy or some department of the government of the country at war; or unless the port for which the grain is destined is in a state of blockade or is occupied by the army or navy of the belligerents. If the grain is not liable to capture for either of the reasons stated above, it cannot be confiscated even if sent by a vessel flying the flag of one of the belligerents. It is needless to suggest, however, that the capture of the ship on which the grain was being carried under such conditions would prevent the grain’s reaching its intended destination.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

The Insurance Company of North America to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/9

[Document 420]

The Insurance Company of North America to the Secretary of State

Philadelphia, August 3, 1914.

Dear Sir: This company is, and has been, for more than a century, engaged in writing marine insurance on imports to and exports from the United States, and owing to the present condition of warfare now existing in Europe, we would ask you for advices on the following points:

Any information which your Department may be in a position to give us as to what is regarded as actual contraband of war; what kind of merchandise is regarded as conditional contraband; what kind of merchandise is not liable to seizure at all.

Any information which your Department may be able to give us regarding rights of belligerents to capture neutral property; what property may be considered to be neutral, and when such property ceases to become neutral; in fact, any information that your Department can give us, which will enable us to properly compute rates of marine insurance against risks of war, will be of great advantage, not only to us, but to thousands of importers and exporters in the United States, who depend on us for protection against the risks incident to capture and detention.

Yours [etc.]

Benjamin Rush
President

The Secretary of State to the Insurance Company of North America

Department of State,
Washington , August 7, 1914.

Gentlemen: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your letter of the 3d instant in which you ask to be informed by the Department “as to what is regarded as actual contraband of war, what kind of merchandise is provisional contraband, and what kind is not liable to seizure at all.” This and the other information solicited in your letter you state is to enable your company to compute properly rates of marine insurance against the risks of war.

The Department appreciates the importance of the subject, in view of the state of war which exists between certain of the European governments and the effect of the European disturbances upon American commerce, but the Department believes that you will, upon second thought, agree with it that it is not advisable or judicious for the Department to attempt to furnish you with a statement of the rules of international law on the several points submitted in your letter, upon which statement by the Department your rates of insurance are presumably to be based. The questions of contraband of war and maritime commerce during a state of war are subject to so many qualifications and exceptions that the Department thinks you had best consult private counsel, who will be able to find the matter discussed at length in many of the standard works on international law, which works, if not available in the private libraries of counsel, will doubtless be found in any large public library.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

Representative Stephens to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/64

[Document 421]

Representative Stephens to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 6, 1914.

Sir: Herewith I have the honor to transmit telegram I have this morning received from the Wichita Mill and Elevator Company, of Wichita Falls, Texas, relative to the shipment of wheat from Galveston to England. The telegram is self-explanatory, and I shall esteem it a favor if you will kindly advise me as the telegram elicits in order that I may wire the parties at as early a date as practicable.

Thanking you [etc.]

John H. Stephens

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The Wichita Mill and Elevator Company to Representative Stephens

Wichita Falls, Texas , August 5, 1914.

Please investigate and advise whether or not wheat can be moved under American flag from Galveston to England, France, and Holland without violation of neutrality provisions; also, Is wheat classed as contraband of war?Will foreign boats now Galveston be permitted cancel foreign registration and register under American requirements? Do you think Government will look with favor on furnishing escort for fleet of grain-carrying steamers destined France? Wire views our cost.

The Wichita Mill And Elevator Company

The Secretary of State to Representative Stephens

Department of State,
Washington , August 8, 1914.

[Telegram]

Referring to telegram from Wichita Mill and Elevator Company, wheat and provisions are classed as conditional contraband of war under generally accepted principles of international law, and therefore subject to capture and confiscation by belligerent vessel if destined for a belligerent government, its army or navy, or its port blockaded or held by military forces; if not so destined they are not contraband of war. Holland is not now at war and wheat and foodstuffs destined for use in that country not considered contraband of war. Persons are free to sell or ship foodstuffs from United States in ordinary commercial transactions without violating United States neutrality laws. Pending passage of bill before Congress, foreign boats referred to may not be registered in United States. This Government could not well furnish escort for fleet of grain steamers as such escort might involve United States in serious complications.

W. J. Bryan

Public circular issued by the Department of State August 15, 1914, regarding neutrality, contraband, and the seizure of ships and cargo File No. 763.72111/161

[Document 422]

Public circular issued by the Department of State 1 August 15, 1914, regarding neutrality, contraband, and the seizure of ships and cargo

NEUTRALITY

All citizens of and persons within the United States are under legal duty to observe neutrality during the war in Europe; this duty is demarked in the neutrality laws and in the President’s proclamation. The following acts are violative of neutrality and are forbidden under penalty of law: 1. Accepting and exercising a commission to serve either of the said belligerents by land or by sea against the other belligerent.

2. Enlisting or entering into the service of either of the said belligerents as a soldier, or as a marine, or seaman on board of any vessel of war, letter of marque, or privateer.

3. Hiring or retaining another person to enlist or enter himself in the service of either of the said belligerents as a soldier, or as a marine, or seaman on board of any vessel of war, letter of marque, or privateer.

4. Hiring another person to go beyond the limits or jurisdiction of the United States with intent to be enlisted as aforesaid.

5. Hiring another person to go beyond the limits of the United States with intent to be entered into service as aforesaid.

6. Retaining another person to go beyond the limits of the United States with intent to be enlisted as aforesaid.

7. Retaining another person to go beyond the limits of the United States with intent to be entered into service as aforesaid. (But the said act is not to be construed to extend to a citizen or subject of either belligerent who, being transiently within the United States, shall, on board of any vessel of war, which, at the time of its arrival within the United States, was fitted and equipped as such vessel of war, enlist or enter himself or hire or retain another subject or citizen of the same belligerent, who is transiently within the United States, to enlist or enter himself to serve such belligerent on board such vessel of war, if the United States shall then be at peace with such belligerent.)

8. Fitting out and arming, or attempting to fit out and arm, or procuring to be fitted out and armed, or knowingly being concerned in the furnishing, fitting out, or arming of any ship or vessel with intent that such ship or vessel shall be employed in the service of either of the said belligerents.

9. Issuing or delivering a commission within the territory or jurisdiction of the United States for any ship or vessel to the intent that she may be employed as aforesaid.

10. Increasing or augmenting, or procuring to be increased or augmented, or knowingly being concerned in increasing or augmenting, the force of any ship of war, cruiser, or other armed vessel, which at the time of her arrival within the United States was a ship of war, cruiser, or armed vessel in the service of either of the said belligerents, or belonging to the subjects of either, by adding to the number of guns of such vessels, or by changing those on board of her for guns of a larger caliber, or by the addition thereto of any equipment solely applicable to war.

11. Beginning or setting on foot or providing or preparing the means for any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from the territory or jurisdiction of the United States against the territories or dominions of either of the said belligerents.

Commerce between this country and countries at war not suspended. The existence of war between foreign governments does not suspend trade or commerce between this country and those at war. This right to continue to trade with belligerents is upheld by the well-recognized principles of international law, subject to the exceptions herein noted.

CONTRABAND

The subject of contraband of war is too comprehensive to admit of a statement covering all phases of the question. But certain general statements, it is believed, will be of service to those interested: 1. The sale or shipment of contraband of war by citizens of the United States to citizens or subjects of any of the belligerent powers, in course of commerce, is not prohibited by the neutrality laws or the President’s proclamation. But contraband, whether shipped in vessels of the belligerents or neutrals, is subject to seizure and confiscation by the belligerents, and when so seized is not entitled to the protection of intervention of this Government.

2. Contraband of war is ranked under two heads, namely, absolute and conditional.

Absolute contraband includes those articles which are peculiarly adapted to war, such as arms and ammunition and military and naval equipment.

When absolute contraband is destined to one of the countries at war, whether to the government or to an individual of that country, it is subject to seizure and confiscation by any of the opposing belligerents when beyond the territory of the neutral government from which it is shipped.

3. The nationality of the vessel in which contraband of war in shipped is immaterial; it is subject to capture and destruction whether shipped in a neutral or enemy vessel.

4. Conditional contraband consists, generally speaking, of articles which are susceptible of use in war as well as for purposes of peace; in consequence, their destination determines whether they are contraband or non-contraband.

Articles of the character stated are considered contraband if destined to the army, navy, or department of government of one of the belligerents or to a place occupied and held by military forces; if not so destined they are not contraband, as, for example, when bound to an individual or private concern.

5. What is contraband of war is to be determined by international law and usage, influenced in some degree by the positions assumed by the belligerents. As there is no final tribunal for the definite determination of these international questions, they are not as determinable as questions of domestic law. There are no general treaties amongst the nations of the world determinative of contraband of war. The London convention, 1908-9, though signed by the delegates of the countries at war, of the United States and of other countries, was not ratified by the signatory governments, and is valuable only as indicating the disposition of the governments represented. This convention may be found in compilations of treaties, available in most public libraries.

Great Britain and Germany have made declarations on contraband since the outbreak of hostilities, which declarations follow rather closely the London convention:

ENGLISH DECLARATION ON CONTRABAND

Absolute contraband: (1) Arms of all kinds, including arms for sporting purposes and their distinctive component parts.

(2) Projectiles, charges, and cartridges of all kinds, and their distinctive component parts.

(3) Powder and explosives especially prepared for use in war.

(4) Gun mountings, limber boxes, limbers, military waggons, field forges, and their distinctive component parts.

(5) Clothing and equipment of a distinctively military character.

(6) All kinds of harness of a distinctively military character.

(7) Saddle, draught, and packing animals suitable for use in war.

(8) Articles of camp equipment, and their distinctive component parts.

(9) Armour plates.

(10) Warships, including boats and their distinctive component parts of such a nature that they can only be used on a vessel of war.

(11) Aeroplanes, airships, balloons, and aircraft of all kinds and their component parts, together with accessories and articles recognisable as intended for use in connection with balloons and aircraft.

(12) Implements and apparatus designed exclusively for the manufacture of munitions of war and for the manufacture or repair of arms, or war material for use on land and sea.

The following articles will be treated as conditional contraband: (1) Foodstuffs.

(2) Forage and grain suitable for feeding animals.

(3) Clothing, fabrics for clothing, and boots and shoes suitable for use in war.

(4) Gold and silver in coin or bullion; paper money.

(5) Vehicles of all kinds available for use in war and their component parts.

(6) Vessels, craft, and boats of all kinds; floating docks, parts of docks, and their component parts.

(7) Railway material, both fixed and rolling stock, and materials for telegraphs, wireless telegraphs, and telephones.

(8) Fuel; lubricants.

(9) Powder and explosives not specially prepared for use in war.

(10) Barbed wire, and implements for fixing and cutting the same.

(11) Horseshoes and shoeing materials.

(12) Harness and saddlery.

(13) Field glasses, telescopes, chronometers, and all kinds of nautical instruments.

GERMAN DECLARATION ON CONTRABAND

Foreign Office communicates list of articles and materials which German Government, pursuant to Nos. 21, 23 of prize ordinance of September 30, 1909, Reichs-Gesetzblatt, page 275, declares contraband of war. They correspond exactly as regards absolute contraband to Article 22, Nos. 1 to [11] inclusive, of the Declaration of London, and as regards conditional contraband to Article 24, Nos. 1 to 14. They further state that ordinance mentioned contains substance of the Declaration of London; that Germany will apply these laws provided that the other belligerents do not disregard them. Foreign Office requests to be informed regarding attitude of the other powers.

It is supposed that the declarations of the other belligerents will, in the main, agree with those of England and Germany.

SEIZURE OF VESSELS AND CARGOES

Vessels flying the flag of one of the belligerents are subject to seizure and confiscation by the opposing belligerents. Contraband of war on board of such vessel is, of course, subject to confiscation, though the property of a neutral.

Goods, not contraband, belonging to a neutral aboard a captured vessel are subject to delay and interruption consequent upon the seizure of the vessel, but not to confiscation, upon manifestation of neutral ownership and the non-contraband character of the goods.

When a vessel containing cargo of a citizen of the United States is captured and is carried before a prize court, as it will be presumably, he should give notice of his claim of property to the prize-court authorities and be prepared to furnish proof of his ownership and the non-contraband character of his goods.

Goods of a neutral, not contraband of war, shipped on a neutral vessel are not rightfully subject to seizure or confiscation by any of the belligerents, and it is not presumed that the vessels of neutrals carrying only non-contraband cargoes will be interfered with.

GENERALLY

It should be borne in mind that the foregoing advices are based upon the most generally accepted principles of international law and usage and are general and advisory only, the Department being unable to forecast the precise course or position of the belligerent governments in particular instances.

The Department takes pleasure in answering specific inquiries from interested parties. Hypothetical questions not related to actual transactions should be avoided.

Cone Johnson
Solicitor Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914.

1 The foregoing letters are representative of inquiries which reached the Department in such numbers as to necessitate the preparation of this printed circular covering the most general points in question. Thereafter, such circulars were enclosed with brief notes of reply, pointing out the application to specific cases as far as practicable. A great part of this circular was later invalidated by subsequent proclamations and orders issued by the belligerent governments departing from the principles laid down in the Declaration of London. These were then likewise printed and distributed, accompanied by a statement that the Department did not approve of all their provisions. For a later circular on Neutrality and Trade in Contraband, dated October 15, which was thereafter also enclosed in replies to inquiries, see post, p. 573. [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920]

Shipments of Copper Shipments of Copper

[The placing of “unwrought copper” on the list of absolute contraband, in the British proclamation of October 29, called forth a great volume of protests from American interests urging the Government toward action in their behalf. These protests reached the Department from governors and senators, more than a score of chambers of commerce and other organizations, besides numerous firms and individuals, in all the western mining states and some districts of the East. The Department did not contest the classification adopted by the British Government, though it sought a more precise definition, but directed its efforts mainly against interference with copper cargoes consigned to neutral countries. Correspondence relating to these efforts is to be found below in the section on “Interference by belligerent governments with neutral ships and cargoes.”]

[423] The Perth Amboy Board of Trade to the Secretary of State

Perth Amboy, New Jersey, November 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/312

[424] The Copper Country Commercial Club to the Secretary of State

Houghton, Michigan, November 7, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/324

[425] The Governor of Montana (Stewart) to the Secretary of State

Helena, Montana, November 7, 1914.

[426] The Weber Club, Ogden Publicity Bureau, to the Secretary of State

Ogden, Utah, November 13, 1914.

[427] The Silver City Chamber of Commerce to the Secretary of State

Silver City, New Mexico, November 17, 1914.

[428] The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 13, 1914.

[429] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/282

[430] Resolution of the American Mining Congress, forwarded to the Secretary of State by the Secretary of the Congress (Callbreath)

Phoenix, Arizona, undated. [Received December 10, 1914]

File No. 763.72112/324

[431] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 19, 1914. [Received December 21.]

File No. 763.72112/576

The Perth Amboy Board of Trade to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/312

[Document 423]

The Perth Amboy Board of Trade to the Secretary of State

Perth Amboy, New Jersey, November 6, 1914.

[Telegram]

The Board of Trade of Perth Amboy, New Jersey, an organization representing the business interests of the greatest copper-refining center in the United States, respectfully begs leave to enter protest against the action of Great Britain in detaining neutral vessels bearing cargoes of copper from the United States to other neutral countries, and we further protest against the action of Great Britain in placing unwrought copper in the list of absolute contraband goods, as only 10 to 15 per cent of the copper that is exported is ever used for military purposes, the balance being used in industrial enterprises. We hold that Great Britain is not warranted in interfering with the transaction of business between neutral countries, and we ask the support of the United States Government in this contention. The copper industry in the United States produces about 1,200,000,000 pounds of copper annually. This is valued at about $180,000,000 and involves an annual expenditure for wages, transportation, and supplies of about $120,000,000. Perth Amboy and the entire state of New Jersey are vitally interested in the copper situation, as nearly 75 per cent, or about 900,000,000 pounds of the copper produced in the United States is smelted and refined in New Jersey. As above, 55 per cent of this copper is exported under normal conditions, the industry is absolutely dependent upon the export market and interference with this export business has a most disastrous effect. It is estimated that more than 1,000,000 people in the United States are interested in the production of copper, and it is in the interest of this large number of citizens that we bespeak your aid in seeing that the commerce in unwrought copper is not illegally or arbitrarily interrupted. The use of unwrought copper in industrial arts is so much out of proportion to its use for military purposes that we contend that there is no sound reason for interference on the part of any warring country with exportation of the metal. When the European war began, it was necessary to curtail copper products in the United States about 50 per cent, and this action threw thousands of men out of employment. If the threatened cessation of the copper-exporting business becomes a reality, it is probable that in a brief time it will become necessary to close the refining plants entirely, as copper cannot be produced profitably at a rate less than 50 per cent of the capacity of the refineries. If these plants are compelled to close entirely, thousands of other men will be thrown out of employment and the industrial life of the entire nation will be seriously affected.

We, therefore, ask for prompt action on behalf of our Government, in an effort to clarify this situation so that steamship owners will not continue to refuse to accept shipments of copper to neutral countries, because of the enormous expense to which they are put by detention of their vessels and because war risk insurance has increased beyond a reasonable figure on account of the action of the British Government.

Very respectfully yours,

The Perth Amboy Board of Trade
By John Pfeiffer , President

The Copper Country Commercial Club to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/324

[Document 424]

The Copper Country Commercial Club to the Secretary of State

Houghton, Michigan, November 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

The Copper Country Commercial Club, representing a district producing 230,000,000 pounds of virgin copper annually, more than 60 per cent of which is exported, desires through your honor to file a normal and most incisive protest against the action of Great Britain in detaining vessels bearing copper from the United States to neutral, foreign countries and the putting of unwrought copper on the list of absolute contraband. The Copper Country Commercial Club desires to impress upon you the absolute injustice of this discrimination against one of the most important of all American mining industries which is already sorely handicapped by European war conditions and which vitally affects the welfare of more than 60,000 high-paid American miners.

Copper Country Commercial Club
G. L. Price , Secretary

The Governor of Montana (Stewart) to the Secretary of State [Document 425]

The Governor of Montana (Stewart) to the Secretary of State

Helena, Montana, November 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

Stopping of copper shipments from United States by nations involved in war must inevitably inflict great losses to important Montana industries. It will involve probable closing of Butte mines wherein thousands of men are employed and will affect others engaged in incidental and independent industries. Suffering and privation will result. In addition labor disorders which have prevailed in the past months will be aggravated. Montana appreciates efforts of Government to prevent interference with copper shipments.

S. V. Stewart

The Weber Club, Ogden Publicity Bureau, to the Secretary of State [Document 426]

The Weber Club, Ogden Publicity Bureau, to the Secretary of State

Ogden, Utah, November 13, 1914.

[Telegram]

If copper is made absolute contraband of war, the prosperity and welfare of Utah are seriously impaired. It will result in such restriction of shipment as to force the majority of mines in the state to discontinue operations. Eighty-five thousand five hundred persons in Utah are directly affected; in fact the entire population will be distressed. In order to prevent widespread disaster to the people of Utah, may we urge you to use your best offices to take such steps as may be necessary and proper as to permit the producers of copper to ship same in neutral ships to neutral ports?

Weber Club, Ogden Publicity Bureau
Joseph Scrowcroft , President

The Silver City Chamber of Commerce to the Secretary of State [Document 427]

The Silver City Chamber of Commerce to the Secretary of State

Silver City, New Mexico, November 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

The following is copy of resolutions this day adopted by Silver City, New Mexico, Chamber of Commerce:

Whereas the British Empire has proclaimed that during the present European war copper will hereafter by it be considered as absolute contraband of war; and

Whereas the recognition of said declaration and its application to commerce would stop the export of copper from the United States during the continuance of said war; and

Whereas the production of copper in the State of New Mexico is an industry which supports a very considerable proportion of the population as shown by the following statistics: In the year 1913 the production of copper in the State of New Mexico was 56,308,706 pounds, valued at $8,727,850. The laborers and other employees together with those directly dependent upon them, who were engaged in the production of said copper, numbered for said year not less than 14,000. The payroll of the various copper producers in the State of New Mexico for said year amounted to $3,550,000; and

Whereas the prevention of the exportation of copper would necessarily cause a cessation of the production of copper and would thereby throw out of employment practically all of those persons engaged in the industry and result in distress to them and their dependents, as well as to the communities in which they live; and

Whereas the cessation of the production of copper would prevent the expansion of the said industry and would thereby deprive the State for an indefinite period of the development of one of its greatest resources at a loss which can be conservatively estimated at over $1,000,000 a year exclusive of wages; and

Whereas the State of New Mexico is in a period of development and expansion, which development and expansion would by the cessation of the production of copper be checked and prevented and thereby the development of said state be set back in a manner, the effects of which would be practically incalculable; and

Whereas all of the coal used in the copper mining and smelting of the States of Arizona and western Texas is produced in the State of New Mexico, and the discontinuance of the copper exportation would cut off to a very great extent the coal production to the great detriment of the coal and transportation industry of New Mexico;

Be it resolved by the Silver City Chamber of Commerce: (1) That the Executive Department of the Government of the United States be, and it is hereby urged to combat the recognition of the principle that copper is absolutely contraband of war; (2) That the said Executive Department of the United States be and it is hereby urged to use all of its influence to secure the recognition of the principle that copper may be shipped in neutral vessels to neutral ports.

C. W. McSherry
President

The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State [Document 428]

The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 13, 1914.

Sir: Many commercial organizations of the West, and some of the East, which are affiliated with this chamber have much concern over the treatment which American trade in copper is receiving, especially from Great Britain and France.

It is unnecessary, we know, to call your attention to the large part of the world’s supply of copper which the United States produces (in 1912, 1,200,000,000 pounds out of a total supply of 2,200,000,000 pounds), or to the importance of the 41 American plants which have been engaged in smelting and refining copper, or to the great number and extent of industrial purposes, unconnected with belligerent activities, for which copper is customarily used.

The action of Great Britain and France in making copper absolute contraband necessarily, because of the extent of innocent uses of copper, affects most directly the non-combatant population of countries with which England and France are at war, and thus has an effect upon our trade which, according to our understanding, can in international law be legitimately brought about only through an effective blockade. So far as we are aware, neither England nor France has formally declared a blockade of any of the coasts or ports of countries with which a state of war exists.

When it was proposed to keep China from importing materials which could be used for the manufacture of arms and ammunition, the United States objected that in view of the nature of materials such a prohibition would seem to have for its real purpose the prevention of industrial enterprises. At the time of the Russian-Japanese war England protested to Russia, which had declared raw cotton unconditionally contraband, that the bulk of cotton exported from India to Japan was intended for peaceful purposes and treatment of harmless cargoes of cotton as unconditionally contraband subjected a branch of innocent commerce to a most unwarrantable interference.

The Declaration of London, which was intended to remove uncertainties and perplexities of neutral commerce in regard to contraband, was, with certain modifications, put in force in England “during the present hostilities” by an order in council of August 20, 1914. The Declaration of London, in Article 23, states that “articles used exclusively for war may be added to the list of absolute contraband by a declaration.” As copper cannot by any means be said to be used exclusively for war, or predominately for war even in circumstances of emergency, it would seem that the present action of England runs counter to the assurances which in effect were given by the order in council of August 14.

The recent announcement of England, connected with the question of “continuous voyage,” concerning shipments of copper to Italy, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, has come to our attention, but, of course, does not dispose of the question we mean to discuss in this letter.

Very respectfully yours,

Elliot H. Goodwin
Secretary

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/282

[Document 429]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

My dear Sir Cecil : In our conversation yesterday I called your attention to the fact that in the proclamation issued by the British Government on October 29, 1914, the only form of copper appearing in the schedule of absolute contraband is “copper, unwrought” (numbered 16 in the schedule). In Schedule 2, the conditional contraband list, appears in item 7 “materials for telegraphs, wireless telegraphs and telephones.” I assume that such materials include copper wire of certain grades.

In the interest of American dealers it is essential to know whether the British Government includes in the term “copper, unwrought” manufactured copper in any form, and whether the “materials” mentioned in item 7 of the list of conditional contraband includes copper wire, and, if so, of what grades.

It would oblige me very much if this subject receive your immediate attention as manufacturers in this country are entitled to know what treatment they may expect for shipments of their manufactured copper articles to Europe.

I am not unmindful of your letter to me of November 1 in which you state that according to the traditions of American and British law the decision as to the meaning of an item in contraband lists rests with the prize courts. In a case of this sort, however, where language is manifestly uncertain, I cannot believe that the British Government purposely made the language uncertain or will decline to explain its meaning. Such a course would be manifestly unreasonable and unjust to neutrals.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Resolution of the American Mining Congress, forwarded to the Secretary of State by the Secretary of the Congress (Callbreath) File No. 763.72112/324

[Document 430]

Resolution of the American Mining Congress, forwarded to the Secretary of State by the Secretary of the Congress (Callbreath)

Phoenix, Arizona, undated.
[Received December 10, 1914]

[Telegram]

Whereas the welfare and prosperity of the States of Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah and of the Territory of Alaska are to a very great extent dependent upon the mining industry and especially upon the mining, milling, and smelting of the ores of copper and the mining of the coal necessary to render the handling of such copper ores possible; and

Whereas the mines of the states and the territory above mentioned produced about 1,180,000,000 pounds of copper during the year 1913 valued according to Government reports at about $173,000,000, to which amount should be added the value of the gold and silver contained in said copper ores, worth at least $27,000,000, making a total value of about $200,000,000; and

Whereas there are over 100,000 persons engaged directly in the mining, milling, smelting, and transportation of copper ores and in the mining of the coal used in connection with the production of said copper ores, and about 300,000 people directly dependent upon those so employed in said industry, and in addition thereto not less than 100,000 persons indirectly dependent upon the industry for their means of livelihood, making a total of more than 500,000 people who are affected by the curtailment of the output of copper; and

Whereas on account of the war conditions now prevailing the exportation of copper to European countries has been greatly restricted which has already resulted in a curtailment of about 50 per cent in the copper production in said states and has caused hardship and suffering among those connected with the industry; and

Whereas, if this calamitous condition is prolonged, it will continue to disastrously affect the entire population of said states and territory, or at least 8,000,000 people, and throw out of employment many thousands of persons who are now dependent upon the said industries for their livelihood;

Now, therefore, be it unanimously resolved by the American Mining Congress in seventeenth annual convention assembled at Phoenix, Arizona, that in order to prevent such great disaster to said states and to the Territory of Alaska, we earnestly appeal to the Government of the United States to use its great offices to keep open every available market for copper and give full protection to the producers of the metal in the shipment of same in neutral vessels to neutral ports. Be it further resolved that a copy of this resolution be transmitted by telegraph to the Secretary of State of the United States of America.

Under instructions I forward above resolution unanimously adopted by the seventeenth annual session of the American Mining Congress.

J. F. Callbreath
Secretary

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72112/576

[Document 431]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, December 19, 1914.
[Received December 21.]

My dear Mr. Counsellor: With regard to the definition of the expression “copper unwrought” I have been informed by Sir E. Grey that the subject is being carefully studied and a decision will be made shortly which will be at once communicated.

Yours truly,

Cecil Spring Rice

Shipments of Cotton Shipments of Cotton

[For other correspondence on the difficulties attending upon the exportation of cotton, see the sections on “Embargoes and related restrictions on trade by the European neutral states and by Germany,” and on the “Censorship of the cables by belligerent governments.”]

[432] Senator Owen to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/104

[433] The Secretary of State to Senator Owen

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914.

[434] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, October 19, 1914. [Received 3:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/197

[435] The President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange and Board of Trade (I. H. Kempner) to the Solicitor for the Department of State

Galveston, Texas, October 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/349

[436] The President of the New York Chamber of Commerce (Seth Low) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/216

[437] Senator Gore to the Secretary of State

Washington October 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72/218

[438] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/370a

[439] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/252

[440] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 26, 1914. [Received October 27, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/226

[441] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 26, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/251

[442] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 28, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/226

[443] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, November 8, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/363a

[444] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 11, 1914. [Received November 16, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/380

[445] A. Boden to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 30, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/1316

[446] The Counselor for the Department of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, December 1, 1914.

[447] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, December 13, 1914. [Received December 14.]

File No. 763.72112/474

[448] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, December 16, 1914. [Received December 17, 10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/568

Senator Owen to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/104

[Document 432]

Senator Owen to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 20, 1914.

My dear Mr. Bryan : Can you not open negotiations through our ambassadors with Germany, France, and England, and arrange so that we might ship our raw cotton to these countries without its being regarded as contraband? I think if an arrangement could be made that raw cotton should not be regarded as contraband, that our ambassadors might find a substantial market for raw cotton that otherwise we cannot ship. It is evident that we will probably lose one third the value of our cotton crop, or somewhere near $20 a bale, or in the neighborhood of $250,000,000. I believe that your Department by energetic action might substantially enlarge this market.

Yours respectfully,

Robert L. Owen

The Secretary of State to Senator Owen [Document 433]

The Secretary of State to Senator Owen

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914.

My dear Senator Owen : Replying to your letter of the 20th instant suggesting that the Department open negotiations through our ambassadors with Germany, France, and England and arrange for shipment of American raw cotton to these countries without its being regarded as contraband, I beg to say that under Article 28 of the Declaration of London certain articles may not be declared contraband of war; the first in the list is raw cotton.

While it is true that of the signatories to the declaration, which include the principal belligerents in the present war, the United States alone has ratified the declaration, Great Britain and Germany have already indicated by their notifications as to contraband that they purpose to adopt the provisions of the declaration as to the articles which will be considered by them absolute and conditional contraband, and inferentially they will not declare contraband the articles listed in Article 28.

As yet we have received no notification from France in the matter of contraband, but presume that that Government will follow the policy which is adopted by Great Britain.

In view of the foregoing it would not appear to be necessary to approach the governments, as you suggest, in relation to obtaining an arrangement for the shipment of raw cotton as non-contraband.

I enclose for your information the British and German notifications as to contraband.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/197

[Document 434]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, October 19, 1914.
[Received 3:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Holland-America Line hears that British Government intends to declare cotton conditional contraband.

Skinner

The President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange and Board of Trade (I. H. Kempner) to the Solicitor for the Department of State File No. 763.72112/349

[Document 435]

The President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange and Board of Trade (I. H. Kempner) to the Solicitor for the Department of State

Galveston, Texas, October 20, 1914.

Sir: There is a good deal of cotton and cottonseed products being shipped to Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. Through the newspapers, the British Consul of Galveston has indicated that all cargoes going to these Scandanavian countries, particularly Sweden and Denmark, are subject to suspicion of being intended ultimately for German use, and has indicated the possibility of England diverting these cargoes from Denmark and Sweden.

Only recently the British steamer Camperdown from Galveston, destined for Danish ports, put into Scotland en route, and was not allowed to proceed on the alleged ground that it was dangerous to go to Denmark, notwithstanding steamers are constantly going to and from Danish ports. This steamer had aboard a large cargo of cottonseed cake and a small cargo of cotton. The result of its detention has been a decline in the market for cottonseed cake and meal, lowering the price that oil mills can pay for seed, since exporters of cottonseed cake and meal find themselves hampered in their business by not being able to give assurance as to ultimate delivery of the goods. A recent decline in the cotton market may be traceable to the fear that the demand that has lately come from neutral countries for cotton is under the suspicion of the British Admiralty, who may interfere with the destination of these cargoes.

To the layman it would appear that cotton—which is at best only a conditional contraband of war, if indeed it is contraband at all—shipped in neutral bottoms to a neutral country should not be subject to interference by any belligerent. On account of this condition buyers in Sweden and Denmark ask that goods be sold them on terms involving their paying cash only on arrival of the goods at Sweden or Denmark, instead of acceptance against documents as heretofore. The war risk and the marine risk can be covered, but detention or diversion by England or her allies cannot be covered, since the insurance business on cargoes in English or neutral bottoms is carried almost exclusively by English companies, and this fear of diversion or detention is curtailing business and stifling what little foreign demand there is for cotton.

If assurance can be given that cotton and cottonseed products can be shipped to neutral countries without danger of interference by navies of belligerent nations, it will go a long way towards opening an untrammelled market to these countries, whose consumption of raw cotton can be materially increased but who naturally can not go to the expense of undertaking this increase, if they are hampered and fettered in securing the supply of raw cotton, which the South is so eager to sell.

It is impossible for a shipper or a seller on this side to always know definitely what becomes of the cotton when it reaches the other side, whether it is used in the country to which it is shipped, or exported, in the raw or manufactured state, to a belligerent. Unless this Government can obtain assurance that traffic in its great staple, cotton, and its by-products, in neutral bottoms to neutral countries, will not be interfered with, it will be a serious blow to the marketing of cotton.

I see in the paper where Sir George Paish, special adviser to the English Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Mr. Basil P. Blackett, of the British Treasury, are in Washington on a conference with reference to the marketing of cotton, and possibly their attention directed to the matter may aid in its solution.

This matter is one that is deserving of very serious attention, and I think it one that thoroughly justifies vigorous action by your Department; I write you direct in the matter on account of our personal acquaintance and friendship.

Very truly yours,

I. H. Kempner

The President of the New York Chamber of Commerce (Seth Low) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/216

[Document 436]

The President of the New York Chamber of Commerce (Seth Low) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

American cotton shippers are in a serious predicament owing to the uncertainty regarding Great Britain’s attitude towards shipments of cotton to neutral European countries. It is reported that the British authorities have announced that cotton to Germany and Austria is on their prohibited list and have warned vessels trading to Scandinavia, Holland, and Italy that serious consequences may be expected for carrying cotton for German or Austrian consumption.

This apparently means that all cotton destined to these countries will be brought before an English prize court and subject to condemnation unless the proof of neutral ownership is satisfactory to such court, meaning possible condemnation or at best the heavy expenses necessary to make an appearance and defense. Neither shippers nor insurance companies can possibly assume risk of this kind unless some guarantee can be given them through our State Department as to the attitude of the British Government, first, as regards shipments that are destined for Germany and Austria, and secondly, if the English Government still holds these liable to capture, what proof will be required of neutral destination. It is imperative that the procedure necessary to establish the innocence of such cargo be known in advance of shipment. Apart from the demand from Germany and Austria there is, and has in the past, been a bona fide demand for cotton for consumption in these neutral countries, especially in Italy, and large engagements have already been made for such shipments.

The Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York urges as a matter of justice to American shippers and to the great cotton interests of the country that Great Britain be requested to give some authoritative statement of her attitude in this matter and of the conditions under which cotton for consumption in neutral countries may be forwarded without interference.

New York Chamber Of Commerce
Seth Low , President

Senator Gore to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/218

[Document 437]

Senator Gore to the Secretary of State

Washington October 24, 1914.

My dear Mr. Secretary:

I beg to hand you herewith a telegram which I have received from the Harris Irby Cotton Company of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, which will explain itself.

Most respectfully,

T. P. Gore

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The Harris Irby Cotton Company to Senator Gore

Oklahoma City, Oklahoma , October 23, 1914.

European buyers of cotton in neutral countries will only pay for same when draft with bill [of] lading is accompanied by full war risk insurance policy. British Admiralty has ordered English underwriters to issue no war insurance on cotton to neutral countries unless the owner warrants same free of capture, seizure and detention by allies. This has not only resulted in American companies having absolute monopoly on all war insurance to neutral countries, but in consequence of their close affiliation with the English companies, all American companies have to-day announced that they will follow precedent English underwriters and refuse to insure without warranty clause unless the British Admiralty officially declare their attitude regarding seizure, capture and detention of non-contraband cargoes destined neutral. This condition means that all commerce to neutral countries will absolutely cease, not only denying America the outlet for her cotton to neutral countries but works a ruinous condition on American cotton shippers who have already entered into engagements for shipments of cotton to neutral countries. These cotton firms have already bought and paid for large quantities of cotton against these engagements and now are in position where they cannot make their shipments and get their money for same from their buyers; this means an immediately, unspeakably serious condition in consequence of engagements already made and forms an absolute estoppel to all further commerce with neutral countries. The United States War Risk Insurance Bureau was created for the purpose of obviating this condition but unfortunately this bureau [is] restricting its policy on American bottoms and American bottoms are practically unobtainable. The only possible relief now lies with you and other Southern Senators through Congress. This condition calls for instant relief as the situation is serious beyond measure. We earnestly urge that you at once introduce measure with emergency clause authorizing Government War Risk Bureau write insurance on shipments of non-contraband cargo such as cotton from America to neutral countries. This is absolutely the only relief in sight and must come quick otherwise immeasurable injustice and loss will immediately follow.

Harris Irby Cotton Company

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/370a

[Document 438]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

391. Cotton exportation. There is an increasing public irritation in this country over the fact that Great Britain has not made an affirmative statement to the effect that American-owned cotton exported in vessels of neutral nationality, whatever the destination of the cotton, except to blockaded ports, will not be subject to seizure and detention. If British Government would immediately communicate to this Government such a declaration, it would relieve present tendency of public opinion which is imputing selfish motives to Great Britain on assumption that cotton shipments, at least those destined for belligerent countries, will be prevented by the British Government. Complaints are increasing on the part of Americans as to interference of Great Britain with commerce which they consider legitimate. Please bring foregoing at once to attention of British Government and ascertain if they would be willing to make such a positive declaration. This Government feels that it is essential that American public opinion on this matter be quieted and it feels confident that His Majesty’s Government will cooperate with it to that end.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/252

[Document 439]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

393. It has been reported to this country, and is believed by a large number of American citizens interested in the exportation of raw cotton, that the British Government is influencing insurance companies in Great Britain to place such limitations upon policies covering raw cotton shipped in neutral vessels that it is impossible for American exporters to obtain marine insurance. It appears that British underwriters will not insure against war risk unless the owner warrants same free of capture, seizure, or detention by the Allies. This action of British underwriters has influenced American insurance companies to follow the same course and refuse to insure without such a warranty clause. The result is that the exportation of raw cotton from the United States is substantially impossible. It is hoped, therefore, that the British Government will take the necessary steps to relieve this situation, which is a source of much adverse criticism against that country and may result in a most undesirable state of public feeling in this country.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/226

[Document 440]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 26, 1914.
[Received October 27, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

911. Your 391, October 24. Sir Edward Grey makes the positive declaration to me that cotton is not contraband and so far as the British Government is concerned will not be. He informs me that he had telegraphed this to Spring Rice. So far as I have been informed no ship with cotton has been detained, except the ship that is held at Stornoway, Scotland, by the owners and not by the British Government.

American Ambassador

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/251

[Document 441]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 26, 1914.

Dear Mr. Counsellor: In compliance with your request I telegraphed on the 23d instant to my Government to enquire what was their view with regard to cotton and whether or no they considered it to be contraband. You addressed this question to me as you said there seemed to be doubts in certain quarters in this country as to the attitude of my Government.

Last night I received a reply from Sir Edward Grey in which he authorises me to give the assurance that cotton will not be seized. He points out that cotton has not been put in any of our lists of contraband and as your Department must be aware from the draft proclamation now in your possession, it is not proposed to include it in our new list of contraband. It is therefore, as far as Great Britain is concerned, in the free list and will remain there.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Embassy at Washington

October 25, 1914.

You can give assurance that cotton will not be seized. It has not been put in any of our lists of contraband and as State Department must know from draft proclamations in their possession, it is not proposed to include it in our new list of contraband. It is therefore as far as we are concerned in the free list and will remain there. But we do not in our new proclamation accept free list of the Declaration of London as regards some articles other than cotton.

Does the State Department realise that though we detain cargoes of contraband to make sure that they are really intended for neutral countries and have retained some cargoes such as copper destined for Krupp, we have not yet taken a single cargo without paying for it and have let all proceed that were really destined for neutral countries?

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72112/226

[Document 442]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

514. British Government have stated that cotton is not in lists of contraband and that they have no intention of interfering with shipments on ground of its being contraband. It would appear therefore that cotton can be shipped in neutral vessels to German ports. Please request German Government to make similar statement regarding cotton, explaining to them the desire of American shippers to send cotton to Russian ports on the Baltic. Intimate that such declaration will operate as strong preventive to any change by British Government as to their policy in regard to cotton.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72112/363a

[Document 443]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)1

Department of State,
Washington, November 8, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

581. There is considerable doubt in certain quarters in this country as to the attitude of the German Government towards the shipments of cotton in neutral bottoms to the ports of the belligerents opposed to Germany. So far as advised, cotton has not been placed on the contraband lists of any of the belligerents, and Great Britain has definitely declared that it is not proposed to place cotton on British contraband lists, and that it will not be seized. Apprehension in this country would be greatly relieved, and the free movement of cotton encouraged, if Germany and Austria could find it possible to make a public declaration that cargoes of cotton in neutral vessels will not be molested or detained.

Please bring the foregoing to the attention of the German Government and request as prompt a reply as possible.

Lansing

1 The same, numbered 258, to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/380

[Document 444]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 11, 1914.
[Received November 16, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

821. Your 514, October 28. Foreign Office informs me that under No. 27 of the German prize ordinance [of September 30, 1909], cotton and cotton yarn shall not be declared contraband. These goods cannot, therefore [as a matter of course], be taken from neutral vessels. The German Government will abide by this attitude as long as the enemy powers do not treat cotton and cotton yarn differently and the neutral powers do not acquiesce in such treatment.

Gerard

A. Boden to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/1316

[Document 445]

A. Boden to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 30, 1914.

Dear Sir: Having come to the United States in order to facilitate the export of the abundant cotton crop through the Netherlands, a neutral country, mainly to the port of Rotterdam, and having not only succeeded by getting the facility of the bigger New York banking institutions, such as the Guaranty Trust Company, New York City Bank, National Park Bank, Knauth Nachodt & Kuhne, for partly financing same, and also interested our banks, our shipowners to put steamers at my disposal, I received a cable last night, by which a shipowner, as well as our Dutch insurance companies, now demand the same assurances and guarantees in regard to letting Dutch bottoms, loaded with cotton, pass free and unmolested while carrying cotton cargoes from the Gulf, as well as Atlantic ports, to Rotterdam. They ask this as a matter of precaution because it has occurred that, where England ordered a ship out of her ports with a free permission to proceed to Amsterdam, the French authorities ordered her to a French port where goods were discharged. It is not the question whether contraband or not contraband, but the danger that a ship being held up for indefinite time pending investigation, causing loss to the shipowner and loss of interest to the banker that has advanced the money, that it should be easy for an article like cotton, which, by no country has been declared as contraband, to give the assurances asked.

American bottoms. These being scarce and quite insufficient tonnage, therefore very high in price, makes it necessary to ship by neutral bottoms. In regard to price, the actual rate for American bottoms from Galveston to Bremen is paid with 3 cents per pound; whereas, I have in charter a Dutch boat at 1¼ cents from Galveston to Rotterdam, to which must be added cost of transportation Rotterdam-Bremen, which is 50 cents per [hundred] pound. Therefore, total of 1¾ cents per pound, which gives a saving of 1¼ cents between neutral and American bottoms.

War Risk Insurance: I am told the American Government charges 5 per cent premium, whereas our Dutch companies charge 2½ per cent, which, again, is a saving of 2½ per cent.

I, therefore, consider it to the benefit of the United States Government, in order that the cotton is shipped unmolested at these reduced rates by which partly the farmer and also partly the importer will be benefited, making his buying capacity so much greater, that the Department of State endeavor to obtain from the French Republic an equal assurance and guarantee as received from the United Kingdom in regard to free, unmolested transportation of cotton, so I may convey to our shipowners, bankers, insurance companies a likewise confirmation such as I had the pleasure to receive from you, which will greatly tend to increase cotton shipments to Rotterdam.

Yours respectfully,

A. Boden

The Counselor for the Department of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) [Document 446]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The positive declaration made by the British Government on the 26th ultimo that they would not seize shipments of cotton as contraband, has greatly relieved the tension which has prevailed among American planters and shippers, due to a feeling of apprehension and uncertainty as to the policy of Great Britain. There is, however, remaining considerable embarrassment among cotton shippers, who claim that while the British authorities do not interfere with shipments of cotton, the French authorities cause undue detentions of vessels loaded with this commodity and destined for belligerent countries in Europe, interrupting the course of their trade and causing them great expense. It would, therefore, be a great satisfaction if you could obtain from your Government as clear a statement of the immunity of this product from seizure as the British Government has been good enough to make in regard to it.

I know that you will appreciate the desire of allaying the apprehension which prevails on this point in regard to an article which this country wishes to export to Europe, and which seems to possess no qualities making it contraband. However groundless such apprehension may be, it is well to quiet it by assurances which can leave no doubt of the intention of your Government.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/474

[Document 447]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, December 13, 1914.
[Received December 14.]

Dear Mr. Secretary: Referring to the question of cotton concerning which you recently telephoned to me, I beg to inform you that my Government cabled me that they “willingly give the same assurances as the British Government.”

I have asked whether this implied the same verifying before departure of the nature of the goods which the papers state is taking place with the assistance of the British consuls. As soon as an answer reaches me, I shall at once convey it to you.

Believe me [etc.]

Jusserand

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/568

[Document 448]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, December 16, 1914.
[Received December 17, 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

351. Your 258, November 8,1 Austro-Hungarian Government state that in navy regulations published May 2, 1913, raw cotton and cotton yarn are specified as non-contraband and therefore free from seizure. Austro-Hungarian Government will adhere to this rule conditional on reciprocity enemy states.

Penfield

1 See footnote, ante, p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Shipments of Illuminating Oil Shipments of Illuminating Oil

[For other correspondence, see the sections on “Interference by belligerent governments with neutral ships and cargoes” and on “The transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag.”]

[449] The Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (by William H. Libby) to the Secretary of State

New York, September 18, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/140

[450] The Acting Secretary of State to William H. Libby

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914.

[451] The Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (by William H. Libby) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 1, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/141

[452] The Acting Secretary of State to William H. Libby

Department of State, Washington, October 26, 1914.

The Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (by William H. Libby) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/140

[Document 449]

The Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (by William H. Libby) to the Secretary of State

New York, September 18, 1914.

Sir: On behalf of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey I have the honor to submit the following:

So far as we are aware, petroleum and its products were not specifically referred to in the London declaration, nor have they been specifically referred to in the contraband declarations of the belligerents.

In the conditional contraband schedules of said London declaration, and of said belligerent declarations, appears the following clause: “Fuel—Lubricants.”

It is of great concern to the American petroleum industry to ascertain just what petroleum products could be or should be included under this fuel classification.

We especially contend that the ordinary illuminating oil of commerce, consigned to industrial concerns the world over for daily retail distribution, is not contraband. The mere fact that it is (naturally) susceptible of ignition should not outweigh the fact that utilization as fuel is not, and never has been, its natural and normal mission.

Although it will burn and create heat, its use as “fuel” for any warlike purpose would be abnormal and unnatural. It has, in fact, never been known or designated as fuel in the commercial circles of the world; and its normal use in lamps and in stoves for domestic heating and cooking should not be interdicted via belligerent proclamation.

The export commerce of petroleum, and its products, is sustaining many penalties traceable to the war, and would continue to be seriously restricted, even with illuminating oil immune from contraband classification.

The annual exports of illuminating oil for 1913 were about 1,100,000,000 gallons. Any serious interruption of this commerce would be a great injury to myriads of foreign consumers, as well as to American producers, manufacturers, and exporters of petroleum.

We would highly appreciate the favor of some intimation as to what extent the Government would support our contentions, viz, that the ordinary illuminating oil of commerce, marketed through old-established, world-wide channels, is distinctly exempt from contraband classification.

I have [etc.]

Wm. H. Libby

The Acting Secretary of State to William H. Libby [Document 450]

The Acting Secretary of State to William H. Libby

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your letter of September 18, and in reply begs leave to say that the action which the Department may appropriately take at this time in the matter submitted by you will be for the Department to submit requests to the governments of the countries at war for a more specific declaration on contraband covering ordinary illuminating oil of commerce, consigned to industrial concerns.

The Department deems it hardly advisable to comply with your request for an intimation as to the extent to which the Government of the United States would support your contention that illuminating oil is distinctly exempt from contraband classification, in view of the present indefinite attitude of the several belligerents on the subject of contraband as applied to petroleum and its products.

If you desire the Department to do so, it will submit through diplomatic officers a request for a more specific declaration by the belligerent powers.

I am [etc.]

For the Acting Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne
Assistant Secretary

The Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (by William H. Libby) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/141

[Document 451]

The Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (by William H. Libby) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 1, 1914.

Sir: In continuation of my letter of September 18, I have the honor on behalf of the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) to acknowledge receipt of your courteous reply thereto, dated September 22, and from which I quote the final phrase:

If you desire the Department to do so, it will submit through diplomatic officers a request for a more specific declaration by the belligerent powers.

May we not respectfully and seriously urge upon the Department to substitute for such request a notification to the belligerent powers that the United States Government does not feel justified in conceding the illuminating oil of commerce as fairly liable to contraband classification?

It was not my intention to suggest that requests should be submitted by our Government to the governments of the countries at war for “a more specific declaration” on the subject. Such requests could, I fear, have but one result, as they would imply that it was left to those governments exclusively to say what was, and what was not, contraband. The course of events in the present war leaves little or no room for doubt that the belligerents, particularly those controlling the sea, would avail themselves of the opportunity thus afforded, to bring within the scope of belligerent inhibition still another branch of neutral trade upon the supposition that the cutting off of commerce, even in innocent articles having no distinctive military use, would tend to put pressure upon the enemy—a supposition which, if it were allowed to prevail, would potentially result in the entire destruction of the trade of neutrals with the belligerent powers, and even serving to seriously embarrass the commerce between neutrals.

The following is an extract of a reply from the Department of State, under date of March 7, 1904, to an inquiry made by this company, under date of March 2, 1904, concerning the status of illuminating oil:

Under the ordinary rules of international law and taking the Russian announcement in its literal sense, the oils which are declared contraband are those which are “obviously fuel” and are commercially sold as such. This is inferred to be the Russian view, inasmuch as the use of mineral oils for fuel is large in Russia and the commercial distinction between such oils and those used as illuminants and lubricants is well known.

The Department does not apprehend Russian interference with innocent traffic in oils obviously different from those declared contraband and in their nature unsuited for belligerent use. It is not thought advisable to raise a question in this regard in advance of a case actually arising. Should a tangible issue be presented, this Department will do everything possible to safeguard the interests of innocent commerce on the part of American citizens.

Subsequently, the expectations that had been entertained as to what would be the course of the Russian Government were disappointed. More than a year later, that is to say, on May 18, 1905, the British steamer Oldhamia, with a cargo of illuminating oil valued at more than $120,000 and belonging to this company, was seized by a Russian cruiser, and within a week, after having been placed in charge of a prize crew, was wrecked on Ourop Island and set on fire and abandoned. Claims were duly filed by the owners in the Russian prize courts for the value of the ship and cargo. The court of first instance held that the cargo was not contraband; but after this decision was rendered, the same court, its personnel having been changed, was hastily reconvened, and, as thus reconstituted, it rendered a sentence of confiscation, which was affirmed on appeal.

Against this sentence the British Government, as well as the Government of the United States, protested, the former government, in a memorandum of January 23, 1911, saying:

Par. 6. That, even assuming that such consignment could bear any contraband character (which His Majesty’s Government were not prepared to admit), it would be necessary to prove that it was destined for the use of the enemy’s forces, and not a shadow of evidence to that effect was produced.

It is a notorious fact that, during the Russo-Japanese war, the Russian Government, without resorting to the recognized measure of blockade, sought to cut off the entire trade of neutrals with Japan by means of an extension of the list of contraband, in which it sought to include in the most absolute terms both provisions and raw cotton, thus striking a direct blow at the export trade of this country.

The creation of a similar condition of things is now threatened. (See my letter of this date re detention of Ocean and Chester.) Thus, not only in the present existing case is illuminating oil apparently asserted to be contraband, but the effect of the neutral destination is altogether ignored.

As was pointed out in my letter of the 18th of September, the annual exportation of illuminating oil from this country amounts to 1,100,000,000 gallons. This extensive and legitimate commerce is now gravely menaced by a claim which involves nothing less than a pretention to supervise, to regulate, to subject to conditions and even to prohibit sea-borne commerce, not only between neutrals and belligerents; but also between neutrals themselves, without regard to the limitations imposed upon belligerent action by the law of contraband and blockade.

In view, therefore, of the position taken both by the American and the British Governments in the aforesaid case of the Oldhamia, would not the Department be consistent in maintaining the non-contraband classification of illuminating oil, and would not the British Government be correspondingly inconsistent in contesting this?

No American industry was more instantaneously and acutely affected by the war than the petroleum industry, and should the Department be unable to secure non-contraband classification for illuminating oil, the entire export commerce in petroleum products would be menaced, inasmuch as fuel oil and lubricants are already under the ban of declared conditional contraband.

I have [etc.]

Wm. H. Libby

The Acting Secretary of State to William H. Libby [Document 452]

The Acting Secretary of State to William H. Libby

Department of State, Washington, October 26, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of the 1st instant, wherein, with reference to your letter of the 18th ultimo, you urge that the Government of the United States notify the belligerent powers that this Government does not feel justified in conceding that the illuminating oil of commerce is fairly liable to contraband classification.

In reply you are advised that the Department is earnestly endeavoring to obtain equitable treatment for American commerce under existing conditions. In this relation, the Department begs to call your attention to the fact that it has made representations to the British Government against the seizure of the steamer John D. Rockefeller , in view of the fact that illuminating oil is not listed as absolute contraband of war by the British Government and in view of the apparent neutral destination of the vessel.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Shipments of Naval Stores Shipments of Naval Stores

[453] Senator Fletcher to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/240

[454] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, October 29, 1914.

[455] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 1, 1914. [Received November 2.]

File No. 763.72112/282

[456] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 22, 1914. [Received December 23.]

File No. 763.72112/515

[457] The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 29, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/689

Senator Fletcher to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/240

[Document 453]

Senator Fletcher to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 27, 1914.

Sir: Herewith is telegram just received from Mr. E. J. L’Engle of Jacksonville, Florida, who is speaking for the naval stores people.

The term “naval stores,” as you know, means spirits of turpentine and rosin. Both are shipped in barrels. They would constitute necessary ballast for cotton cargoes. Two thirds of the market, or more, for naval stores is found in foreign countries, but particularly in Europe. This market having been cut off by the war leaves the industry in a very precarious condition. It would be a blessing to the naval stores people, which include all the states where the yellow pine grows, if these markets could be opened up, or if shipments could be safely made to them. I hope, therefore, you will make every possible effort to secure the allowance of naval stores along with cotton shipments. I would be obliged if you will advise what conclusion is reached after you have taken the matter up with the British Ambassador.

Very respectfully and sincerely,

Duncan U. Fletcher

[Enclosure—Telegram]

Mr. J. L’Engle to Senator Fletcher

Jacksonville, Florida , October 27, 1914.

Newspapers report that British Government has announced intention permit cotton shipments direct to Germany; our people regard it very important to secure right guaranteed by similar declaration to ship naval stores to Germany as part of cotton cargoes. Naval stores shipments necessary ballast for cotton cargoes. I understand that neither cotton nor naval stores are contraband of war and we would be greatly obliged if you would ask State Department to secure declaration from British Ambassador to this effect in order facilitate joint shipments of naval stores and cotton from Atlantic and Gulf ports direct to Germany. If this assurance can be secured it will constitute important and far-reaching measure of relief to naval stores industry. Please answer.

E. J. L’Engle

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 454]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, October 29, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The positive declaration by your Government that they will not seize shipments of cotton as contraband has relieved the tension which has prevailed among the American planters and shippers due to a feeling of apprehension and uncertainty as to the British policy.

I desire now to call your attention to certain other commodities produced in our Southern States, as to which there appears to be the same anxiety as there was in regard to cotton. These products are turpentine and rosin, which have the misleading trade term of “naval stores.” It would be a great satisfaction if you could obtain from your Government as clear a statement of the immunity of these products from seizure as they were good enough to make in regard to cotton.

Neither in the lists of absolute or conditional contraband proclaimed by your Government nor in the proposed lists, which have been communicated to this Department, do I find either turpentine or rosin.

I know that you appreciate the desirability of allaying the apprehension which prevails as to certain articles of trade which this country wishes to export to Europe and which seem to possess no qualities making them contraband. However groundless such apprehension may be, it is well to quiet it by assurances which can leave no doubt of the intention of your Government.

If you can take this matter up with London, it will be a service to this Government in relieving a situation which is growing daily more embarrassing.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/282

[Document 455]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 1, 1914.
[Received November 2.]

Sir: In your note of the 29th ultimo you called my attention to the anxiety which prevailed in the Southern States as to the liability to seizure of turpentine and rosin as “naval stores.” You point out that however groundless such apprehension may be it is well to quiet it by assurances which can leave no doubt of the intention of the belligerent governments.

In compliance with your request I at once communicated with Sir Edward Grey pointing out to him that your Government considered it desirable in the interests of neutral trade to relieve a situation which was daily growing more embarrassing.

Sir Edward Grey has now informed me in reply that in view of the representations which you have made he has pleasure in giving the official assurance that the British Government has not in fact any present intention of interfering with turpentine and rosin.

At the same time, and in order to prevent misapprehension in the future or the establishment of a precedent which may prove embarrassing to both our Governments in the future, Sir Edward Grey wishes me to point out that the British Government has published a contraband list for the guidance of the public and that it would not be advisable to make official statements in answer to individual enquiries as to whether or not specified articles can be held to fall under any of the heads enumerated in the contraband lists and are therefore immune from capture.

You will no doubt agree that if statements in answer to individual enquiries become a general practice, there would be a constant succession of such enquiries and there would be no finality. In accordance with the recognised tradition of British and American law, the proper interpretation of contraband lists is a matter which each Government reserves for the decision of its prize courts.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/515

[Document 456]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State 1

British Embassy,
Washington, December 22, 1914.
[Received December 23.]

No. 441]

I have the honour to inform you that I am in receipt of a telegram from my Government stating that circumstances have been brought to their notice which have convinced them of the necessity of not allowing resinous products to be freely imported by the enemy countries and it has accordingly been decided to add to the list of absolute contraband the heading “resinous products, camphor and turpentine (oil spirit).”2

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 For a statement by the Secretary of state that the information conveyed in the British Ambassador’s note of December 22 “is received with profound regret” and reserving “for future communication the objections which this Government may have to the action of the British Government in listing resin and turpentine as contraband of war,” see the Secretary’s note to the British Ambassador, December 24, post, p. 371. [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558]

2 The announcement of this action provoked widespread demonstrations from the American interests affected by it. Telegrams and letters urging some action to avert the effects of this “most serious blow to one of the South’s greatest industries” were received from governors, senators and congressmen, chambers of commerce, and firms and individuals throughout the Southern States.

The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/689

[Document 457]

The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 29, 1914.

Sir: On two earlier occasions we have addressed you on behalf of members of this chamber who in a manner and a degree which we believe are without justification according to the established usages of nations are being impeded in ordinary business transactions. In one instance we called to your attention action on the part of Great Britain which has been prejudicial to our export trade in copper. Subsequently, we represented to you that Great Britain, even after a period sufficiently long to organize a system of censorship which will take reasonable account of the interests of neutral countries in neutral trade, continues arbitrarily and without notice to interrupt commercial cablegrams transmitted between the United States and neutral countries.

On behalf of commercial organizations in the South and their members who are interested in the production of turpentine and rosin, we now hope that steps can be taken to have Great Britain rescind its decision of December 23, 1914, that turpentine and rosin are absolute contraband of war.

Even in the days when sailing ships were in use, both as naval vessels and in the merchant marine, rosin and turpentine could not be said to be used exclusively for war. Certainly they do not to-day have any such exclusive use. Accordingly, in our understanding of the characteristic essential for classification of any article as absolute contraband, rosin and turpentine cannot be placed among absolute contraband without prejudicing the interests of a neutral nation to an extent beyond which no belligerent can fairly go.

The production of rosin and turpentine is an important American industry. In 1909, according to reports of the Bureau of the Census, it had products valued at $25,000,000, and gave employment to 44,000 persons. In the fiscal year of 1913 rosin valued at $17,000,000 was exported: in largest value, $4,900,000, to Germany; Great Britain received the second largest value, $3,800,000. In the fiscal year of 1914, the value of all rosin exported fell to $11,200,000, with Germany and Great Britain still the largest and second largest importers.

Of spirits of turpentine the United States exported a value of $8,700,000 in fiscal year of 1913, and a value of $8,000,000 in the year ended with June 1914. In the latter year a value of $2,900,000 was exported to Great Britain, $1,800,000 to the Netherlands, and $1,300;000 to Germany.

These statistics give some indication of the commercial and economic importance of the present attitude of England. This attitude will greatly accentuate the serious effects the European war has already had in the naval stores industry; in October 1914, the value of all rosin exported from the United States was $351,000, whereas in October 1913, the value was $677,000. The value of all turpentine exported in October 1914 was but $174,000; in October of last year it was $478,000. Unless Great Britain soon rescinds its decision to make rosin and turpentine absolute contraband of war, the state of the naval stores industry will still further decline.

Very respectfully,

John H. Fahey
President

Shipments of Tobacco Shipments of Tobacco

[458] The Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade to the Secretary of State

Hopkinsville, Kentucky, November 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/320

[459] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/332

[460] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/398

The Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/320

[Document 458]

The Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade to the Secretary of State

Hopkinsville, Kentucky, November 5, 1914.

Dear Sir: The Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade desires to call your attention to the deplorable condition of affairs in west Kentucky and west Tennessee is what is known as the “export district of dark-fired tobacco,” grown in about thirty counties of western Kentucky, and eight or ten counties in western Tennessee.

The crop of this section amounts to about 150,000,000 pounds tobacco annually, and of this quantity 20 per cent of said crop is manufactured and consumed in the United States, and 80 per cent is exported to Europe, namely: England, Spain, Italy, France, Austria, Germany, Holland, and all other northern European countries. Germany and Austria purchase of us 33⅓ per cent of our total export crop.

By reason of the disturbed conditions caused by the war, trading and shipping in our product has been entirely stopped, not that any of these countries have classed tobacco as “contraband”, but from the fact that shipments consigned to all countries have been interfered with, and some destined to Germany and Austria have been captured and towed into English ports.

There is a great deal of tobacco of the 1913 crop that is bought and unpaid for remaining at ports in the United States for shipment, and still other shipments that started but have dodged into neutral ports. All of this brings dire distress to our farmers and tobacco growers who in this section depend upon their tobacco as their money crop.

In August a delegation from Kentucky and Tennessee appeared at what was termed the “cotton conference,” which was presided over by Secretary McAdoo, other members of the Cabinet, and the regional reserve board members being present. At this meeting we were assured that whatever consideration was shown by the Government in the interest of cotton, the same would be extended to export tobacco.

The purpose of said meeting was to secure Government loans on warehouse certificates. We see that a treaty, or agreement, has been effected with the Ambassador of England whereby the embargo is raised on cotton, and a promise that shipments will not be interfered with destined to Germany, Austria, and other countries in Europe.

Now, we hereby petition you, as our representative and Secretary of State, to use your good office to secure for export tobacco the same consideration as has been secured for cotton, raising the embargo and permitting the shipment of tobacco in neutral bottoms to all European ports.

As the tobacco crop is not greater this year than a normal or average crop, if the agreement is affected there will be a demand that will take up our entire crop, thereby relieving the necessity for further appeal for Government loans, as the European countries will furnish the money to pay for the same.

We recognize that tobacco is a revenue producer in all these countries, nevertheless the revenue is paid by the subjects of each respective country, and tobacco being a luxury, the more the government consumes the greater the depletion of the treasury of that government, as it is used for cigars, and tobacco so purchased soon goes up in smoke. It cannot be used in the support of, nor sustain life as food, neither can it help the sick or wounded; it cannot be used for bullets or bayonets, therefore we see no reason why England, or any other country, should object to legitimate commercial transactions being carried on when the effect is of so great importance to a large section of Kentucky and Tennessee, whose farmers are at present without money to pay their state taxes until the market is opened up.

We pray you therefore to take immediate steps to give us relief.

Yours truly,

Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade
By R. E. Cooper , President

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/332

[Document 459]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 6, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The Department is greatly pressed by American growers and exporters of tobacco for an indication of the position of the British Government in regard to shipments of this article. It is represented that 80 per cent of the dark tobacco grown in the States of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia is exported, and that Germany and Austria consume annually one third of our total exportation of this commodity. Complaint is made that when war was declared a great deal of tobacco that had been contracted for to be delivered in Austria, Belgium, and Germany was stopped at our shipping points here, or diverted into foreign neutral ports, so that as a result it has been impossible to make deliveries.

The tobacco growers and exporters are familiar with the cotton situation and say that it would be a great relief to them if an assurance could be obtained as to tobacco along the same lines a was obtained from the British Government as to cotton. As the sale of the 1914 crop will begin about the middle of this month and as it is most important from the point of view of popular opinion in the United States, especially in the southern portion where conditions resulting from the war have caused very great hardship and not a little distress, it would be very gratifying if you could find it possible to give an assurance to me, which may be published, to the effect that as tobacco is not on any of the contraband lists of Great Britain, the British Government has no intention of interfering with shipments in neutral bottoms to any countries in Europe.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/398

[Document 460]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Dear Mr. Counsellor: In reply to your letter of November 6 I have the honour to inform you that as tobacco is not on any of the British contraband lists which I have received, nor as I understand, on any list which has been communicated to you, the British Government has no intention of interfering with shipments in neutral bottoms to any countries in Europe.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

Interference by belligerent governments with neutral ships and cargoesInterference by belligerent governments with neutral ships and cargoes

Contents

Cases Arising under the British Proclamation Of August 4 and Order In Council Of August 20 . Cases Arising under the British Proclamation Of August 4 and Order In Council Of August 20 1 .

1  Ante, pp. 219–20 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

[461] The North American Export Grain Association to the Secretary of State

New York, August 12, 1914. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/528

[462] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 300.115/154

[463] The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914.

File No. 300.115

[464] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received August 18, 1914, 1:15 p.m. ]

File No. 763.72112/87

[465] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 18, 1914. [Received August 19, 11:30 a.m.]

File No. 300.115/63

[466] The Honorable Seth Low to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 17, 1914. [Received August 19.]

File No. 300.115/245

[467] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 300.115/63

[468] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 23, 1914, 6 p.m.

[469] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received August 27, 1914, 3 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/106

[470] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914, 7 p.m.

[471] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London August 28, 1914. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/117

[472] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914.

File No. 300.115/63

[473] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 29, 1914. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/136

[474] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, September 3, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/165

[475] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 27, 1914. [Received September 9.]

File No. 763.72112/126

[476] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 10, 1914.

File No. 300.115/197

[477] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received September 17, 1914, 4:30 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/340

[478] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914.

File No. 300.115/450e

[479] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received September 25, 1914, 8:20 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/477

[480] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, September 28, 1914.

[481] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 15, 1914. [Received September 28.]

File No. 300.115/512

The North American Export Grain Association to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/528

[Document 461]

The North American Export Grain Association to the Secretary of State

New York, August 12, 1914.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

During the past week many vessels carrying grain and other foodstuffs from the United States to continental ports have been diverted to English ports. The precise causes of these diversions are not as yet precisely known but we are advised to-day that the British Admiralty are notifying shipowners to land the cargoes of the diverted vessels with the port authorities who are instructed to sell perishable cargo and store non-perishable. We beg you to cable our Ambassador in London to make immediate inquiry of the British Government concerning the action taken in these cases. In the present circumstances shippers are without protection and invoke the interposition of their Government for the protection of their property and interests.

North American Export Grain Association

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/154

[Document 462]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Department has received information that vessels carrying grain and other foodstuffs from United States to continental ports have been diverted to English ports, particularly steamers Kursk, Campanello, and Spenser from New York to Rotterdam, containing shipment 360,000 bushels of wheat by Milmine, Bodman and Company, and that British Admiralty are notifying shipowners to land cargoes of diverted vessels with port authorities who are instructed to sell perishable cargo and store non-perishable. Make inquiry of British Government for facts of case and bring to its attention injury to result from this course, if followed, to American shippers. Department understands that some of these vessels are or will be diverted to ports affording no market for the cargoes, whether perishable or non-perishable, and that such action, if taken, will result in heavy losses to American exporters. Milmine, Bodman and Company protest against action and insist that wheat be sold only with advice and assistance of one of their British correspondents. Department desires full facts of situation with reasons and basis for British Government’s action.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls File No. 300.115

[Document 463]

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

Telegraph promptly capture of merchant vessels coming to your knowledge. When you have information of claim of American owner of cargo, give informal notice thereof; and when requested by American owner of cargo, select representative for him without liability of yourself or this Government.

Bryan

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/87

[Document 464]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received August 18, 1914, 1:15 p.m. ]

[Telegram]

Marshal of prize court informs me neutrals can obtain possession of their property not contraband by applying procurator general, Treasury Chambers, Whitehall, who will require proof ownership and particulars as to freight whether paid or unpaid.

Skinner

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/63

[Document 465]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 18, 1914.
[Received August 19, 11:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

405. Your August 13, 8 p.m. Sir Edward Grey informs me that the British Government will consider claims of American shippers whose cargoes destined for parts of British enemies are diverted to British ports and sold. If such claims for loss by such diversion be established, the British Government will in due time pay them.

American Ambassador

The Honorable Seth Low to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/245

[Document 466]

The Honorable Seth Low to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 17, 1914.
[Received August 19.]

Sir: On behalf of the conference held in Washington on August 14, 1914, under the auspices of the Secretary of the Treasury,1 I have the honor to ask your attention to the following resolution adopted by the committee appointed by that conference:

Resolved that the State Department be requested to take up with the British Government the question of securing the release of funds and shipments now held in London or elsewhere resulting from the sale or diversion of shipments that have been diverted or commandeered

Very respectfully,

Seth Low
Chairman

1 The Grain Export and Foreign Exchange Conference here referred to comprised 62 representatives of the trading, shipping, and banking interests concerned in the exportation of grain. It considered and passed resolutions on all aspects of the business and designated a standing committee in three sections—war risk insurance, transportation, and foreign exchange—under the chairmanship of Mr. Low, to carry on its work, to confer with the departments of Government, and to make further recommendations for measures of relief. Other measures successfully urged by the conference were the creation of a Government Bureau of War Risk Insurance and a relaxation of the laws governing American registry of foreign-built ships.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/63

[Document 467]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram 405, August 18. Department advised that American shippers, though expecting compensation for damages, desire now the release of grain cargoes diverted to England and of the funds resulting from the sale of such cargoes. Otherwise grain trade seriously blocked on account of money tied up, in England, and shippers may decline to make further shipments in English vessels if present policy is continued. Make immediate and strong representations on the specific question of the release of funds and cargoes and press for most expeditious and favorable reply. Cable results.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 468]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 23, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Is Department to understand that presentation of claims of neutral owners of cargo to procurator general, London, applies only, to vessels seized in or carried to ports in England proper?

At what other British ports has Great Britain prize courts, and what steps should American owners of cargo take for release of same aboard ships seized and taken to such other British ports?

This Government considers all cargo consigned to or by American owners afloat before outbreak of hostilities not subject to adjudication as prize, and assumes that the British Government will facilitate their release. Owing to sudden outbreak of war and disturbed communication with foreign countries and great difficulty of American owners presenting formal claims or having representation, the United States thinks it would be an act of justice if British Government would direct release of American-owned goods afloat before declaration of war without necessity for presentation of claim, where it is apparent that goods are not contraband. Otherwise innocent American owners will suffer great hardships and irreparable injury. Present this matter to the British Government and urge its favorable action, which will have effect of allaying apprehension of American interests involved, who otherwise may fear to risk future shipment under any circumstances.

Bryan

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/106

[Document 469]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received August 27, 1914, 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Persons interested in cargoes other than enemy cargoes on captured ships may obtain order for release on submitting proof of ownership such as bills lading and particulars as to freight paid or unpaid to procurator general, Treasury, Whitehall, provided such proof is submitted prior to issuance of writ in prize-court action. If similar evidence is produced after issuance, of writ, procurator general will assent to order by court for release. The court determines time limit for production of documentary evidence. When a writ has been issued, an appearance to such writ should be entered by a solicitor at Admiralty marshal’s office within eight days thereof. The court will not question authority of a solicitor who enters appearance. American claimants can submit proof directly without solicitor to procurator general when certain that no writ has been issued. In other cases and if without London counsel, they should send the proofs and cable instructions to me to employ counsel if necessary. In case of Sloan, solicitor has been employed. Assurances have been given that due consideration will be given American claimants. Does Department desire list of diverted ships and cargo details?

Skinner

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner) [Document 470]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

State specifically if proof and procedure to procurator general, London, referred to in your August 27, 3 p.m., for release of neutral cargo, apply to all enemy vessels captured by the British and taken to any British port or to vessels in ports of the British Isles only. When and under what circumstances does writ in prize-court action issue? Will prize courts be held at other British ports outside of London? If so, what is the procedure necessary for American claimants in such last-named cases? Owing to interrupted communication by wire and by mail, and great number of vessels suddenly seized and detained, it will hardly be possible for American owners to present a claim or proof of ownership within the usual time of monition. Many American owners have not yet learned of the seizure of the vessels; others do not know to what port vessel and cargo have been taken, or where or when the prize court may sit. The documents in many cases are marooned and parties cannot tell precisely whether the drafts and documents have been taken up. This uncertainty and confusion arise from the sudden outbreak of hostilities and the great amount of commerce afloat on the vessels of the countries now at war. Department does not consider that neutral cargo on any of the vessels captured or seized which sailed before the war and in ignorance of hostilities can be confiscated or adjudged prize under any circumstances, and that prize proceedings on such cargo are not appropriate. Many millions of American-owned goods are involved; great uneasiness exists amongst American exporters and importers respecting the future of their cargo afloat before the war. This Government expects, of course, that due consideration will be given American claimants, but it desires that all American property which at the time of its seizure was engaged in innocent and peaceful commerce shall not be subjected to the hazard of an adjudication as prize under existing circumstances.

You will render every possible assistance to American interests involved, and when so requested by American claimants, engage counsel on their account and cooperate with counsel in every possible way.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/117

[Document 471]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London August 28, 1914.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

504. Your August 20, 7 p.m. Sir Edward Grey informs me that a special committee has been appointed to deal with all cases in their merits regarding the release of grain cargoes diverted to England. This committee is communicating with various representatives of American shippers and will be ready to hear any other such representatives as desire to approach them. It will sit daily at the board of trade and all communications respecting it should be addressed to its secretary, H. C. Money, Harbor Department, Board of Trade. No difficulty is anticipated in regard to the release of cargoes about which the question of prize does not arise.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/63

[Document 472]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

Referring to Department’s August 23, 6 p.m., no reply has been received from you, though matter of urgent importance. If you have not presented matter to British Government as instructed, or if you have not received a favorable statement from British Foreign Office, you will present to Foreign Office note in the sense of the following:

Immense number of shipments by and to Americans and American concerns, on ships of the several countries now at war, were afloat prior to any declaration of war or outbreak of hostilities. Some of these originated in the territory of neutrals and were destined to American citizens and American ports; others originated in this country and were from citizens of the United States to the territories and citizens of other neutrals; some were shipments from citizens and ports of the United States to the territories of the countries now at war and others were from the territories of the present belligerents to citizens and ports of the United States. These shipments were made in time of peace, in due course of commerce, and had no relation to the war which has arisen since the vessels carrying this cargo sailed. Under principles of international law and justice and enlightened usage of nations, neutral cargo aboard such Vessels cannot be confiscated, and is under no circumstances rightfully subject to adjudication and condemnation as prize. Shipments by and to the nationals of a neutral, made before war, are not in the category of shipments made by neutrals in the vessels of a belligerent after war has been declared or hostilities have begun. As such shipments are not confiscable, they should be released without the formality of a claim by the neutral owner and without proof required in ordinary cases of prize, provided it is established that they were at sea at the outbreak of war.

In addition, communication between this country and the many ports at which a great number of captured vessels are held has been interrupted and prevented by the war, and it would hardly be possible in many cases for American owners to present claims or proof before the expiration of the usual monition, if such procedure is followed. The documents in many cases are marooned, and in some cases the American owner is unable at the present moment to ascertain the precise status of the documents, or whether drafts with bills of lading and documents have been honored. In fine, for the reasons above stated and for other reasons equally cogent, the United States cannot recognize as legal the condemnation or confiscation of cargo in the situation stated, even though the usual prize proceedings should be followed. The injustice to innocent interests would be manifest.

Much of this commerce was between this country and the United Kingdom, supposedly to the mutual advantage of both countries and their people. The Government of the United States, though informed that the British Government contemplates sending such cargo to prize courts for procedure, is slow to believe that the British Government has in mind to attempt to subject the enormous amount of American commerce involved to confiscation as prize of war. The Government of the United States earnestly hopes that the British Government will take such action as will facilitate the release to American owners of all cargo aboard vessels afloat at the outbreak of war, time and opportunity commensurate with existing conditions being given to them to establish their rights to their goods.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/136

[Document 473]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 29, 1914.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

508. With a view to removing some misapprehensions that have arisen the British Government’s committee on diverted cargoes have issued the following statement as regards dealings with such cargoes:

Except in cases of cargo in an enemy ship, or cargo in respect of which a question arises of its constituting enemy cargo or contraband (whether absolute or conditional contraband), the instructions issued to collectors of customs provide for their allowing: (a) Discharge from the ship and delivery out of customs control of all cargoes consigned to the United Kingdom.

(b) Discharge from the ship and delivery out of customs control of all cargoes in ships diverted from a foreign destination to a port in the United Kingdom, if the owners or their agents prefer to discharge the cargo in the United Kingdom.

(c) Conveyance to a British, allied, or neutral destination of all cargoes which have been brought to a port of the United Kingdom merely for the purpose of being immediately forwarded in the same or another ship to a British, allied, or neutral destination.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/165

[Document 474]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, September 3, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

President Admiralty division prize court writes:

Writs are issued when it is shown that ship or goods should be condemned as lawful prize. Prize court will sit only in London for [the] United Kingdom. Owners of cargo alleged to be property neutrals, if they satisfy procurator general by the shipping, documents that such cargo is neutral property, will obtain his consent to cargo being released and marshal will at once act on such consent. In compliance with your request American owners of cargo shall have one month further time in which to enter appearance and court should be prepared on special grounds to enlarge this time. The procurator general has already in many cases consented to release before an appearance has been entered.

Procurator general has agreed with me to note my informal protests as to vessels taken to ports in British Isles and give me opportunity to appoint solicitor for absent owners if such have not entered appearance within tune limit agreed. Following courts authorized act as prize courts under Prize Courts Act 1894:

Supreme Court in Gibraltar; Colombo for Ceylon; Mauritius; Singapore for Straits Settlements; Hongkong; Sydney for New South Wales; Melbourne for Victoria; Adelaide for South Australia; Perth or Albany for Western Australia; Hobart for Tasmania; Dunedin, Wellington, Auckland and Christchurch for New Zealand; St. John’s for Newfoundland; Stanley for Falkland Islands; Brisbane for Queensland; Kingston or Port Royal for Jamaica; Simon’s Bay or Cape Town for Cape of Good Hope; Sierre Leone; Bombay; Durban for Natal; Suva for Fiji; Nassau for Bahamas; Georgetown for British Guiana; Belize for Honduras; Port of Spain for Trinidad; Antigua for Leeward Islands; commercial court in Malta; exchequer court or local judges in Admiralty in Halifax, Victoria, Quebec, Charlottetown and St. John for Canada; court of general assizes for Bermuda; royal court of St. Lucia for Windward Islands; residents court for Aden; high court of judicature, Fort William, for Calcutta; and chief court for Lower Burma.

The towns named indicate places at which it would be convenient court sit and colonies have been so informed but decision as to place of sitting rests with colony.

Skinner

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/126

[Document 475]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 27, 1914.
[Received September 9.]

No. 420]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed a copy of the note from the Foreign Office I telegraphed you on the 26th instant (No. 483) defining the attitude of the British Government with regard to the so-called Declaration of London, 1909, together with a copy of a memorandum which accompanied the note, and a copy of the King’s order in council of the 20th instant relating to this matter.1

There will also be found attached a copy of a circular note I have just received from the Foreign Office relating to the same order in council and to the rules governing the proceedings in the British prize courts. Another copy of the King’s order in council of the 20th instant which accompanied the circular note is enclosed herewith, and there will be found as well, in the pouch which accompanies this dispatch, six copies of the prize court rules.2

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Foreign Office,
August 26, 1914.

Your Excellency: I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a copy of an order in council made on the 20th instant, prescribing the extent to which the instrument signed on the 26th February, 1909, and known as the Declaration of London, will be adhered to by His Majesty’s Government during the course of the present war.

At the same time I have the honour to enclose a copy of the prize court rules which will govern proceedings in the prize courts established in the United Kingdom, and which either have been or will, it is anticipated, shortly be adopted throughout the British Empire.

All persons having any claims in respect of vessels or cargoes which are the subject of proceedings in the prize courts should take steps to have their interests represented in accordance with these rules. With respect to vessels Which may be in the custody of the prize courts established in the United Kingdom, I would call your attention to the following notice which appears daily on the front page of the Times newspaper:

PRIZE COURTS

Admiralty Marshal’s Office

Royal Courts of Justice, London, W. C.

Registry of the Prize Courts in Great Britain and Ireland

August 14, 1914 .

All persons having any interest in cargoes other than enemy cargoes laden on enemy ships captured as prizes, and requiring a release of such cargoes or portion of cargoes, should make enquiries in London at the offices of His Majesty’s procurator general, Treasury Chambers, Whitehall, and at the outports of the United Kingdom, at the offices of the agents for His Majesty’s procurator general, whose addresses can be obtained from the collectors of customs at such outports.

His Majesty’s procurator general will require proof of ownership and particulars as to freight, whether paid or unpaid.

In cases where the title of persons domiciled in allied or neutral States, or of friendly aliens domiciled in this country, who are interested in such cargoes, is clear and established without doubt to the satisfaction of the procurator general, such cargoes or portions of cargoes will be released with as little delay as possible, provided that no question of contraband arises, and subject to the adjustment of any matters relating to freight or other charges falling on the cargo. In more doubtful cases recourse to the ordinary prize-court procedure will be necessary. It will in most cases be convenient that the parties should communicate with the agent of the procurator general at the port where the ship is rather than with the procurator general himself.

I have also the honour to inform you that notice will be given on the front page of the Times newspaper of the institution of proceedings in cases in which vessels are in the custody of the prize courts in the United Kingdom. In cases where vessels have been detained in or brought into British ports outside the United Kingdom, it is not practicable to give similar notice in the press of this country; but with a view to minimising the inconvenience caused to subjects or citizens of allied or neutral States, I have made arrangements under which I shall be informed of the names of all ships detained in or brought into British ports. Lists of such ships will be communicated periodically to your excellency.

It is also provided in the prize court rules that where proceedings are instituted in respect of a ship purporting to be neutral, notice shall be sent to the consular officer of the state to which the ship purports to belong.

I trust that these arrangements will minimise the inconvenience to which subjects or citizens of allied or neutral States must inevitably be put, in this connection, by reason of the existence of a state of war.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Ralph Paget

1 These documents are printed as telegraphed, ante, pp. 219–20 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366].

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/197

[Document 476]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

87. Your 584, September 4.1

Ambassador Spring Rice informed Department September 4 of receipt of telegram from Sir Edward Grey as follows: In order to prevent loss to subjects of neutral powers and to encourage continuance of trade, His Majesty’s Government have taken steps to set free expeditiously and without reference to prize court as many cargoes as possible, even though in some cases cargoes may be liable in law to condemnation as a prize. An executive committee with full powers to deal with such cases has been appointed.

This telegram has been copied extensively in United States as favorable attitude of British Government for expeditious disposition of American cargo aboard captured vessels.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/340

[Document 477]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received September 17, 1914, 4:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

In proposing to release certain American goods procurator general informs me order will be made: “On payment of any sum which may be due in respect of freight.” As goods are not landed at ports to which originally consigned, payment of freight to London necessarily adds to shippers’ losses. Does Department desire me to urge release of neutral goods free of all charges?

Skinner

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner) File No. 300.115/450e

[Document 478]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department considers British Government not entitled to collect freight on cargo on diverted, detained, or seized vessels sailing before war. American interests at best suffer enormous losses through detention and course pursued by British, which course Department cannot approve as extending neutral commerce rights to which entitled under international law and modern usage.

Moreover, ships have not earned freight. Press for release American goods free of charges.

With Department’s position made clear, it will not advise owners to refuse to pay freight since still greater loss from further detention would accrue.

Lansing

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/477

[Document 479]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received September 25, 1914, 8:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

When proof of ownership of neutral goods in captured ships is reasonably proved, procurator general orders release. When legal ownership is in doubt, cases are referred to Bonar Law’s committee which releases goods ex gratia. In many instances American claimants have accepted release paying freight without protest. To my representation that British Government is not entitled to collect freight on cargo on diverted, detained, or seized vessels sailing before war, procurator general states unprepared to offer any final judgment but is inclined to release on payment freight under protest, determining question of principle later, and if deciding in our favor, all freight already paid to be reimbursed. In respect of British ships diverted to British ports: when court releases such goods, the shipowner’s lien for freight at once attaches and procurator general does not interfere in these cases. Unless Department can propose remedy, shippers must pay freight and heavy storage or be deprived of goods. Procurator maintains that in many cases, both as to cargo of captured and diverted ships, commercial position of goods when released, is as satisfactory or better than if port of destination had been reached and that in equity freight should be paid. I have insisted neutral shippers were under no obligation to consider whether British market was better or worse than intended German market; that goods were landed here involuntarily; that contracts were broken; incidental costs piled up; and that release free of freight and charges was insufficient compensation for such losses which should be computed and paid as incident of war. In some cases British Government have sold American cargo without awaiting proofs and expect claimant to accept proceeds of sale less freight. I have claimed that owners were entitled to proceeds such sales plus difference between such proceeds and prices they expected to receive. Respecting diverted cargo, under American bills lading transporting vessels would seem to be responsible for proper delivery at destination and can be relieved of liability when losses arise from perils [of] sea, acts [of] God, or public enemies but not from action of home Government as in present cases. If Department approves these views and will instruct, I can appear before Bonar Law’s committee and attempt to settle expeditiously these questions which involve large amounts.

Skinner

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner) [Document 480]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State,
Washington, September 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

See Department’s August 23, 6 p.m., to Ambassador and previous instructions to you.1

If you deem advisable you may appear before Bonar Law’s committee for expeditious settlement of matter of freight, making plain the attitude of this Government as stated in instructions referred to, and in order to prevent losses from further detention on account of payment of freight, you may advise American interests to pay freight if finally demanded with protest, question to be determined on principle later, and if decided in our favor all freight collected to be reimbursed.

Lansing

1  Ante, p. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/512

[Document 481]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 15, 1914.
[Received September 28.]

No. 446]

Sir: Referring to your cablegram of August 29 [28] concerning the treatment of American cargoes on ships of the several countries now at war, 2 instructing me to present the matter to the Foreign Office with request for an answer at the earliest possible moment, and to my telegram No. 528 of August 31 in acknowledgment thereof,3 I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a note from His Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs dated September 14, in answer to my memorandum dated August 31, ire the premises.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The British, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

Foreign Office,
September 14, 1914.

Your Excellency: I have had under careful consideration your excellency’s note of August 31 enclosing a copy of a telegram from the State Department on the subject of neutral cargo on enemy vessels which have been captured by His Majesty’s forces.

In reply I have the honour to inform your excellency that His Majesty’s Government, who are bound by Article 3 of the Declaration of Paris, have no intention of claiming the condemnation of neutral goods, not being contraband of war, on a captured enemy vessel, and they are as anxious as the Government of the United States that such cargo should be restored to the rightful owners with the least possible delay.

Your excellency will realize that when such cargoes have, in consquence of the capture of the ship, come into the custody of the prize court, it is impossible for them to be released except by the court. This does not however, necessitate the owners involving themselves in lengthy prize court proceedings. In cases where the proper evidence of title can be produced to the procurator general, as indicated in my note of August 26, the goods are released at once, subject to the adjustment of any questions of freight. His Majesty’s Government realize, however, that in many cases it is not possible at the moment to produce full evidence of title, and they have now made arrangements under which such cargo can be released at once, provided that the claimants can produce some reasonable evidence of title, even though it may not be possible to produce evidence of such a strict and complete nature as would be required by the prize court.

Thus the only case left unprovided for is that in which the claimants can produce no evidence of title at all Your excellency will I am sure understand, that in this case it is impossible for the goods to be released at once without some guarantee that the claimant is really entitled to them; but if, the claimant or his representative is prepared to file a bail bond in accordance with the prize court rules, the goods can be released, and the title can thereafter be proved in the usual way.

I would also remind your excellency that an interested party may enter an appearance by leave of the court at any time before final adjudication.

I trust therefore that the Government of the United States will realize that His Majesty’s Government are doing all in their power to ensure that innocent neutral cargo shall be restored to its owners with as little delay as possible, and that the unavoidable inconvenience to neutral merchants shall be minimized so far as possible.

I have [etc.]

[File copy not signed]

2  Ante, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472].

3 Not printed.

Cases Arising under the Additional Proclamation of September Cases Arising under the Additional Proclamation of September 1

1  Ante, p. 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381].

[482] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, September 28, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/518

[483] Resolution of the Senate of the United States of September 28 (Calendar day, September 30), 1914

September 28, 2014

File No. 300.115/585

[484] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received September 30, 1914, 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/561

[485] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, undated. [Received October 2, 1914, 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/589

[486] The Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York to the Secretary of State

New York, October 2, 1914.

File No. 300.115/596

[487] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1914.

[488] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, October 7, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 11:15 a.m.]

File No. 341.115G 79/1

[489] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, September 25, 1914. [Received October 7.]

File No. 763.72112/161

[490] Senator Williams to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 300.115/729

[491] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 300.115/960½

[492] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 13, 1914.

File No. 300.115/729

[493] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Minister at Stockholm (Howard)

London, October 14, 1914. [Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, October 15, 1914.]

File No. 763.72112/206

[494] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, October 21, 1914. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 800.115/880

[495] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 21, 1914.

File No. 341.115St2/10

[496] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 22, 1914.

File No. 841.115St2/24

[497] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 22, 1914.

File No. 341.115St2/17

[498] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1914.

File No. 341.115St2/18

[499] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 24, 1914. [Received 11:55 p.m.]

File No. 341.115St2/32

[500] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, October 12, 1914. [Received October 26.]

File No. 300.115/978

[501] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 25, 1914. [Received October 26.]

File No. 763.72112/219

[502] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 26, 1914. [Received October 27, 8 a.m.]

File No. 341.115St2/37

[503] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1914.

File No. 300.115/768b

[504] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

[505] Four Copper Exporting Companies to the Secretary of State

New York, October 28, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1000

[506] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/733a

[507] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, October 28, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/241½

[508] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 30, 1914. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/272

[509] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 2, 1914.

[510] Two Copper Exporting Companies to the Secretary of State

New York, October 31, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1032

[511] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

[512] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 2, 1914. [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1058

[513] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 2, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/284

[514] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, November 3, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1094

[515] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 4, 1914. [Received November 5, 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/304

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/518

[Document 482]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, September 28, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 8:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Dutch steamers Sloterdyk and Rotterdam brought Plymouth because of copper in cargo consigned by various American firms to Dutch concerns. As copper was declared conditional contraband on September 21 only and ships left New York prior to that date, I am protesting against seizure as unwarranted, as other shipments may be en route. Question arises as to American position relative to copper exports after September 21 in neutral bottoms consigned to neutral ports. British authorities are bringing all the Dutch liners into British ports and require affirmative proof that goods are for Dutch consumption.

Skinner

Resolution of the Senate of the United States of September 28 (Calendar day, September 30), 1914 File No. 300.115/585

[Document 483]

Resolution of the Senate of the United States of September 28 (Calendar day, September 30), 1914 1

September 28, 2014

Resolved that the Secretary of State is hereby requested if not incompatible with the best interests of the Government, to inform the Senate whether the British Government is interfering with export shipments of copper from American points to Rotterdam, carried in neutral bottoms, and if so, what reasons or justification are assigned by the British Government for so, doing.

Attest:

James M. Baker
Secretary

1 No reply was made to this resolution.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/561

[Document 484]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received September 30, 1914, 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Inquiries concerning cargoes laden ships captured lying French ports should be addressed Prefect Maritime of district where ship detained. Releases effected same basis as in United Kingdom where cases go to prize court at Bordeaux. Claims should be presented through advocate of Council of State.

Skinner

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/589

[Document 485]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, undated.
[Received October 2, 1914, 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

39. Branch houses of American firms and importers of American products at Rotterdam request me to transmit the following memo randum for your serious and early consideration:

We desire to protest energetically against measures taken by belligerent governments regarding shipments consigned us from the United States which have resulted in the Holland-America Line refusing to accept cargo intended for us unless consigned to the Dutch Government. We feel that American houses are entitled to conduct their business direct with their branches without interference as long as the goods clearly bear the neutral origin, character, and destination and are transported to neutral destination by neutral carriers. We are willing to sign a declaration to the effect that we are the consignees of the respective goods; that they are or will be sold to our customers in the Netherlands exclusively or for reexportation to such countries only as are not at war. This declaration should fully cover the requirements of all belligerents.

Van Dyke

The Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/596

[Document 486]

The Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York to the Secretary of State

New York, October 2, 1914.

Dear Sir: I have been instructed by the board of managers of the coffee exchange of the City of New York to transmit to you the enclosed copy of resolutions adopted at a meeting held this date, asking your prompt consideration for the same.

I remain [etc.]

Frank Norton

[Enclosure]

Resolution adopted by the board of managers of the coffee exchange of the City of New York

October 2, 1914.

Whereas of the total amount of coffee annually imported into the United. States by its citizens, amounting to about 870,000,000 pounds, about 73 per cent thereof is shipped from Brazil and by far the greater part thereof is transported to this country by foreign steamers; and,

Whereas a state of war now exists between Great Britain and Germany and between other European states, and it appears that one or more belligerent cruisers off the South American coast have captured and destroyed upon the high seas, without adjudication by a prize court, the steamer Indian Prince, and her cargo of about 34,000 bags of coffee of the approximate value of about $500,000, and other valuable cargo, the great bulk of which was the property of citizens of the United States, said vessel having laden her cargo at neutral Brazilian ports and being bound to ports in the United States, another neutral nation; and,

Whereas there are now afloat in steamers of belligerent nations about 474,000 bags (02,568,000 pounds) of coffee, valued at about $5,318,000, largely the property of citizens of the United States, bound from neutral ports in South America to ports in the United States, and it appears that there is grave danger of the capture of the steamers carrying said cargoes and the total destruction of said shipment of merchandise by belligerent cruisers notwithstanding that said cargoes are not contraband of war, are the property of neutrals, who are citizens of the United States, in course of transportation between said neutral ports and are consequently not good prize, and that other similar shipments have been contracted for; and,

Whereas coffee constitutes one of the staple imports of great importance and value to the citizens of the United States and it is feared that if the aforesaid destruction by the cruisers of one belligerent of enemy ships and their neutral cargoes of coffee owned by citizens of the. United States, shipped as aforesaid, continues, said shipments now afloat may be largely destroyed and lost, to the great damage of the owners thereof, and that the making of future shipments will thereby be greatly restricted if not rendered commercially impracticable, owing to increased rates of insurance and the inadequate supply of neutral vessels available for that purpose, to the serious loss and detriment of consumers and importers of coffee in the United States; it is therefore

Resolved that in view of the serious danger of capture and destruction now threatening importations of coffee into the United States by its citizens in ships owned by subjects of nations now at war, by war vessels of nations hostile to the government of such carrying ships, the secretary of this exchange be and he hereby is authorized and directed to communicate this danger threatening such coffee shipments to the Hon. William J. Bryan, Secretary of State of the United States, by transmitting to him a copy of this resolution, to the end that the Government of the United States may take such steps and make such representations to the nations now at war as will while saving and protecting the rights of our citizens for indemnity in respect of such losses as they have already sustained, result in preventing the destruction by warships of any belligerent nation, of cargoes of coffee and other Merchandise owned by citizens of the United States’ in transit between neutral ports.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York [Document 487]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Coffee Exchange of the City of New York

Department of State,
Washington, October 9, 1914.

Sir: The Department acknowledges receipt of your letter of October 2, transmitting a resolution adopted by the board of managers of the coffee exchange of the City of York, on the subject of the seizure and destruction of ships of belligerent nations engaged in the transportation of coffee from neutral ports to the United States, and in reply begs to say that the resolution will receive the most careful consideration.

The practice of nations in the past, stated generally, has been to sink prizes of war taken on the seas if either the ship or any part of her cargo was neutral property only when military necessity made this course imperative. This practice has now been embodied, at least in part, in the rules on the subject laid down by the Declaration of London, which Germany appears to have adopted for her guidance in the present naval warfare, and on which she has presumably based her action in this instance. It is not to be presumed, however, that the German Government will refuse to grant indemnity for neutral property which has been lost in such manner and which would otherwise have been restored by a court of prize.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 341.115G 79/1

[Document 488]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, October 7, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 11:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to seizure of 1,000 barrels wood alcohol owned by Grey and Company, of which Admiralty sold one lot at forced sale, prior to filing of claim, and procurator’s offer to release goods on payment of any freight which may be due, I stated September 29 that this mode of settlement would be unsatisfactory to American Government, adding that any loss resulting from forced sale constituted a reasonable claim and that no charges for freight and like expenses could be recognized as due. Procurator general was also supplied with text of Department’s views October 6. Procurator states my reference to views of Department will be regarded; merely as views put forward on behalf of individual American firms. While unable to make any general statement, he will take into consideration any representations respecting freight and charges in particular cases. The Bonar Law committee “if hampered by what appear unreasonable contentions might be reluctantly compelled to adopt stricter attitude.” The procurator and committee state that in the majority of cases property has clearly or probably passed to enemy consignees and would have been condemned either to confiscation or detention., They claim to have acted on principle of doing what is equitable, independently of strictly legal considerations, “and payment of freight and charges is as a rule a condition which the committee and procurator consider to be fair and reasonable.”

If American shippers are compelled to pay these charges as condition precedent to release of goods, their losses will be heavily increased for benefit of British prize fund. Department, should restate its position as authoritative position of American Government.

Skinner

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/161

[Document 489]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, September 25, 1914.
[Received October 7.]

No. 66]

Sir: I have been visited on several occasions by Mr. J. Rypperda Wierdsma, managing director of the Holland-American Line, of Rotterdam, and another director of the same company, who labor under the impression—or at least the hope—that the interests of the American Government in the cargo and passengers carried by the ships of their line might induce it to support the efforts of the Netherlands Government to prevent further interference from the British Government. The Nieuw Amsterdam, the Ryndam, and the Rotterdam, each eastward bound, have been arrested during the past few weeks, and only after long and costly delays have they been permitted to proceed from the British ports to which they have been convoyed.

The motive for these arrests is the British fear that the ships carry contraband, or conditional contraband, and apparently the British. Government requires each vessel to prove that the cargo is not contraband before allowing it to proceed, although no undertaking is given on its part to show that it has any prima facie cause for arresting the ship in the first place. To put the matter practically, the British Government desires convincing proofs that cargo going to Holland is not intended for reshipment to Germany. While the Dutch Government has forbidden the export from Holland of various articles on the British list of merchandise contraband or conditional contraband, it also has an engagement with the German Government to keep navigation on the Rhine open.

On the landing of goods from the United States or elsewhere, the importer declares that they are for “consumption” or “transit” if for “consumption,” then they can not be reexported, but if for “transit,” then the importer may reship them to any point he pleases. It is conceivably difficult for the shipping company to know in advance what final disposition the importer intends to make of his goods, and so far as I know the Holland-America Line has not undertaken to adopt the expedient of accepting goods at New York only with an ironclad contract on the part of exporter and importer to declare the shipment for “consumption” on the other side. Perhaps if the shipping company did so, the German Government might protest upon the ground of discrimination and violation of the declaration of neutrality.

Undoubtedly the Dutch Government is in a trying position, between anvil and hammer. Down at the bottom, the Holland-America Line are troubled respecting anticipated shipments of American cotton. Cotton is not now on the conditional contraband list in this country, but my visitors seem to fear that it may be placed there. They expect to bring over large quantities, and while much of it may remain in Holland, probably a great deal will go into Germany also. They are hoping that the attitude of the American Government would be favorable to their interests if shipments of cotton consigned from American ports to Rotterdam should be held up by the belligerent powers.

I have [etc.]

Robert Skinner

Senator Williams to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/729

[Document 490]

Senator Williams to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 12, 1914.

My dear Mr. Secretary: Here is a telegram from Mr. W. P. Kretschmar, of Greenville, Mississippi. Judging by his name he is an American of German descent. Of course, cottonseed oil and cottonseed oil cake are distinctly declared by the conference of London to be non-contraband, not even conditional contraband, and I hardly think it likely that any of the belligerents are interfering with the shipments of these two products. I send you the wire, however, in order that you may inquire into it and take such methods as may be necessary, in case it is a fact.

I am [etc.]

John Sharp Williams

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The President of the Chamber of Commerce, Greenville, Mississippi (W. P. Kretschmar), to Senator Williams

Greenville, Mississippi , October 9, 1914.

British Government is interfering with shipments of cottonseed oil and cake to neutral countries like Holland and Denmark. Please take such immediate action as you deem advisable in the premises with view of having same stopped, because if it continues it will put the cottonseed oil industry in the same deplorable condition as the cotton people and deprive the planters of practically only revenue they are deriving from the present cotton crop.

W. P. Kretschmar

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner) File No. 300.115/960½

[Document 491]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, October 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your October 7, 12 noon. The course pursued by the British officials respecting disposition of goods aboard seized, detained, and diverted vessels is in furtherance of a policy affecting American commerce; and the position of the Department, text of which you state you have furnished to procurator general and to Bonar Law’s committee, is the authoritative position of the American Government and not merely representations in behalf of particular shipments. You will so inform the procurator general and the Bonar Law committee, stating that the position of the Department is not affected by the course which the committee intimates it may feel under duty to adopt.

The action of the British authorities in seizing and detaining neutral vessels destined to the port of Rotterdam carrying American cargo which; under no proper view, can be held to be contraband or subject to seizure, particularly shipments of cottonseed products, has already resulted in serious injury to American commerce and American interests and produces in this country a strong feeling of antagonism against the course of Great Britain. The Department desires that you obtain statement from appropriate authorities whether ruling in case of cottonseed cake of Spencer Kellogg and Company will apply to other shipments of cottonseed cake and meal to Holland.

Bryan

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/729

[Document 492]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 13, 1914.

[Telegram]

300. The frequent seizure and detention by British of Dutch vessels carrying American cargo, particularly cottonseed products of oil, cake, and meal, has resulted evidently in the announcement by Holland-America Line that it will not accept for shipment goods from this country destined to Dutch ports unless consigned to Netherlands Government. The cotton industry of the South is already greatly depressed and threatened with disaster. The situation with reference to commerce in general with neutral ports in northern Europe is very unsatisfactory to this Government and the British Government must appreciate that the Government of the United States cannot be inactive when legitimate American commerce is interrupted and when American rights of trade with neutral countries are not observed.

You will bring these views at once to the attention of the British Government and urge them for some comprehensive and specific statement which will make clear that. American commerce, when conducted in due course of trade on American or neutral vessels, will receive at the hands of Great Britain all the rights to which it is entitled under international law and usage. The Department believes that a point has been reached when some satisfactory understanding respecting our commerce with the neutral countries of. Europe should be arrived at.

Lansing

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Minister at Stockholm (Howard) File No. 763.72112/206

[Document 493]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Minister at Stockholm (Howard)

London, October 14, 1914.
[Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, October 15, 1914.]

[Telegram]

We wish to avoid interference with any ship bona fide carrying cargoes for consumption in neutral countries.

On receiving from Swedish Government an assurance that cargoes, of which exportation is prohibited, will be landed at port of destination and not exported, vessels carrying such cargo will not be detained after verification of their papers in a port.

An assurance that this applies to oil and copper and rubber is especially important at this moment.

If vessels carrying such cargoes for Swedish ports will call at a British port, such as Falmouth, Lough Swilly, or Kirkwall, on their way, notice will be sent to the fleet which will prevent their being searched or stopped at sea, provided of course they do not commit any unneutral act.

In fact, if all vessels for Scandinavian ports will call at a British port on their way, it will avoid the delay and inconvenience of being stopped at sea.

You should communicate at once with the government to which you are accredited and ask for early reply.

You should instruct British consuls at ports of departure to urge upon shipping agents the practical advantage of adopting the course recommended in fourth and fifth paragraphs.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 800.115/880

[Document 494]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, October 21, 1914.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Every insurance company in London and Liverpool and member of Lloyd’s agrees to insert clause excluding risk liability from any claim arising from capture or detention of ship by British Government or allies. Refusal under government insurance scheme to permit camperdown to proceed Denmark and seizure of Platuria [?] to-day bound for Aarhus, indicate increasing disposition to prevent shipments grains, foodstuffs, oil, and copper to Scandinavia.

Skinner

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 341.115St2/10

[Document 495]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

362. Department advised that tank steamer John D. Rockefeller , owned by Standard Oil Company; New Jersey, built-in America, sailing under American flag and registry since before the war, and with American officers, left Philadelphia September 26 with cargo illuminating oil for Copenhagen now detained by British Government at Kirkwall, Orkney Islands. Present foregoing to British Government and request that, if facts are as represented, vessel be released at once and allowed to proceed to destination. In view of fact that illuminating oil is not listed as absolute contraband of war by British Government, and that petroleum is on embargo list of Denmark, and in view of apparent bona fide destination for neutral port, it is difficult to understand the justification for seizure and detention.

Lansing

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.115St2/24

[Document 496]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 22, 1914.

Dear Mr. Lansing : The John D. Rockefeller was held up as there was nothing to show in her papers for whom the oil she carries was destined, it being consigned merely to order.” It has now been ascertained that the oil is in fact destined for the Danish Petroleum Company, and an assurance has been obtained to the effect that it will be discharged in Denmark and not reexported.

Directions are accordingly being given for the release of the vessel.

I am however to impress earnestly on the United States Government that a belligerent is entitled to find on board a neutral vessel papers clearly indicating the destination both of ship and cargo, with full particulars showing who are the owners and to whom each part of the cargo is consigned. So long as cargoes are merely consigned “to order,” His Majesty’s Government are compelled to hold up the ship and detain her until they are satisfied as to the innocence of her destination.

Fuel and lubricants were declared conditional contraband under the King’s proclamation of August 4.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 341.115St2/17

[Document 497]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 22, 1914.

[Telegram]

375. Department is advised that tank steamer Brindilla owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, formerly the Washington owned by the Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft, a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company controlled by American capital, has been seized during her voyage to Alexandria, Egypt, and taken into the port of Halifax by the British cruiser Caronia. Department advised that Brindilla carries a cargo of oil owned by Americans. Please bring the foregoing to the attention of the British Government and state that this Government finds difficulty in seeing cause for the seizure and detention of an American vessel with a cargo of petroleum bound for the port of Alexandria, Egypt, and therefore requests that the vessel and cargo be released immediately and allowed to proceed to her destination.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 341.115St2/18

[Document 498]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 23, 1914.

[Telegram]

379. Department informed American steamer Platuria with cargo illuminating oil was seized on her voyage to Aarhus, Denmark, and taken into port at Stornoway by a British vessel. The Platuria, like the steamer Brindilla, recently taken into port at Halifax by British cruiser, is owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and was formerly owned by the Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft, a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company controlled by American capital. Bring these facts to attention of the British Government and say that this Government does not perceive that there could be any justification for the seizure and detention of this American vessel, bound, according to this Government’s information, for a neutral port, with a neutral cargo of petroleum, and therefore requests that vessel and cargo be immediately released.

Lansing

[For telegram from the Ambassador in Great Britain, October 24, 1914, dealing in part with the question of detention of ships and cargoes, see ante, page 259.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 341.115St2/32

[Document 499]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 24, 1914.
[Received 11:55 p.m.]

[Telegram]

903. Your 375, October 22. Sir Edward Grey has received information from Alexandria that oil carried by steamer Brindilla is expected there. He has, therefore, ordered her immediate release from Halifax, unless authorities there have some reason unknown to him. He removes the suspicion or claim of her captors that cargo was really meant for an enemy use. He also waives any contention in this case about validity of ownership and flag.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/978

[Document 500]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, October 12, 1914.
[Received October 26.]

No. 85]

Sir: Referring to my telegram dated October 7,1 I have the honor to confirm its contents which were to the effect that the procurator general and the Bonar Law committee appear to be indisposed to release innocent American goods contained in the cargo of captured and detained vessels without the payment of freight and other charges. I now enclose the full text of the procurator general’s letter to me dated October 6 written in reply to my own representations. These representations, I may add, conformed strictly to the views entertained by the Department.

The procurator general and the committee observe that they have acted throughout on the principle of doing what is equitable and reasonable independently of strict legal considerations, and they thought I would not deny that they had dealt with these difficult and numerous cases in a spirit of fairness and even generosity. It is true that the authorities here have released all American goods when shown that the ownership vested certainly or probably in American firms, but in every case the release was conditional upon payment of any freight “which may be due,” and other charges. If the Department’s opinion that innocent goods which left the United States prior to the war are not properly subject to prize proceedings is correct under international law, the subsequent release of such goods can scarcely be described as an act of generosity, and constitutes merely a recognition of the soundness of the Department’s position; and if that be so, it is difficult to comprehend upon what ground, the payment of freight is demanded upon goods landed at a port where their presence is not desired, and under conditions which inevitably subject the owners to heavy losses and expenses.

I am advising shippers whose goods are being released, to accept the proffered terms under protest and with a view to obtaining reimbursement should the Department find it possible to come to an agreement with the British Government on this matter.

I have [etc.]

Robert E. Skinner

[Enclosure]

The British Procurator General (Dennis) to the American Consul General at London (Skinner)

Treasury, Whitehall, S. W.,
October 6, 1914.

Sir: Your letter of the 23d ultimo and two letters of the 29th ultimo, relating to the payment of freight and charges incurred in connection with American cargoes on enemy ships which sailed before the war have been laid before the committee which is dealing on behalf of the Government with the release of cargoes on enemy ships.

The committee observe that you refer in your first letter to the opinion of the Secretary of State of the United States, and that in one of your later letters you state that the course proposed in a certain case “will not be acceptable to the American Government,” and they desire that I should point out, as I had already done both in correspondence and orally, that the views of the Government of the United States should be put forward to the Foreign Office through the proper diplomatic channel, namely the American Embassy.

The committee however propose to treat your references to the views of the American Government merely as an expression of the views which you desire to put forward for their consideration on behalf of individual American firms who may be interested in these cargoes.

Referring first to your letter of the 23d ultimo, it seems to the committee that the third paragraph of that letter does not adequately describe the nature of the cases which have come before them. Some of the cases involved do no doubt fall within the description of American cargoes and had they been brought before the prize court would probably have been released.

In the majority of the cases, however, the property has either clearly, or probably, passed to enemy consignees and would have been condemned in the prize court either to confiscation or to detention during the period of the war; in most of these cases it appears that the American shippers retain their legal remedy for the purchase money against the German consignees, and in some cases it is not clear that bills may not have been actually accepted by the latter.

The committee and the procurator general have acted throughout on the principle of doing what is equitable and reasonable independently of strictly legal considerations, and I think that you will not deny that they have dealt” with these difficult and numerous cases in a spirit of fairness and even of generosity; the American claimants have so far shown their willingness to reciprocate by agreeing to such conditions as may have been thought reasonable, without considering strict legal rights, and the payment of freight and charges is certainly as a rule a condition which the committee and the procurator general consider to be fair and reasonable nor has objection been hitherto taken to such payment (except in one or two cases).

I should mention that a claim has been put in by an American company to a proportion of the freight on the ship Kronprinzessin Cecilie.

The committee and the procurator general, while they are not able to make any general statement applicable to all cases, will take into consideration any representations on the subject of freight or charges that may be made in particular cases.

They would however regret if they should find themselves hampered in dealing with these cases by what appear to them to be unreasonable contentions on the part of those interested in the cargoes as they might then be reluctantly compelled to adopt a stricter attitude.

As regards the particular case of the wood alcohol to which you refer observe that you may expect a further communication from Messrs. Grey and Company, and I think that before dealing with it I should know whether any and what other claim is to be made by the owners in order that the matter may be dealt with as a whole.

I have informed the committee of your offer to see them on the subject and they desire me to thank you for it but to say that after reading your letters they feel that they are in full possession of your views and that it is not necessary to put you to the trouble of attending before them.

I am [etc.]

A. H. Dennis

1  Ante, p. 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488].

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72112/219

[Document 501]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 25, 1914.
[Received October 26.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: With reference to the case of the Rockefeller I think it would be opportune were I to make some remarks on the general question of contraband and the attitude of the British Government.

You are doubtless aware that in the last few weeks there has been a marked increase of the export of certain articles, as compared with previous years, to those neutral countries which are in direct communication with the belligerent nations. I will choose, among many, the single instance of mineral oils, and the returns for the month of September. Whereas the value of United States exports of the principal articles for that month as compared with September 1913 have decreased from 107 to 74 million dollars, or 30 per cent, the export of gasoline, naphtha, etc., has increased from 20 to 23 million gallons, or 15 per cent, and of fuel oil from 36 to 58 millions of gallons, or 61 per cent.

I need not point out that the course of the present war has shown the immense importance of the motor, the airship and the submarine, all of which are consumers of mineral oil. I may add that there is reason to believe that mineral oil in all its forms may be used for these purposes. A large proportion of the exports of this country has been consigned to neutral ports and according to evidence in our possession has been transmitted from them to a belligerent country. As you are aware, the Supreme Court of the United States in 1863 considered vessels as carrying contraband, although sailing from one neutral port to another, if the goods concerned were destined to be transported by land or sea from the neutral port of landing into enemy territory. It then decided that the character of the goods is determined by their ultimate, and not their immediate destination, and this doctrine was at the time acquiesced in by Great Britain, though her own trade was the chief sufferer.

On the other hand the neutral countries concerned, who are anxious, in the interests of their neutrality, to avoid being used as bases for hostilities by either belligerent, are now making arrangements which will give sure guarantees that articles which may be used in war shall not be reexported. In a word they are anxious to prevent their ports from becoming the back door of either belligerent. When these arrangements are complete, it is to be confidently hoped that trade between neutrals will be subject to little or no hindrance.

But it is of course essential in the interests of free and undisturbed trade between neutrals, that every security possible should be provided in order to enable belligerents to form a speedy and sure judgment as to the neutral destination of goods which may be used for peaceful or warlike purposes. In the case of the Rockefeller, which was bound for a port in the near neighbourhood of the chief naval port of a belligerent, the oil she carried was consigned to order and there was therefore no guarantee that it would not be forwarded to the enemy. She was accordingly detained until proof was afforded of the neutral destination of her cargo and the intention of the neutral government to prevent reexport.

It is to be hoped that for the future adequate precautions will be taken in order to show the real destination of goods consigned to neutrals which, if transshipped to a belligerent, might be used for belligerent purposes.

I may observe in conclusion that although the British Government have detained cargoes of contraband in order to make sure that they are really intended for neutral countries, and, have retained some cargoes such as copper destined for Krupp’s ammunition works, they have not yet taken a single cargo without paying for it, and have allowed every cargo really destined for neutral countries to proceed to its destination.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 341.115St2/37

[Document 502]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 26, 1914.
[Received October 27, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

912. Your 379, October 23.1 Sir Edward Grey informs me that Denmark last year imported 3,000,000 gallons of oil and that up to this time this year Denmark has already imported 6,000,000 gallons. The detained ship Platuria has on board 1,500,000 gallons. He has telegraphed Denmark asking for assurance that this cargo of oil shall not go through to Germany. If he receives such assurance the ship will be released. He waives the question of her right to fly the American flag.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 300.115/768b

[Document 503]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

370. German cruisers have sunk one or more English ships off coast of South America containing cargo of great value owned by Americans and destined to United States ports. Department desires to be advised as quickly as possible whether German Government proposes to hold proceedings in nature of prize adjudication on vessels and cargo so destroyed, and if so, where and when will such proceedings be held, and to have information necessary for guidance of owners American cargo.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 504]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

[Telegram]

504. Department’s telegram, October 9, regarding cargoes on vessels destroyed by German cruisers. Interested persons represent to Department German Government’s position this matter has important effect on questions relating to insurance. Endeavor obtain early reply from German Government.

Lansing

Four Copper Exporting Companies to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1000

[Document 505]

Four Copper Exporting Companies to the Secretary of State

New York, October 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

The undersigned, representing nearly 90 per cent of the copper export trade of this country, have the honor to lay before you the following facts:

We learned yesterday by cable that the Italian steamers San Giovanni and Regina d’Italia have been seized by British authorities at Gibraltar because part of cargoes consist of copper shipped from this country. The San Giovanni has 450 tons belonging to American Smelting and Refining Company and consigned in conformity with universal practice in the trade to order of that company at Genoa. The Regina d’Italia has 1,160 tons of which 150 belong to the American Smelting and Refining Company, 200 to the American Metal Company, 410 to the Consolidated Metals Company, and 400 to the United Metals Selling Company, practically all being consigned in the usual course in the same way. We are further advised this morning by shipping agents that the American Line steamer Kroonland, flying the American flag and having on board 800 tons of copper belonging to American Smelting and Refining Company and 500 to the United Metals Selling Company, has also been seized and is detained at Gibraltar. The copper consigned in usual course as in the other cases. Moreover, we have just been notified by the New York agents of the Sicilian-American Line that for reasons which cannot be explained it absolutely declines to ship any copper by its steamer San Giorgio ; and this morning the Lloyd Sabaudo Line has given notice of its refusal of a shipment of copper and cancellation of contract unless the name of an Italian consignee shall be given, together with a guarantee that the copper shall not be reexported from Italy, which guarantee it is manifestly impossible for the American exporter to give. These measures of interference with our commerce threaten to stop altogether the exportation of copper from the United States to Europe and this means practically the stopping of the entire export business in that metal except to England and France, since there is no demand for the American product outside of Europe. The stopping of the export trade would affect disastrously the copper-mining industry through the West. We beg leave respectfully to ask consideration of the facts above set forth and such representations and action by our Government as it may deem appropriate for the relief of the critical situation in which the industry we represent is now placed, and we shall be very grateful to be acquainted of the action taken by the Department to that end.

American Smelting and Refining Company
United Metals Selling Company
The American Metal Company, Ltd.
Consolidated Metals Company

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) File No. 763.72111/733a

[Document 506]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

Sir: This Department has received the information that it is customary at certain of the principal ports, if not at all ports, to exhibit the manifests of departing vessels to any person making request to examine such manifests, and that consular officers of belligerent governments are constantly obtaining this information presumably for the purpose of advising the warships of their countries as to vessels carrying contraband destined to belligerent ports or to neutral ports near belligerent territory.

Though this custom of opening to public inspection manifests of departing vessels has become general and in ordinary circumstances is entirely proper, the use to which such information may be put in view of the recent enforcement of the rule that a full manifest must be filed before clearance, raises a question as to the desirability of discontinuing the practice while a state of war exists, since it would seem to furnish information which would be valuable in directing belligerent warships off our coasts as to their operations in intercepting vessels carrying contraband.

I submit the foregoing question to you for your consideration and would appreciate it if you would advise me at your earliest convenience of your views in regard to this subject and the action, if any, which you would deem it expedient and proper to take.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/241½

[Document 507]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, October 28, 1914.

Sir: Replying to your favor of the 27th instant, in reference to the publication of manifests of departing vessels, etc., I take pleasure in handing you herewith copy of an order which I have this day issued to collectors of customs throughout the country, requiring them to withhold publication of such manifests until thirty days after the clearance of each vessel. The Secretary of Commerce has been notified of this action.

Faithfully yours,

William G. McAdoo

[Enclosure—Memorandum]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Assistant Secretary (Peters)

Treasury Department,
Washington , October 28, 1914.

Please issue the following instructions to collectors of customs:

Until further directed you will refrain from making public or giving out to any other than duly authorized officers of the Government information regarding any and all outward cargoes and the destination thereof until thirty days after the date of the clearance of the vessel or vessels carrying such cargoes.

W. G. McAdoo

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/272

[Document 508]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 30, 1914.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

948. There is considerable apprehension here as to the purpose and effect of the recent order of the Secretary of the Treasury directing the United States customs officials to refrain from giving out information regarding outward cargoes and their destination until thirty days after date of clearance of vessels carrying such cargoes. This order is thought here to be a means of concealing contraband cargoes because the publication of information about such cargoes would result in the search and seizure of neutral vessels.

Can I assure the British Government that this order does not mean that the Government of the United States intends to assist its citizens in carrying on contraband trade with belligerents?

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 509]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

[Telegram]

447. Your No. 948, October 30, 7 p.m. American shippers have objected to publicity of manifests in view of order soon after war was declared compelling filing of full manifest before clearance, a rule not previously enforced. As making public manifests was a custom at certain ports without sanction of Treasury Department, the request of consignors to have the nature of their shipments not made public was granted as a matter of course.

While you may make the foregoing explanation to the British Government as a friendly act in view of the apprehension expressed as to the purpose of the order, you will please to bear in mind that trade in all articles, whether contraband or non-contraband, is legitimate, and this Government cannot recognize the right of any belligerent to question the rules and regulations applicable within its jurisdiction to such trade when no question of neutrality is involved.

Lansing

Two Copper Exporting Companies to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1032

[Document 510]

Two Copper Exporting Companies to the Secretary of State

New York, October 31, 1914.

[Telegram]

We desire to protest most vigorously the action of the British Government in seizing the copper on S. S. Kroonland and having it discharged at Gibraltar. This copper belongs to us and we have submitted to you through the steamship company absolute proof of ownership. We should be glad to be advised of any action taken to protect our interests.

American Smelting and Refining Company
United States Selling Company

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 511]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

[Telegram]

433. Department is informed that American steamer Kroonland, which sailed October 15 from New York for Naples and Piraeus with consignments of copper and rubber shipped by American citizens, has been detained at Gibraltar and is awaiting orders from England. It appears from representations submitted to Department by shippers, extensively supported by affidavits, that, in accordance with usual practice of trade, bills of lading were made to order of shippers that the goods were not intended by the shippers for a belligerent government or its military or naval forces, and that there is not even evidence warranting the belief that they were destined ultimately for delivery in belligerent territory. Owners of cargoes and vessel allege they are suffering large losses because of the detention of the vessel and they call attention to the hardships imposed on the passengers.

This Government does not question the right of British authorities properly to visit and search neutral merchant vessels for the purpose of ascertaining if they are carrying contraband or performing unneutral services to a belligerent, but if such search does not disclose any offense on the part of a vessel she should be promptly released. Department understands the Kroonland was not stopped on the high seas but is detained at Gibraltar. Such detention appears equivalent to a seizure, and the Department cannot perceive that the vessel can be properly held awaiting orders from the British authorities at London regardless of what an examination of available evidence on the ship may show relative to her destination and destination of her cargo.

The Department, therefore, considers that, unless investigation on the part of the British authorities has disclosed facts in relation to detention of vessel and cargo other than those that have been represented by owners, both ship and cargo should be released at once. If British authorities are not prepared to take such action, the Department feels warranted in requesting that this Government be furnished promptly with a statement of the grounds for detention of the ship.

This Government is also seriously concerned regarding the reported detention at Gibraltar of American shipments of copper on board the Italian steamers San Giovanni and Regina d’Italia, which cargoes it is also represented to Department are not destined by the shippers for delivery in belligerent territory. The Department hopes they may be released at once. If this should not be done, this Government would also like to receive a statement from the British Government as soon as possible regarding the detention of the property.

The trade of this country has already suffered serious injury as a result of the detention and seizure by British authorities of American vessels and cargoes in cases where investigation has failed to show attempts to carry on illegal trade, and American shippers are bitterly complaining that their export trade is seriously menaced by unwarranted interference by British authorities with shipments to Europe.

Communicate with British Government in sense of the foregoing.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1058

[Document 512]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 2, 1914.
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

964. Your 433, October 31. Sir Edward Grey promises to give me such a report as you ask on the ship Kroonland at earliest moment possible. Its detention is not a seizure.

Sir Edward informs me that his Government found evidence that the copper on the Italian steamers San Giovanni and Regina d’Italia was destined for belligerent territory. This Government therefore prohibits its delivery and will itself buy it and pay for it. The delay of the steamers was caused by the fact that the Copper was at the bottom of the ships. They have been allowed to proceed under guarantee that the copper will be delivered to British authorities on return voyage.

American Ambassador

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/284

[Document 513]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

[Memorandum]

Great difficulties are experienced in obtaining answers from the Danish Government as to the destination of shipments. As the quantities of American shipments to Denmark are daily increasing (to which fact the statements published in the press bear witness) and these shipments are to a large extent articles which would be useful to the German Army and Navy and as according to evidence collected on the spot, shipments to Denmark are in many cases at once forwarded to Germany and especially to the naval stations, the matter is one which requires the serious attention of the British Government.

Enclosed is copy of a telegram recently sent to Copenhagen.

P. S. Satisfactory assurances having now been received from the Danish Government as to the destination of cargoes, the Platuria and the Christian Knudsen have been released.

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Minister in Denmark (Lowther)

October 31, 1914.

It is essential to have immediate answer respecting Platuria and Knudsen as I am receiving constant and urgent complaints from United States Government against delay in dealing with these ships. If you cannot obtain desired guarantees report exactly how the case stands.

[File copy not signed]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1094

[Document 514]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Christiania, November 3, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

S. S. Bergensfjord , Norwegian American Line, sailed from New York for Norway October 21, seized by English warships near Shetland and taken to Orkney and held for three days by Great Britain authorities to inspect cargoes. At the request of Norwegian Government, through their diplomatic representative at London, was released. At the opening of the war vessels to and from Norway have been stopped by Great Britain warships, compelled to show their papers. Foreign Office informs me that English warships are taking vessels to England ports to inspect their cargoes. Their explanation for the change is their warships cannot stand still on the high seas on account of danger from German naval vessels.

Schmedeman

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/304

[Document 515]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 4, 1914.
[Received November 5, 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

724. Your 504, 27th.1 German code of. prize procedure of April 15, 1911, published Reichs-Gesetzblatt, 1914, No 51, provides in section 1, paragraph 2, No 2, for prize adjudication of all vessels and cargoes destroyed, the prize court at Hamburg being competent. Prize proceedings on all vessels until now reported as sunk and their cargoes will be held shortly.

Gerard

1  Ante, p. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505].

Cases Arising under the Proclamation and Order in Council of October 29 Cases Arising under the Proclamation and Order in Council of October 29 2

2  Ante, p. 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409].

[516] Muir and Company to the Secretary of State

New York, November 4, 1914. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1104

[517] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 5, 1914. [Received 11 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1115

[518] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1104

[519] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

London, November 6, 1914. [Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, November 7, 1914.]

File No. 763.72112/513

[520] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Rome (Rodd)

London, November 2, 1914. [Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, November 7, 1914.]

File No. 300.115/1880

[521] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 341.115St2/54

[522] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 9, 1914. [Received November 11.]

File No. 763.72112/514½

[523] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 9, 1914. [Received 11:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/337

[524] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan)

Department of State, Washington, November 9, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/304

[525] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, November 9, 1914, 8 p.m.

[526] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 10, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1070

[527] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 12, 1914. [Received November 13, 1:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/370

[528] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 13, 1914, 7 p.m. . [Received November 14, 12.05 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/377

[529] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, undated. [Received November 17, 1914, 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/395

[530] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 18, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1335

[531] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 18, 1914.

File No. 665.11251/5

[532] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 20, 1914. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1372

[533] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 30, 1914. [Received 4:05 p.m.]

File No. 665.11251/9

[534] The Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Hamburg, November 11, 1914. [Received November 30.]

File No. 763.72112/436

[535] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, December 1, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/382

[536] Armour and Company to the Secretary of State

December 1, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1788

[537] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counsellor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington December 2, 1914. [Received December 3.]

File No. 763.72112/441

[538] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 3, 1914.

File No. 800.115/1586a

[539] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914, 9:30 p.m.

File No. 300.115/1437

[540] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, December 5, 1914. [Received 9:40 a.m.]

File No. 300.115/1572

[541] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 6, 1914. [Received December 7, 8 a.m.]

File No. 300.115/1587

Muir and Company to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1104

[Document 516]

Muir and Company to the Secretary of State

New York, November 4, 1914.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

We had two loads wheat on steamer Miramichi destined for Rotterdam sold to German buyers but not paid for. Steamer left before outbreak of war and was diverted by English action to English port. We claimed our goods and produced documents and title to prove ownership. Nevertheless, ship was sent before prize court where British authorities argued prize law applies and Government entitled seize our cargo though not paid for by buyers. We understand from your communication to our association that English Foreign Secretary definitely undertook to deliver American goods on production of proof of ownership. British action sending steamer before prize court and argument before the court clearly against British undertaking and promise. Shall thank you take urgent action in proper quarters and rely on your full protection.

Muir and Company

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1115

[Document 517]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 5, 1914.
[Received 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1000. Your 433, November 1,1 my 965 [964] of November 2,2 and my 967 of November 3.1 Foreign Office to-day sent me a memorandum stating that Kroonland is now discharging at the suggestion of the White Star Line her cargo of copper and rubber at Gibraltar and as soon as this done she will be allowed to proceed. As before stated the ground for detention was that she was carrying copper ostensibly to Naples but believed to be for Germany. The copper consignment has been brought into the prize court.

The San Giovanni was detained for same reason. Prize court proceedings have already commenced in respect of her cargo of copper and instructions were sent at the same time for her to be released immediately. The copper, etc., was discharged.

The Regina d’Italia was also detained for reason given in preceding cases. Part of her copper is below other cargo and difficult to discharge. Part has been discharged and placed in prize court and an arrangement is now being concluded with the Italian Government under which vessel will be allowed to proceed with all consignments of copper undischarged actually addressed to Italian firms on a guarantee from that Government that it will not be reexported.

All possible steps are being taken to expedite departure of these ships.

American Ambassador

1 See October 31, 1914, ante, p. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511].

2  Ante, p. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513].

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/1104

[Document 518]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

495. Muir and Company, New York City, having two loads wheat on steamer Miramichi sold to German buyers but not paid for and sailing before outbreak of war, claim to have produced documents and title proving their ownership of wheat. Nevertheless ship sent to prize court and British authorities insisting that prize law applies and that goods should not be released. Render them all possible assistance in their claim. Department is not able to appreciate justice of action upon part of British authorities in insisting upon the right to condemn as prize shipments of American goods made before outbreak of war though destined to German buyers, but not paid for by purchasers.

Direct Consul General to render all possible assistance to interested parties before prize court authorities.

Lansing

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/513

[Document 519]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

London, November 6, 1914.
[Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, November 7, 1914.]

[Telegram]

You should take steps without the appearance of an official communiqué, to make known to the press following facts, which I am communicating to the United States Ambassador.

We are informing some of the correspondents here in same sense.

Information in possession of British Government conclusively proves that very large shipments of copper, rubber, and other commodities are passing through Italian ports on their way to Germany.

In New York large purchases of copper are being made by houses in Rotterdam, Amsterdam, and Copenhagen who are working on German account. Directions are at the same time being given that these large consignments of copper are to be shipped through Italian ports to the order of such institutions as Banat Commerciale, a banking concern largely controlled by German capital.

The American copper refiners appear to be quite capable of protecting their own interests since they usually insist on payment in cash before they allow copper to be shipped, and it is well known that certain prominent firms of bankers in New York are making these payments on German account.

British Government, it is understood, are determined that they will use every legitimate endeavour to prevent copper reaching Germany where it is being made into ammunition for use against the British forces and they are therefore diverting various steamers carrying copper to Italy, to Gibraltar, where copper is discharged and steamers promptly released. Some of this copper is actually found to be packed in cases marked “For Danzig.” Other parcels are shipments made upon orders through German houses in Amsterdam and Rotterdam, some of these houses being actually connected, with firm of Krupp.

It is understood that representatives of some of the big copper-refining firms have recently sailed from New York to Europe with the object of consultation with representatives of German firms as to the best means of forwarding copper to Germany, and private houses in Italy have also been approached by purchasers of copper in Germany with a view of their lending their names for the purpose of disguising destination of American copper shipments.

To show increase in exports of copper from New York to Italy during last few weeks it is only necessary to say that since the 25th of October vessels have been diverted to Gibraltar with no less than 7,700 tons of copper on board and at the present moment there are very large shipments on the way amounting to some thousands of tons. This represents nearly 8,000 tons in ten days. Larger part of these shipments are destined for Genoa. Now it so happens that an official return of imports of copper into Genoa between August 1 and October 19 has just been published: For these two and a half months they amount to only 1,316 tons.

On comparison of these figures the fact is obvious that present trade to Italy is entirely an artificial one and that Italian imports are not for consumption in that country.

In view of all this accumulative evidence there is no alternative left to the British Government but to stop contraband trade in copper with Germany through Italy.

With a few possible exceptions the American citizen does not suffer, as he has been already paid, but it is understood that the British Government do not in any way wish to be unreasonable and are prepared, so far as shipments made before October 29 are concerned, on which date copper was transferred from conditional to absolute contraband list, to arrange for purchase of copper which has been detained by them.

[File copy not signed]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Rome (Rodd) File No. 300.115/1880

[Document 520]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Rome (Rodd)

London, November 2, 1914.
[Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, November 7, 1914.]

[Telegram]

Copper-laden vessels at Gibraltar.

Copper is being discharged from all, and vessels will be released shortly, except British S. S. Ascot .

In the case of the Regina d’Italia, 21,000 bars consigned to Italian Commercial Bank, Genoa, are below other cargo and difficult to discharge.

Endeavour to induce Italian Government to prevent export of this lot, if vessel is allowed to proceed. Large consignments of copper are being made to this bank by German agent in Amsterdam via New York. Some of those on the Ascot were addressed to Danzig.

It is absolutely essential that no copper should get through to Germany and to prevent friction with Italian Government His Majesty’s Government might be willing to negotiate purchase of all bank’s consignments on the Regina d’Italia, delivery to be given in Genoa. Any copper found documented to Government account will of course be released as soon as possible.

[File copy not signed]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 341.115St2/54

[Document 521]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Excellency: Referring to your informal communication of the 22d ultimo1 stating that the John D. Rockefeller was detained among other reasons because an assurance was desired that the cargo would be discharged in Denmark and not exported from that country, the Department is also advised that the oil steamers Platuria and Chr. Knudsen have been detained pending the receipt of guaranties regarding the non-exportation of oil from Denmark.

It does not appear to this Government that the detention of vessels carrying cargoes for neutral destinations, until assurances have been obtained that the cargoes will not be exported from a neutral country after having arrived there, is legally justifiable. It is important, therefore, briefly to state the position of the United States in regard to such interference with American commerce, in order that His Majesty’s Government may not labor under the misapprehension that this Government admits the propriety of such action. Under the existing rules of international law and usage, a neutral owner of articles on a neutral vessel, bound to a neutral port, which articles under certain conditions might acquire the character of contraband, is not responsible for their future disposition by the Government of the neutral port of their destination, or by the persons to whom they are bona fide consigned in the ordinary course of trade. The treatment which such goods may receive after delivery to the consignees in a neutral country is a matter between the belligerent government investigating the shipment and the neutral government concerned, for which a bona fide shipper should not be made to suffer. In the opinion of this Government, the belligerent right of visit and search requires that the search should be made on the high seas at the time of the visit and that the conclusion of the search should rest upon the evidence found on the ship under investigation, and not upon circumstances ascertained from external sources. That evidence, in the view of this Government, should make out a prima facie case to justify the captor in taking the vessel into port. To take vessels into custody and send them into a port of the belligerent without prima facie evidence to impress the cargo with the character of absolute or conditional contraband, constitutes, in the opinion of the United States, a justifiable ground for complaint by, a neutral government, and a basis for a legal claim for damages against the belligerent government which has detained the vessel for the purpose of inquiry through other channels as to the ultimate destination of the cargo, or as to the intended action of the government of the neutral country of destination.

The interruption in this manner and for such purposes of the voyage of the particular vessels mentioned or of any others similarly situated is, this Government believes, contrary to the principles of international law applicable to such cases, and the Government of the United States, therefore, reserves on behalf of its citizens interested in such vessels and cargoes the right to hold His Britannic Majesty’s Government responsible in damages.

The United States Government feels obliged to request that the method of detention followed in these instances for the purpose of procuring guaranties or further evidence should be discontinued, and that the visit and search of vessels be made at sea with the greatest expedition possible under the circumstances.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496].

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72112/514½

[Document 522]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 9, 1914.
[Received November 11.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: I duly received the official letter from your Department dated November 7 relative to the protest of your Government on the subject of the detention of United States vessels in British ports and other matters.

I lost no time in telegraphing its contents to my Government and I will send a copy by the next mail. In the meanwhile I have received telegrams from my Government, copies of which I enclose for you herewith, which provide information as to the arrangements now being made with neutral governments with the object of putting as few hindrances as possible in the way of neutral trade and shipping, while carrying out those measures of restriction which present hostilities have unfortunately made necessary.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure 1—Telegram]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ministers at Christiania (Findlay), Stockholm (Howard), and Copenhagen (Lowther)

London , November 8, 1914.

We are satisfied with the guarantees offered by the Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish Governments as to the non-exportation of those contraband goods consigned to a named person in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark which are included in the list of prohibited exports issued by the Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish Governments; and relying upon the Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish Governments to see that such goods are landed in Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish ports of destination and not subsequently exported or passed on in transit to enemy country, orders have been given to British Fleet and customs authorities at British ports to restrict interference with neutral vessels carrying such cargoes so consigned to verification of ship’s papers and cargo.

[File copy not signed]

[Enclosure 2—Telegram]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Rome (Rodd)

London , November 8, 1914.

Italian prohibition of export is practically valueless so long as under Italian transit regulations cargoes even when addressed to named consignees in Italy may on arrival at Italian port be declared “in transit” and so escape export prohibition.

We have accordingly decided on arrangement explained in my telegram to Rome of to-day, No. 100. That arrangement, if accepted by Italian Government, will fully provide for bona fide import trade into Italy and transit to Switzerland of cargoes for Swiss use, but will stop illicit transit to Germany.

[File copy not signed]

[Enclosure 3—Telegram]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Rome (Rodd)

London , November 8, 1914.

His Majesty’s Government have decided for the present to stop at Gibraltar all copper except that consigned to the Italian Government, subject to the following restrictions.

As regards electrolytic weak high-grade copper unquestionably destined for Italian firms they would be prepared, in view of measures taken by the Italian. Government as reported in your telegram, to allow this to proceed if consigned to the Italian Government, firms making the necessary arrangements with their Government for this purpose. His Majesty’s Government rely on the Italian Government to satisfy themselves that these consignments will not be declared “in transit” on arrival but will in fact fall under operation of prohibition of export.

As regards Bessemer (lower-grade copper) shipment will be allowed through, when consigned to Italian firms who give an undertaking that it is for use in Italy only.

Your excellency should point out that an arrangement of this kind is rendered especially necessary in view of the existing Italian regulations under which as I understand from your telegram No. 86 shipments [?] even when addressed to named consignee in Italy may on arrival at Italian port be declared to be “in transit.”

Arrangement now proposed appears to be one which will afford all possible facilities to Italian houses and work with the least friction.

Negotiations will be opened at once with the Swiss Government in regard to copper intended for Switzerland.

Regina d’Italia has sailed from Gibraltar and it is understood copper for Pirelli has not been discharged.

[File copy not signed]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/337

[Document 523]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 9, 1914.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1029. Sir Edward Grey has given me the following written statement which I transmit entire:

In view of the articles now appearing in the American press on the subject of the restrictions enforced by the Allied Governments on the contraband trade in copper, the following facts deserve consideration:

Electrolytic copper is used mainly for the manufacture of ammunition and other warlike implements. There is now a great scarcity of such copper in Germany with the result that the most persevering efforts are being made by German agents and commercial houses working in conjunction with German capitalists to get copper into Germany, by some means or other regardless of cost.

The principal channel chosen for this contraband traffic at present is Italy. Statistics just published give the imports of copper into Genoa for the two and a half months from August 1 to October 19 as 1,316 tons. Since the 25th of October vessels have been diverted to Gibraltar with no less than 7,700 tons of copper on board and several thousand tons are in addition now on the way from New York. This represents nearly 8,000 tons in ten days, of which the largest part is destined for Genoa. These figures point to but one conclusion:

The present swollen trade is an entirely artificial one and does not represent bona fide imports into Italy. This is fully confirmed by other information. Some of the shipments seized at Gibraltar were actually found packed in cases marked for Danzig; other parcels are shipments made on orders placed by firms and agents to Amsterdam and Rotterdam. It is obvious that such shipments, if they were intended to meet genuine Dutch requirements, would not be expressly directed to take the route via Genoa. Moreover, the firms in question are not Dutch but German houses, some of them being actually connected with Krupp.

It may also be stated that representatives of some of the big American copper-refining firms have recently sailed from New York for Europe by arrangement with the representatives of German firms with the object of consulting together as to the best means of introducing copper into Germany, notwithstanding its contraband character; and private houses in Italy have also been approached by purchasers of copper in Germany with the view of their lending their names for the purpose of disguising the destination of American copper shipments. Furthermore, it is known that, in view of the financial situation in Germany, the orders are not usually executed in America except on payment in cash before shipment, and that such payments are made by certain prominent firms of bankers in New York on German account. If, nevertheless, the cargoes are in many cases accompanied by bills of lading showing an American owner, there is good ground for believing that these papers do not genuinely represent the actual ownership but merely form part of the general scheme devised to conceal the real nature of the transaction.

It is clear that what the Allied Governments have to deal with is a carefully organized plan on the part of German agents and their coadjutors in America to supply the German arms factories systematically with copper. To facilitate these operations it is sought to create an artificial and entirely unjustified agitation in the American press for the purpose of stirring up feeling against the Allied Governments on account, of the measures which they are not merely justified but bound to take to put a stop to an illicit and unnatural traffic which, if successfully carried on, would be of the utmost assistance to their enemies in prolonging the war. The attempts to stir up American feeling in this matter is all the more regrettable as even in the rare cases where shipments may have been genuinely and innocently made by American citizens before October 29, when copper was transferred from the list of conditional to that of absolute contraband, the Allied Governments have intimated their readiness to meet any bona fide neutral grievance by purchasing the copper removed from neutral ships at a reasonable price.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) File No. 763.72112/304

[Document 524]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan)

Department of State,
Washington, November 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department informed by Ambassador, Berlin, prize proceedings be held soon at Hamburg with reference to vessels and cargoes that have been sunk by German warships. Keep Department informed by telegraph as to when proceedings on such vessels are to be held.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 525]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, November 9, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

608. Your 724, November 4.1 Endeavor obtain information regarding procedure which should be followed by persons desiring to present claims for cargoes that have been destroyed.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/1070

[Document 526]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

511. Your telegrams November 21 and 3.2 In connection with cases of detention of cargoes of copper on Kroonland and other vessels, bring following to attention of British Government and impress upon them the importance to American commerce of immediately releasing cargoes so detained. The Department desires to point out that copper was listed as conditional contraband up to October 29, nearly two weeks after some of the vessels detained had sailed, and that British Government contend that the real destination of the cargoes is German territory generally. This Government cannot admit that such cargoes of copper are legally subject to seizure and confiscation in the absence of evidence showing them to be destined for the armed forces or government of a belligerent country. Even if copper should be regarded as absolute contraband, the propriety of which is not admitted, Department is of the opinion that the evidence on board the vessels should make out a prima facie case showing that it is destined to German territory, and that the detention of vessels pending ascertainment of destination of cargoes from sources outside of ship’s papers is not justifiable under existing rules of international law. If the copper is held on the ground that it was shipped under bills of lading drawn to order of shippers, which is a usual practice of the trade, Department deems it necessary to state that it cannot acquiesce in the detention of the copper on this ground, as such practice would be in its opinion contrary to existing rules of international law. To hold that conditional contraband is subject to detention and prize proceedings when so consigned appears to destroy the distinction under international law between conditional and absolute contraband. The Government of the United States is obliged to repeat its request that the cargoes of copper now detained on these grounds be released immediately and allowed to proceed to their destinations, and to reserve the right to hold the Government of His Britannic Majesty responsible for any damages which may result to American citizens from the interference of British authorities with such cargoes and with American vessels carrying them.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513].

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/370

[Document 527]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 12, 1914.
[Received November 13, 1:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

822. Your sixth [608], November 9, 8 p.m. German code of prize-court procedure defines interested parties in prize proceedings as the owners of the ships and cargoes seized and all private persons who have a legal interest in having the prize released or the owners awarded damages or restitution.

The prize court shall call upon all interested parties to enter verified claims not less than two weeks or more than two months after issuance of this monition, which is generally by publication in the official gazette, but claims may be entered earlier.

Claims must set forth all facts and proofs on which they rest, documents to be appended in the original if possible. They should be in the German language. They must be signed by a lawyer admitted to practice before any German court and who possesses the qualifications of the office of judge. He must have power of attorney in writing.

If claimant does not reside at the seat of the court, he must designate a person residing there to whom service can be made. When a claim is filed in due season the presiding judge shall set a date for an oral Björnson. The imperial commissioner and the claimant shall be summoned formally. If there are several claims touching the same object they shall all be heard at the same proceeding as a rule.

Claimant or his agent is permitted upon special application to examine the papers with the consent of the imperial commissioner, which consent cannot be refused unless military interests demand it. The oral Björnson is public. Claimants must give security for costs in an amount which is determined by the court. There are no fees attached to prize proceedings.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/377

[Document 528]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 13, 1914, 7 p.m. .
[Received November 14, 12.05 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 511, November 10. I have again gone over the whole question of detaining copper cargoes with Sir Edward Grey. His position in general is that when war material such as copper is shipped to a neutral country bordering on an enemy’s country, and when the normal supply of the neutral of that material has been far exceeded by shipments since the war began, the British Government must require some responsible guarantee that any shipment in question shall not go to the enemy country. With such guarantee it will stop no cargo. Without such guarantee the overwhelming presumption is that it is destined for the enemy country. He maintains that all war materials shipped to anybody in Germany are now inevitably destined for the German Army, since the army is in complete command of all departments of the Government and of all industry. It is upon this principle that the arrangements have been made with the Scandinavian countries and are in process with the Netherlands and Italian Governments. In short the British Government will not interfere with bona fide commerce with neutral countries. But the evidence of bona fides must be some acceptable assurance that the goods are for neutral use, especially when consigned to the shipper or in blank.

I have direct information from the Foreign Office but not from Grey that British Government has documentary proof that some of these copper cargoes were bought for the German Government and paid for before they left New York, and that the ship’s papers were made out so as to conceal this fact.

About the particular cargoes of the ship Kroonland, and others stopped at Gibraltar, I again asked for promised detailed statement and Grey has again promised it forthwith. The truth is, and the experience of my colleagues confirms my own, that the Admiralty are more and more in command of the Government. The Foreign Office lacks nothing in courtesy and promptness. But it cannot hurry the Admiralty which, of course, is primarily concerned with the conduct of the war. I shall press daily for answer in detail.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/395

[Document 529]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, undated.
[Received November 17, 1914, 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s October 12, respecting definite British policy respecting exports cotton [seed] products.1

Foreign Office states:

Cottonseed cake, being feeding stuff for cattle, is conditional contraband and will be treated in strict accordance with order in council, Article 1, subarticle 3. If possible, it will be made to fall under special agreement now under negotiation with Netherlands Government respecting prevention of export to Germany.

Order in council referred to reads:

Notwithstanding provisions of Article 35 of Declaration of London, conditional contraband shall be liable to capture on board vessels bound for neutral port, if goods are consigned to order, or if ship’s papers do not show who is consignee of goods, or if they show a consignee of goods in territory belonging to or occupied by enemy.

Skinner

1  Ante, p. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/1335

[Document 530]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1914.

[Telegram]

562. Department informed Norwegian steamer tiller chartered by Gans Steamship Line, American corporation, from Savannah for Göteborg, with full cargo cotton detained by British at Kirkwall. In view of representations of interested parties as to nationality of vessel and character of cargo and of assurance of British Government that shipment of cotton to European countries on neutral vessels would not be molested, Department unable to see how detention in this case is justified. Repeated detention of shipments on neutral vessels to neutral countries has upset American shippers, resulting in increase of freight and insurance rates, and the regrettable detention of the Uller produces in minds of cotton interests a general impression that course of Great Britain is not friendly to American trade and assists in continuing to depress price of cotton. Department, acting on declaration of Great Britain, has endeavored to assure, as far as consistent, American shippers, and sincerely trusts that course of Great Britain will not contradict these assurances.

Present [note] to British Government in the sense of the foregoing and request immediate release of vessel and cargo with full explanation. Department asking Gans Line specifically if vessel neutral-owned and if carried any other cargo than cotton if so, where and how consigned. Will advise you.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 665.11251/5

[Document 531]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1914.

[Telegram]

564. Department has received information from Italian Embassy in Washington that by a decree of the Italian Government dated November 13, 1914, all goods, the exportation of which from Italy is forbidden, cannot be reshipped abroad in transit or through transshipment after having arrived at an Italian port, if the bill of lading indicates Italy is their destination declared at the place of shipment or if the bill of lading fails to contain any specified destination.1 Inquire of British Government whether, in view of the fact that this decree apparently provides for a complete prohibition of the reexportation of shipments to Italy consigned to order or directly to an importer, the British authorities would be inclined to question the destination of or interfere with shipments to Italy of any articles contained in the British Government’s list of contraband and conditional contraband articles, if such shipments are consigned to order or to a specified consignee. Report by telegraph as soon as possible regarding this matter.

Lansing

1 Statement handed to the Acting Secretary of State by the Italian commercial delegate, November 17. Decree not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1372

[Document 532]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 20, 1914.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1104. Your 562, November 18. While waiting for full statement of facts about ship Uller, Sir Edward Grey informs me that she was not detained because of cotton cargo. Cotton is not stopped by Admiralty and will not be.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251/9

[Document 533]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 30, 1914.
[Received 4:05 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1163. Your telegram 564, November 18. Sir Edward Grey replies that it is not possible for the British Government to make any pronouncement on this subject until some practical experience of the working of the new Italian decree has been gained.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/436

[Document 534]

The Consul General at Hamburg (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Hamburg, November 11, 1914.
[Received November 30.]

No. 108]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s cable instructions dated November 9, 1914,1 in reference to prize proceedings to be held at Hamburg with reference to vessels and cargoes that have been sunk by German warships, and instructing me to keep the Department informed by telegraph as to when proceedings on such vessels are to be held.

In reply I beg to inform the Department that only one such proceeding has taken place in Hamburg up to the present time, which was on November 7, 1914. The only boats brought into this port as prizes have been several steam trawlers and one Finnish freight steamer, the Uleaborg, but on none of these boats were there any American goods.

President Brandes of the prize court, with whom I have conferred, has promised to keep me informed of the dates as to when proceedings on such vessels as may be captured are to be held, and I will keep the Department informed of the dates thereof by telegraph. The President of the prize court exacted a promise from me that I would not give out for publication the names of the boats brought into this harbor and I beg that this information, for obvious reasons, will be regarded as confidential.

I have [etc.]

Henry H. Morgan

1  Ante, p. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525].

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/382

[Document 535]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to call your attention to the fact that there has been brought to the notice of the Department a copy of the following communication which appears to have been addressed by the British Consul General at Philadelphia to an American firm in that city:

I have received from His Britannic Majesty’s Government an instruction to urge upon all shipping agents in this port the advantage to be gained by any of their vessels proceeding to Scandinavian ports, calling on their way at some British ports such as Falmouth, Lough Swilly or Kirkwall, thus avoiding the inconvenience and delay of being stopped and searched at sea it is of course understood by the above, that such ships have not committed any unneutral act.

I venture to call your attention to these instructions in order that any ships you may be despatching may avoid unnecessary detention.

I would be glad if you would inform me as to whether the Consul General is accurately advising American shippers in accordance with instructions from the British Government.

It does not seem to me clear that it would serve the purpose of avoiding delay and inconvenience incident to search at sea if persons interested in vessels sailing from this country to Scandinavian ports should see fit to take steps to have such vessels call en route at the ports named in the Consul General’s letter. Presumably it is the intention of your Government that vessels should call at these ports for the purpose of being searched. It appears to me that the inconvenience connected with an examination of a vessel in a port in this manner would be as great, if not greater than that resulting from the search of a vessel at sea, conducted in accordance with international law and custom, with proper regard for the rights and safety of the cargo and vessel detained.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Armour and Company to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1788

[Document 536]

Armour and Company to the Secretary of State1

December 1, 1914.

SUMMARY OF FACTS

Neutrals: Ships (cargoes conditional contraband), consignors and consignees all neutrals.

Ships: Fourteen ships all sailing under the Norwegian flag have as major portion of cargo meat-food products (very largely oleo oils and lards).

Shippers and ports: Armour and Company, Swift and Company, Morris and Company, Sulzberger and Sons Company, and Cudahy Packing Company of the United States. All shipped to Scandinavian ports, principally Copenhagen, between October 8 and November 19, 1914.

Manner of shipment: Bulk of these shipments are: “to order notify.” In the case of Armour and Company most of shipments are to order of Armour and Company, Copenhagen, notify.” Armour and Company is incorporated in Denmark under the laws of that country under the name of Armour and Company A/S.

Value of cargoes: Estimated at from $10,000,000 to $12,000,000.

Grievance: The British Government has detained overseas five of the vessels, three of which, the Alfred Nobel , Björnstjerne Björnson , and the Fridland cleared from the port of New York at dates all prior to October 29, upon which date England issued its proclamation governing “to-order” shipments. These ships have been detained, some of them as far back as November 5. The products thereon are perishable and fast deteriorating. The two other ships detained, Strinda and the Kim. The packers aforementioned received the proclamation of England of October 29 on or about the 20th of November and have not since that time made any “to-order” shipments; in fact, all shipments of meat-food products to Norway, Sweden and Denmark have ceased, for the reason set out in the next following paragraph.

To-order shipment: Is a long-standing commercial practice, the purpose being to collect at destination in foreign countries the value of the shipment before bill of lading is delivered to the purchaser, upon which bill of lading steamship companies deliver the goods. To cut off to-order shipments with any country is to kill the trade, for the reason that credits will not be extended and cannot safely be extended to many foreign-party purchasers. To-order shipment has always been recognized in British commerce and was recognized by the British Government as recently as its proclamations of August 4 and August 20 last.

Volume of business: The annual business of the packers with the Scandinavian countries named aggregates approximately $75,000 000.

Alfred R. Urion

[Enclosure]

Memorandum of facts submitted by Armour and Company of Chicago concerning cargoes of meat-food products to Copenhagen in vessels sailing under the Norwegian flag, detained and held by the British Government

November 19, 1914.

Following the suggestions in the public press said to have been based on the spoken attitude of the officials of our Government calling attention of the commercial interests of the United States to the great opportunities to extend our foreign trade brought about by the great conflict raging between foreign nations, we as large packers of cattle and hog products for food purposes have sought to extend the exportation of the products save fresh meats, but mare largely lard and cured hog-meats, to the neutral countries, until at the present time we have on the high seas or detained at English ports by the British Government in neutral ships consigned to neutral countries a large amount of these products all shipped in manner and form within international law, 600 carloads, aggregating in value approximately $2,000,000.

As we probably represent only from one fourth to one third of the export business in these products, it is fair and reasonable to state the aggregate value of such products now on the high seas and detained as aforesaid, all shipped within a month or six weeks, to be of from $6,000,000 to $8,000,000; that of this amount probably $2,000,000 worth is detained by the British Government, some of it for as long as two weeks, and the shortest for more than one week, for reasons not yet disclosed.

The prospective export business in these products to neutral countries based on the foregoing figures, will aggregate upwards of $75,000,000 annually and is in jeopardy because of the long detentions aforesaid and fear of seizures, the loss of which export business, if it occurs, and must occur unless there is speedy relief from the present unreasonable and unjust hindrances, will fall not only most heavily on us as packers, but in a measure must also fall on the farmer and livestock grower who produces the hogs and livestock from which the products are manufactured.

We have continued to solicit orders, make sales to the same parties in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden and ship in the same way as for many years past, and, as stated, some of the ships carrying the products have been detained to such an extent that we are compelled to forego further efforts to extend the exportation of these products to neutral countries until the detained shipments are released and the future made clear as to whether shipments to neutral countries can be made without undue and unreasonable detentions and hindrances. The following facts touching three different shipments best illustrate the difficulties:

We shipped to Copenhagen, Denmark, on S. S. Alfred Nobel of the Gans Line sailing from New York, October 20, 1914, 75 carloads of meat products, mostly lard, valued at $200,000. The Nobel was detained by the British on or about November 5 last and taken to the Shetland Islands, and later on, or about November 14, as we are informed, taken to Liverpool. This ship has therefore been detained about two weeks and no reason yet given therefor, nor is any information as to reason for so long a detention obtainable by our Department of State notwithstanding its efforts in this respect.

The S. S. Björnstjerne Björnson sailing from New York October 27 last and the S. S. Fridland sailing from the same port October 28 last, containing 84 and 53 cars respectively of our meat-food products, mostly lard, for Copenhagen, valued at about $400,000, have likewise been detained at English ports, for reasons likewise unknown, and not yet obtainable.

The shipments were consigned to “order Armour and Company notify,” as has always been the custom of Armour and Company, so that goods will not be delivered at destination without surrender of bill of lading after payment of draft or other arrangement made for payment. The plan of consignment “to order” is a credit matter wholly, a commercial practice of long standing, and has no bearing whatever on anything else. The objection of Great Britain to consigning “to order” was made after these three shipments had cleared from New York, and can have no effect thereon.

Other packers have large shipments of the same kind of meat-food products on the three ships named, going to the same neutral countries; and thus taken together meat-food products make up the greater part of the cargoes of such detained ships, all of which ships fly the Norwegian flag, and carry cargoes consigned from one neutral country to another neutral country.

We call attention to the fact that shipments of our same products to same neutral ports, consigned “to order,” all in exactly the same way as in the three detained ships, left New York both before and since the sailing from New York of the three detained ships, have reached destination and the goods delivered to purchasers in the usual and customary manner: e. g., S. S. Frederick VIII left New York October 31, 1914, carrying 44 cars of our meat products, arrived at Copenhagen November 10.

We therefore respectfully ask: (1) That the reason for the detention of the three ships mentioned be ascertained without further delay, and if perchance there has been found contraband on board (which the steamship line denies to us), that it be removed at once, so that the ships may proceed to destination for the delivery of the meat-food products thereon, or that some method be promptly put into effect insuring immediate release and prompt forwarding of the meat-food products thereon to destination, Copenhagen.

(2) That the lawful right to ship meat-food products to Denmark, Norway, and Sweden be determined so that we may know [under] what conditions and restrictions we may safely ship or refrain from making further shipments, which we are willing to do if our Government should so decide, and must do if no effective plan is arranged for future shipments.

(3) We respectfully suggest that objection be made now and from time to time as necessity may require, against improper and unreasonable proclamations defining conditional contraband and conditions governing same and urge that proclamations be submitted to our Government and if approved, publicity be given to exporters for their information and guidance before becoming effective.

In this connection attention is called to the unusual and extraordinary requirement in paragraph (iv) of Great Britain’s proclamation effective October 29, 1914 (not made known to us until two weeks later and after the three shipments now held by the British Government had sailed from New York for Copenhagen), which requirement is as follows: “In cases covered by the preceding paragraph (iii) it shall lie upon the owners of the goods to prove that their destination was innocent.” All of which we respectfully submit.

Armour and Company
By George B. Robbins
Alfred R. Urion

1 A copy of this memorandum was handed by the Counselor to the British Ambassador on the morning of December 2.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counsellor for the Department of State File No. 763.72112/441

[Document 537]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counsellor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington December 2, 1914.
[Received December 3.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: I have carefully considered the memorandum 1 you handed me this morning protesting against the detention by the British Government of ships containing cargoes of meat-food products, shipped to Scandinavian ports, principally Copenhagen, between October 8 and November 19.

I have lost no time in communicating the sense of this memorandum to my government by telegram and I will not fail to inform you of any reply which I may receive. In the meanwhile I hasten to make the following personal observations:

Apart from the duty of belligerents to respect neutral commerce, it is the desire of the British Government to facilitate by every possible means trade between neutral nations in which, as is well known, British interests are deeply involved. At the same time, as belligerents, they are bound to take certain measures of defense in conformity with the general practice hitherto observed by belligerent nations, and expressly confirmed in the United States general order of June 1898.

According to the general principles laid down by the Supreme Court of the United States during the Civil War, ships trading with a neutral port, in the vicinity of a belligerent country, for instance Matamoros in Mexico, were to be treated as if carrying goods directly to an enemy port and as “necessary to the convenient passage of property from one end to the other.” That the goods were shipped deliverable to “order or assigns” in the neutral port seems to have been regarded as sufficient to justify seizure even though there was nothing irregular or unusual in giving this form to the bills of lading.

It is established that goods consigned to order in Denmark have been immediately forwarded to a belligerent destination and ships going to a port in such a situation are naturally subject to suspicion, especially if the cargoes are consigned to order without further evidence as to the real consignee. It is greatly to be regretted that owing to the size of modern ships, a search takes a longer time than formerly, especially for an article like copper which is loaded deep. But it is as essential for a belligerent now as in 1862 to make every effort to deprive an enemy of supplies necessary for carrying on the war and to reserve liberty to make a thorough examination of cargo which is only possible in a port. It has never, under such circumstances, been the custom to accept at once and without further enquiry the evidence of manifests, and it has been shown in a recent case that the requirements of the law have been satisfied, when false manifests have been given, by the payment of a fine. There is evidence that large quantities of copper have been purchased here by agents of a belligerent for the purpose of exporting it clandestinely to arms factories in Germany through neutral ports. This is of course a perfectly legitimate neutral operation but it entails as a consequence the equally legitimate right of belligerent search.

With regard to the reasons for the detention of particular ships and the free and unrestricted passage of others, I have no complete information. I may remark however that it is a principle accepted by our two Governments in the past that foodstuffs as such are not liable to seizure, but only when destined to the armed forces of the enemy. It is certainly the object of my Government to ensure to neutrals the continuance of at least their normal supplies of every commodity to the full extent of the domestic requirements. In order to ensure this object all that is required is to furnish adequate proof (as is already done in most instances without difficulty or delay) as to the neutral character of the consignee. It is known that at least one of the firms affected has been engaged from a date antecedent to the outbreak of the war in supplying foodstuffs in large quantities for military use and this fact according to established practice renders it incumbent on a belligerent to enquire somewhat narrowly into the real destination of goods consigned to such a port as Copenhagen.

It is, I know, the desire of my Government (as it was yours in 1862 and 1898) that, while maintaining the belligerent right of search, they should exercise it with as little inconvenience to neutrals as is compatible with safety and I am confident that practical means will be found by which these regrettable delays will be avoided.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1  Ante, p. 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 800.115/1586a

[Document 538]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

680. In re seizure of steamships Alfred Nobel , Björnson and Fridland and cargoes.

From reports from Consul General and information from shippers, Department concludes seizures and detention are not based on possession of facts tending to show cargoes were bound or destined to belligerents. Department therefore wishes to be advised at earliest moment if any ground of seizure asserted other than that shipments are “to order,” or “consignee not shown,” and, particularly, whether authorities have evidence aliunde that any of shipmenus involved are as matter of fact bound or intended for bellingerents and what particular shipments on any of said vessels are held as prize and sent to prize court.

The course of Great Britain in taking neutral vessels into British ports and detaining them for examination, including unloading of cargo in search of evidence of its contraband character, constitutes wrongful and unjustifiable detention of vessels and cargo to which this Government explicitly objects and for which it denies there is any international right.

Department reiterates its position, as stated in the case of the Kroonland respecting shipments “to order,” and holds that shipments of consignments to neutral countries, though to shipper’s order, being in usual course and in accordance with established custom of trade for protection of shipper against refusal of draft, cannot rightfully be seized as contraband in absence of facts tending to show that they are in fact destined for belligerents and as to the legality of the action of Great Britain in seizing American shipments on neutral ships to neutral countries as in the above cases on ground merely that shipments are consigned to order, the Government of the United States enters all explicit denial.

Assuming, as seems to be the case, that cargoes of vessels named were seized and are detained under the provisions of the proclamation referred to, Department directs that you deliver a note to the British Foreign Office in the sense of the foregoing, and ask for the release of the American cargoes on the ships named.

Other vessels now en route to neutral countries of Europe carrying American cargoes presumably will meet with like action by Great Britain, whose course towards shipments from this country to the neutral countries of Europe has already provoked sharp criticism in this country, and if persisted in will assuredly produce conviction that Great Britain attempts to prevent trade between the United States and countries in Europe not involved in war. Action of Department in giving publicity to announcements by Great Britain, particularly as to the guaranties which it had received from Norway, Sweden, and Denmark that reexportation of absolute and conditional contraband would be prohibited from their respective territories, is counteracted by the action of Great Britain in continuing to seize cargoes destined to these neutral countries, and suggest that arrangements by Great Britain with neutral countries contiguous to countries at war are not intended to facilitate neutral commerce but to add further checks in British interest against all trade with enemies of Great Britain. This suggestion is strengthened by the statement of the Foreign Office, reported in your November 30, No. 1163, respecting Italian decree.1 Consul General in possession of data which you may probably desire.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/1437

[Document 539]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914, 9:30 p.m.

[Telegram]

684. Consignment of copper by American Metal Company on steamer Sif, consigned to B. Ursells, Efterfölger, Stockholm, was taken from vessel and is detained at Glasgow, and shipment on steamer Sigrun similarly consigned held at Newport. Department desires you ascertain and report grounds of these seizures. Shippers assert that copper is definitely consigned to Swedish concern, and not intended for belligerents, that they have no knowledge that it is intended ultimately to reach belligerent destination, and that they shipped in reliance upon statement by the British authorities that the Governments of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark had given assurances that reexportation of articles, listed as contraband would be forbidden.

In view of Sir Edward Grey’s statement that copper on Tyr and other ships is held because Sweden has not forbidden reexportation of copper, Department anticipates these seizures are upon same grounds and if such is the case you will insist upon the release of the shipments in question.

Bryan

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1572

[Document 540]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, December 5, 1914.
[Received 9:40 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s November 191 and others relating to Alfred Nobel, Björnstjerne Björnson, and Fridland involving Swift and Company, Morris and Sulzberger Packing Company. After repeated fruitless inquiries I asked procurator December 3 on behalf Swift precisely what proofs and guarantees of neutral destination were required pledging Swift and Company comply completely with any reasonable requirements in order to obtain release of goods. December 4 procurator replied: “To ascertain what assurances would be acceptable to British Government in this matter I am to refer you to Foreign Office who will be able to give you any information.” Foreign Office already on November 28 had replied: “These vessels and their cargoes have been put into prize court where every facility will be given owners to establish rights.” Thus we are traveling in circle without hope of exit except through formal decision prize court, and prize court now four months behind time.

Respectfully suggest diplomatic arrangement under which I may discuss specific cases with competent British representative authorized to expose facts from British point of view and prepare plan for prompt settlement. Present inaction except by prize-court processes and inability of anyone to state grounds for detention of ships disastrous to private interests and causing increasing irritation. Present position apparently is that American cargo interests presumed guilty but will be afforded opportunity to prove innocence at some undetermined time in prize court.

Skinner

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1587

[Document 541]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 6, 1914.
[Received December 7, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1202. Your 680, December 3, and 684, December 4. To correct a possible mistake of fact: If I telegraphed that Scandinavian Governments had forbidden exportation of all goods declared contraband in British list, I was slightly mistaken. See contraband list, and see list of articles forbidden to be exported by Denmark, Norway, Sweden, both which I have sent you. They are not quite identical, but British Government is trying to make them identical. One notable divergence is that Sweden has not yet forbidden export of copper which British Government hope will soon, be done.

American Ambassador

The Proposed “Working Arrangement” with Great Britain The Proposed “Working Arrangement” with Great Britain

[542] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 6, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received December 7, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 611.419/81

[543] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, November 25, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 300.115/1718

[544] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 7, 1914. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/455

[545] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm November 17, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 763.72112/458

[546] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 9, 1914.

File No. 611.419/81

[547] The German Embassy to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, December 10, 1914. [Received December 11.]

File No. 763 72112/468

[548] The Ambassador in Great Britain, (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 11, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 611.419/88

[549] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 13, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received December 14, 8 a.m.]

File No. 300.115/1761

[550] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Sharp)

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914.

File No. 351.115 St 2/3

[551] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, December 4, 1914. [Received December 15.]

File No. 300.115/1877

[552] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, December 16, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1661

[553] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, December 11, 1914. [Received December 21.]

File No. 763.72112/510

[554] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 21, 1914. [Received 8:35 p.m.]

File No. 800415/1891

[555] The President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (L. H. Kempner) to the Secretary of State

Galveston, Texas, December 21, 1914.

FileNo.63.72112/498

[556] The Secretary of State to the President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (L. H. Kempner)

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

[557] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1888

[558] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/515

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.419/81

[Document 542]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 6, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received December 7, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1199. More than a fortnight ago I took up with Sir Edward Grey the possibility of making some comprehensive working arrangement whereby the two Governments might remove as many as possible Of the trade and shipping difficulties that the war has developed. After discussion, he proposed that an effort to formulate such an arrangement be made by Anderson for us and for him by representatives of the several departments of British Government that have to do with these questions. These gentlemen have had many, conferences and Sir Edward and I have discussed it three times. Our conference yesterday [lasted] practically the whole afternoon. I contended especially for the lifting of the embargo on the various products which we are prohibited from importing which it seems to me would be a concrete and substantial gain. In the proposed arrangement we have secured this contention except as to wool; and they promise to take up wool as soon as their own military demands are satisfied.1

They contended for a considerable number of concessions, some of which it would be difficult, if not impossible, to grant, We secured the elimination from the proposed arrangement of all the concessions they asked except our at least negative support of their demand that cargoes, especially of copper, shall be consigned to some definite consignee and not to the shipper nor to order. The practice of consigning to the shipper or to order is an innocent and convenient and valuable commercial practice in time of peace when no government cares to whom any cargo belongs or whither it is bound, but they contend that in time of war this method is used to conceal real ownership and real destination of contraband goods. They ask that we refrain from supporting complaints of shippers about detention of cargoes based on this ground only. This leaves us all rights as now of making claims for wrongful detentions of these cargoes as well as of any others whatever. They claim to have definite proof that all copper in Germany or that is shipped into Germany is controlled by the Government for military use and my information is that no neutral Government [in] Europe disputes this. They cite the very high price of copper in Germany as confirming their contention. I hear from independent trade sources that the imports of copper into some of the countries contiguous to Germany has in the last four months been very far in excess of any previous annual importation. Great Britain will in any event continue to treat copper as absolute contraband. They claim also to have proof that many apparently neutral firms and companies in neutral [countries] contiguous to Germany are really German buying agents. They asserted that they have no wish to interfere with bona fide neutral trade and that they have taken and will take no action but what is necessary to prevent contraband trade under the guise of neutral. Every interference with what is proved to be real neutral trade they will take as now at the risk of damages.

The proposed working arrangement cane be ended by either party at any time. The text of it, which in this final form was prepared by them and accepted by Grey, follows. Grey hopes it will be acceptable to you and the President.2

After conversations with the Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and with representatives of the Departments of State concerned full assurances have been given that the British Government is earnestly desirous of making arrangements calculated to diminish the interference with the bona fide trade between the United States and neutral countries.

It is not desired to press the Government of the United States to make any declaration of policy with regard thereto; the object is merely to secure good offices of that Government in carrying out the arrangements indicated in this statement and in insuring that exports from America are correctly and fully described on the manifests and bills of lading.

It is pointed out that since the outbreak of war a change has been made in the practice whereby evidence of contents of manifests was available at ports of shipment in the United States. The consequence has been that the information disclosed therein had been withheld, with the unfortunate result thenceforth that additional activity has had to be displayed in visiting, search, and detaining ships in order to discover the real nature of the cargoes. It has also transpired that contraband goods have been shipped either with false and simulated descriptions or with no description whatever. This has been particularly the case with rubber, and, in addition, there is some evidence that the facilities given for the shipment of cotton without hindrance is inducing consignor to mix copper with the cotton (copper packed in cotton). It is the opinion here that such practices as these are dangerous and damaging to honest trading and are sure to restrict trade and create bad feeling. The British Government trust that they may have the administrative assistance of the Government of the United States in putting a stop to such proceedings.

In this connection it is clear that the greatest importance is attached to stopping copper from reaching enemy territory. Great Britain has no wish to come into any conflict with the copper producers in America who desire to carry on a bona fide trade with neutral countries, but it is keenly felt that the United States Government ought to give its whole support to an endeavor to prevent fraudulent trade through American ports, arid should also refrain from supporting the complaints of traders based on the ground that there is no right to detain copper merely because it is destined for the enemy territory.

Some part of the difficulties surrounding the treatment of copper has now disappeared, as there is evidence that the German Government has assumed control of all the copper in or entering Germany, and it is hoped that if copper is openly addressed to bone fide consignees in neutral countries, the risk of such detention will be greatly minimized as negotiations are well advanced with most of the neutral countries contiguous to the enemy states to insure easy trade conditions in such countries, subject to prohibition of export therefrom.

Should the Government of the United States find itself able to act on the lines herein described, the British Government will gladly negotiate for the grant of permits for the exportation from Great Britain and its colonies to the United States, of rubber, hides, jute, plumbago, manganese, ferromanganese, chrome, tungsten ore, and other ingredients of steel, on receiving assurances that these articles will not be reexported from the United States in their waste, crude, or raw form, and that bloom or ingots of steel and manufactured rubber and leather articles (to be limited to a specific list), will not be exported to countries at war with Great Britain or to neutral European countries from which Great Britain has not secured satisfactory guarantees against reexportation of such articles. This limitation would not, however, interfere with exportation of any of these articles to Great Britain for distribution from there to neutral countries under the limitations imposed by British law.

Effect would be given to these proposals by granting licenses to the agents in Great Britain of American steel, rubber, and leather trades; such licenses to contain stipulations and provide for necessary securities. The British Government has already been in communication with trade representatives and finds that such a scheme is feasible and would be satisfactory to them.

The remarks made at the beginning of this memorandum as to the good offices of the American Government would apply equally to the arrangements made in respect of all the articles that become the subject of license to export to America, and which are not to be reexported.

As soon as the British Government hear that the arrangements herein proposed are acceptable to the United States Government, British officials will be instructed to interview applicants for licenses and to grant permits without delay.

December 5, 1914.

American Ambassador

1 For previous correspondence relating to embargoes by the Allied states, see the section on this subject, post, p. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646].

2 The text of the draft arrangement which follows has been corrected in accordance with another copy which was presented by the British Ambassador on the same day (File No. 763.72112/457).

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1718

[Document 543]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, November 25, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 153]

Sir: I have the honor to report that I have repeatedly called to the attention of the procurator general the circumstances that the implied promise made to the Department by the British Ambassador on September 4 last that American seized cargo should be disposed of expeditiously by an executive Committee without reference to the prize court, is not being carried out, and to my most recent communication on this subject he replied on November 21 in the following terms:

I may observe that it is of much general importance that the legal questions involved in the case (this was the case of Muir and Company) should be judicially determined, and it cannot, I venture to think, justly be made a matter complaint that a decision has been sought whether cargo belongs to neutral claimants or to the enemy.

I may add that the functions of the committee to which you refer are not generally to supersede the prize court, as your letter rather suggests, but have regard to the exercise of the dispensing powers or the bounty of the Crown.

I have [etc.]

R. P. Skinner

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/455

[Document 544]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 7, 1914.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1209. In my effort to find out something about the copper trade which is giving us so much shipping trouble I am told in American trade circles here that many of the cargoes of copper shipped from the United States to neutral European countries are shipped to dummy concerns which are German in neutral disguise and that they transship them to the German Government openly or secretly as they can. Even if they can [ship] copper no further than a neutral destination, they use it there in making ammunition [for shipment to] Germany. I am told that much of this copper is paid for by agents of the German Government before it leaves American ports; in other words that the claim of neutral trade and use made by some shippers is false.

I do not know to what extent this may be true. And I have no means of confirming or disproving it. I send it thinking you will probably wish to investigate the truth of what shippers [claim], Of course I realize that all this is no concern of ours unless fraudulent representations embarrass us diplomatically.

The price of copper is nearly twice as high in Germany as here and I am informed that German Government is requisitioning copper kettles and such like things from the people. The Swedish Minister informs me that Sweden has now put copper on the list of articles, the export of which is prohibited.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/458

[Document 545]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm November 17, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 37]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies and translation of a note with enclosures from the director general of the Foreign Office.

I have [etc.]

Ira N. Morris

[Enclosure—Translation]

The Director General of the Swedish Foreign Office to the American Minister (Morris)

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Stockholm , November 14, 1914.

Dear Mr. Morris : Hereby I beg to transmit to you a copy of the note, which the Swedish Government have addressed to the Governments of France, Germany, Great Britain, and Russia, thinking that the same may be of interest to you.

Identical notes have been sent by the Danish and Norwegian Governments.1

I remain [etc.]

[File copy not signed]

[Subenclosure—Translation]

The Swedish Minister of Foreign Affairs (Wallenberg) to the German, French, British, and Russian Ministers

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Stockholm , November 12, 1914.

Mr. Minister: It is in the natural order of things that the baleful conflagration which has involved so many powers should also very perceptibly affect the neutral countries and impose very, heavy sacrifices upon them. These sacrifices, which, within certain limits, might be termed unavoidable, ought not to be arbitrarily aggravated through measures taken by the belligerents. The law of nations has established in the matter of neutral rights and duties certain principles which are not open to the charge of favoring the neutrals at the expense of the belligerents. Yet even the very moderate measure of protection accorded to neutral interests by existing international law seems to be vanishing in the course of the present war. The neutral countries, careful to observe the strictest impartiality and pursuing their trade in a spirit of perfect honesty toward the belligerents, trusted that they could rely on the inviolability of the fundamental rules of international law. Nevertheless they have had to note, day after day, and to their sorrow, that the belligerents are presuming to enforce principles compatible neither with the rights of neutrals nor with the precepts of international law. It is perhaps conceivable that in the heat of conflict a belligerent may be prone to apply none but the rules which seem to be to his advantage at the time and this set up a purely opportunistic international law. But invasions of neutral rights are not justified thereby. And in the long run this opportunism is against the interests of the belligerents themselves. The present crisis will come to an end some day, and then the belligerents will surely not be sorry to find still in force some of the principles which were dear to them in the past and which they themselves have often gloriously defended.

To keep in mind the principles of international law is to conserve the common heritage of the civilized nations, preventing the obliteration of gains made through more than a century’s effort. Furthermore, the uncertainty that has overwhelmed neutral maritime commerce has increased to such a n extent as to cause serious anxiety to the governments of the neutral powers; wherefore they feel obliged to protest against measures which; at the hands of belligerents on both sides, now imperil the lawful commerce of their countries.

As regards several of its most important portions, international law was codified at the time of the Hague and London conferences. To be sure not all the conventions there framed have been ratified. They are however, to be regarded as the most authoritative expression of the juridical conscience of nations, depicting from that standpoint the existing status of international law. This holds good especially in the case of the Declaration of London, approved by the representatives of ten maritime powers, six of which are now belligerents. The text itself of that convention expressly states that the rules therein set forth substantially agree with the generally accepted principles of international law. Even apart from the declarations according to which the London convention is to be enforced like a ratified treaty, full and entire validity must henceforth be conceded to nearly all its provisions.

In order further to emphasize our grounds for complaint, it will suffice briefly to mention a certain number of particularly important points.

Grave danger menaces neutral trade from the laying of mines across the main commercial highways of the seas. The planting of mines without due regard to the safety of peaceful navigation is in flagrant violation of neutral rights and has not only caused considerable damage but has even led to the loss of many human lives.

The freedom of the seas and the inalienable right of neutrals to use the highways common to all have also been curtailed and circumscribed through the pretension to compel neutral vessels to take certain routes and call at certain ports without just cause being given by the neutrals for suspicion that might occasion, not to say justify, such restrictions.

The ideas of both absolute and conditional contraband have been distorted and amplified beyond measure, encroaching by so much upon the rights of neutrals. The attempt to apply to conditional contraband the theory of continuous voyage and certain presumptions disadvantageous to the neutrals amounts, in reality, to a claim to wipe out all distinction between that and absolute contraband, which would constitute a most dangerous innovation.

With regard to visit and capture, the rules that have been universally accepted for centuries are no longer observed, lawful trade suffering thereby delays which involve considerable loss.

In the measures above adverted to, and in others besides, there appears a tendency to exercise a control over the commerce of neutral countries which is not compatible with the rights or even with the duties of neutrals.

The Royal Government entertains the hope that the belligerent powers will take pains to act upon the foregoing remarks which they cannot but find well-grounded.

Accept [etc.]

S. A. Wallenberg

1 Copies of the note were also transmitted to the Department by the Danish Minister on December 15, and by the Swedish Minister on December 18.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.419/81

[Document 546]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

714. Your 1199, December 6, 7 p.m.,1 is receiving consideration. So far there does not appear any insurmountable obstacle to a common undertaking for a working basis along the lines outlined in the memorandum, the text of which you quote. Meanwhile) Department thinks it important that a note in the sense of Department’s number. 683 [680], December 3,2 should be presented to the Foreign Office. Department hopes to be able soon to make some definite response to the proposed general arrangement.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542].

2  Ante, p. 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538].

The German Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763 72112/468

[Document 547]

The German Embassy to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, December 10, 1914.
[Received December 11.]

The New York Herald announced lately that the United States Government had protested against England’s actions in seizing the cargo of American ships consigned to specified consignees in neutral ports under pretext that it contained contraband of war. According. to the same paper the British Ambassador has presented a note giving the assurance that England would not retain. American ships by searching for contraband.

The German Embassy would be interested to learn if that announcement is true, and if so, whether the United States are willing to prevent the British under the above mentioned conditions from seizing relative contraband, especially foodstuffs, even if the goods are destined to Germany.

The Ambassador in Great Britain, (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.419/88

[Document 548]

The Ambassador in Great Britain, (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 11, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1240. My 1199, December 5 [6, 7 p.m.]. I suggest for your consideration, if you accept proposed working arrangement, that your incorporate in it the stipulation that the British Government shall promptly inform us of the detention of every American ship or cargo and give the specified reason for the detention in every case.

The difficulty of getting this information with promptness and in [some] cases the difficulty of getting it at all, is the most serious and annoying single fact perhaps of all these troubles. Prompt and full information would in most cases open the way to an adjustment.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1761

[Document 549]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 13, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received December 14, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1255. Your 617, November 25, and 643, November 28, and 673, December 3.1 I have just received the following facts from Sir Edward Grey:

The Francisco, Idaho, and Toronto, were not detained: It was, however, decided that the 200 tons of copper which each of these vessels carried should be requisitioned by the Admiralty as His Majesty’s Government were in doubt as to the ultimate destination of the three consignments. Guarantees were offered in respect of their innocent destination but these were not considered satisfactory or adequate.

The Antares carried a large quantity of copper concerning whose real destination there are strong suspicions. It was therefore not considered safe to release the copper and it was decided that the prize-court proceedings must take their course.

The Tyranta 1 is quite unknown to His Majesty’s Government and it is not to be found in Lloyd’s Register. The Res is equally unknown to His Majesty’s Government.

Your 684, December 4.2 Sir Edward Grey’s statement is as follows:

The Sif’s cargo consisted of grain, varnish, and copper consigned to Sweden. The latter only was detained and there are grave doubts as to its real destination being Sweden. The grain and varnish were allowed to proceed.

The cargo of the Sigrun consisted of cattle feeding stuffs, copper-wire ingots and wire bars, rubber and lubricating oil. His Majesty’s Government had definite information that the rubber was shipped on a German order. The ultimate destination of the other items was also suspected. It was accordingly decided that prize-court proceedings must be instituted with respect to the vessel as well as her cargo.

Your 680, December 3.3 The statement given me follows:

The Alfred Nobel was put into the prize court for carrying conditional contraband; her cargo consisted of wheat and meat, partly tinned. Among the exporters were the firms of Morris, Armour, and Swift, all of whom are believed to have executed contracts for large quantities for supplying the German Army. Practically the whole cargo was consigned “to order.” The vessel was chartered by a German company to the Gans Steamship Company, with head office at Hamburg and a branch at New York. Besides, it was known to His Majesty’s Government that meat merchants at Copenhagen had been approached by the United States shippers of the cargo on this vessel in order that they might be induced to lend names so as to appear to be the legitimate owners of the cargo. The Alfred Nobel is known to have been generally and regularly engaged in the German trade.

The cargo of the Tyr consisted of copper, rubber, oats, and oil cake, the fifty-nine cases of rubber being described as gum. It was decided that the feeding stuff should be allowed to proceed; and that in view of the small quantity of copper on board, prize-court proceedings should not be instituted as regards the vessel but only as regards the copper and rubber, the former being in part consigned “to order” and the innocent destination in both cases being a matter of serious doubt.

The vessels Björnson, Fridland, and Kim, were detained under similar circumstances to the Alfred Nobel , the cargoes being all consigned “to order,” in addition to which rubber shipped as “gum” was found in the Fridland and Kim.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

1 Department’s 673 read: Tyr, Antares.

2  Ante, p. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540].

3  Ante, p. 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Sharp) File No. 351.115 St 2/3

[Document 550]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Sharp)

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

386. Yours December 9 and 10.4 Cushing and Archbold with entire cargo owned by Standard Oil Company, American corporation, which in turn, as Department informed, owns three-fourths interest and has entire control of Societa Italo-Americana del Petrolio, to which concern cargoes are Department can perceive no legal grounds for these seizures;; which are apparently in violation of rights of neutral shippers. Announcement by French authorities that if cargo is confiscated French Government will pay the value is not satisfactory to neutral owners, and cannot satisfy Department as the right of French Government to requisition property on high seas is denied. Communicate with French Government in sense of foregoing, request the release of vessels and cargoes, and give notice that this Government reserves all right of reclamation for losses sustained as result of, detentions.

The situation produced by the wholesale seizure and detention of American cargoes by the Allies, particularly by British, on grounds denied in international law, has reached a stage calling for vigorous action on part of this Government in opposition to their course.

Bryan

4 Neither printed.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1877

[Document 551]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, December 4, 1914.
[Received December 15.]

No. 176]

Sir: Referring to several cabled instructions from the Department directing me to be of assistance to shippers of goods in the seized ships Alfred Nobel, Fridland, and Björnstjerne Björnson, I have the honor to report that I am making active representations to the procurator general, and also asked the Foreign Office for a statement of the reasons for the detention of the goods some time ago. Such a statement is indispensable in order that consignors may protect their interests. The Foreign Office has replied in the form of notes to the Embassy, copies of which I enclose. On receipt of the note in relation to the Alfred Nobel , I stated to the Ambassador that, while no doubt the Foreign Office intended to be as helpful as possible, the Secretary, perhaps, did not realize that with his brief statement in hand it would be quite impossible for me to make proper reply to many inquiries on the subject. I continued as follows:

It is clearly the case that when a ship is arrested and brought into port, the British authorities possess certain definite grounds for taking this action, and the disclosure of these grounds is not at all likely to imperil the ends of justice, or the military situation. On the other hand the lack of such knowledge renders it very difficult for American shippers to comprehend their position and to determine upon an appropriate course of action.

I have never doubted that the prize court would give the owners of cargo every facility to establish their rights, but unless information is promptly forthcoming, weeks and months may elapse before these rights can be determined; and in the meantime shippers are subjected to heavy losses of various kinds.

In reply to the second note from the Foreign Office relating to the Björnstjerne Björnson and the Fridland, I have to-day written the Ambassador as per copy enclosed.

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

[Enclosure 1]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

No. 73180/14]
Foreign Office
November 24, 1914.

Your Excellency: With reference to an enquiry dated the 18th instant which has reached the board of trade from the United States Consul General respecting the intentions of His Majesty’s Government as regards the cargo on board the S. S. Alfred Nobel , I have the honour to inform your excellency that His Majesty’s Government have decided to put this vessel and her cargo into the prize court where every facility will be given to owners of the cargo to establish their rights.

Your excellency will be duly informed of the finding of the court.

I have [etc.]

[File copy not signed]

[Enclosure 2]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

Foreign Office,
November 28, 1914.

The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his compliments to the United States Ambassador and has the honour to inform his excellency, with reference to an enquiry dated the 18th instant addressed by the United States Consul General to the board of trade on the subject of the detention of the steamships Fridland and Björnstjerne Björnson, that these vessels and their cargoes have been put into the prize court where every facility will be given to owners of the cargo to establish their rights.

The United States Embassy will be duly advised of the finding of the court.

[Enclosure 3]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

American Consulate General,
London , December 4, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge, with thanks, the receipt of your letter dated December 1 transmitting information from the Foreign Office in regard to detention of the steamships Fridland and Björnstjerne Bjornson. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs mentions that these vessels and their cargo have been put into the prize court “where every facility will be given to owners of the cargo to establish their rights.” As I stated to you in my letter of the 27th ultimo, this communication is not particularly informing, as it seems to follow naturally that neutral ships arrested at sea will be taken before the prize court eventually, unless, in consequence of informal representations, they are released. It is believed that in many cases, if owners of cargo were allowed to know more explicity why their consignments are under suspicion, they might clear up the matter promptly and advantageously to a good understanding on every side.

The expectation held out to them that they must await a formal decision from the prize court in all instances is most unsatisfactory. Large amounts of money are involved in these matters, costs multiply, and it is not unreasonable that prompt information should be given of all facts, which are not confidential in their nature, but which would be helpful in preparing a defense, and in formulating a request for release. A great many vessels were brought to the United Kingdom at the beginning of the war four months ago, and their cargoes are still undisposed of. If the owners of cargo shipped in the vessels under consideration must also wait four months for a decision they can scarcely expect to be entirely satisfied with their treatment. The procurator general is doing everything in his power to dispose of cases which are taken before the prize court in the regular way, but the court Is congested, and in the meantime, in some cases brought to my attention, accumulated costs equal the value of the goods themselves.

At the present time the Swift Packing Company, one of the best-known concerns in the United States, and conscious of the correctness of its intentions, is asking what proofs or guarantees the British. Government requires in order that its goods in these ships may be released, and promises to produce these guarantees. If no answer is to be made to this appeal, and if the whole subject must remain in abeyance until the prize court can pass upon it, they will feel, without any doubt, much aggrieved.

I mention all the foregoing, not so much in a spirit of criticism, as because I deem it probable that the Foreign Office does not fully appreciate the difficulties which confront traders in these difficult times, and with this somewhat informal statement before it, might be disposed to lend itself to a prompt adjustment of pending issues without insisting upon the terms of its notes, Nos. 73180 and 73177, to yourself.

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner) File No. 300.115/1661

[Document 552]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State,
Washington, December 16, 1914.

No. 84]

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 161 of November 27, 1914, in regard to shipments of copper and meats to neutral countries.1

The Department has given wide publicity to the order in council of October 29. It will be observed that in some instances of shipments seized or detained by the British officials the shipments were made prior to knowledge of the order in council, to which, therefore, the order should not apply.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/510

[Document 553]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, December 11, 1914.
[Received December 21.]

No. 187]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a note from the Foreign Office on the subject of seized shipments of cargo in Great Britain which I have received to-day and which is stated to be in reply to my letter to the procurator general dated November 9.2 Sir Edward Grey remarks in this note that every belligerent possesses the right to refer particular cases to the prize court, but he appears not to have given consideration to the fact that these presumed rights in respect of cargo shipped before the war were waived on August 20 when the Privy Council ordered that “during the present hostilities the convention known as the Declaration of London shall, subject to the following additions and modifications, be adopted and put in force.” The additions and modifications mentioned in the proclamation did not affect the status of non-contraband goods shipped before the war, nor has their status been affected by the proclamation of October 29, which reaffirms the Declaration of London subject to express modifications. There can be no doubt, it seems to me, that Article 43 of the Declaration of London applies, therefore, in the cases of American goods shipped before the war. The article named reads as follows:

If a vessel is encountered at sea while unaware of the outbreak of hostilities or of the declaration of contraband which applies to her cargo, the contraband cannot be condemned except on payment of compensation; the vessel herself and the remainder of her cargo are not liable to condemnation.... The same rule applies if the master, after becoming aware of the outbreak of hostilities, or of the declaration of contraband, has had no opportunity of discharging the contraband.

Notwithstanding the foregoing very plain language, many of our shippers of lumber, tobacco, agricultural implements, cotton and the like, have been kept four months and upwards without obtaining the release of their goods, although in law their goods appear not liable to condemnation. If goods are not liable to condemnation, how can they be subject to detention after a demand for their release has been formulated; how can there be any plans for their being brought before the prize court for possible condemnation?

After carefully reading the note from it Edward Grey, I cannot feel that he has given sufficient consideration to the obligations which the British Government assumed in proclaiming its adherence to the Declaration of London, and I am confident that a decision, even at this late date, to order the release of all goods not contraband shipped before the war, would be very highly appreciated by numbers of shippers whose capital is tied up and who are confronted with the necessity of paying costs which increase with every day of additional delay.

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of state for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his compliments to the United States Ambassador and in reply to Dr. Page’s communication of the 21st ultimo respecting the cargo of wheat on board the steamship Miramichi has the honour to inform him that the president of the probate, divorce, and admiralty division delivered judgment in the case on the 23d ultimo when His Lordship found that the cargo in question at the time of seizure remained the property of the American claimants and was net therefore subject to seizure. He accordingly ordered the payment out of the proceeds of the goods in court to the claimant.

The facts of the case are stated in the report of the judgment, a copy of which is enclosed. The facts in a large number of other cases being similar, it was decided on the advice of counsel to submit the case to the prize court as a test case in order that the point of law might be determined, i. e., whether the goods were, at the time of seizure, the property of the American shippers, or of the German consignee. The claimants in the month of Septembers instructed solicitors to represent them, and the case was fully argued in court in November the 2d by counsel on their behalf, when the president reserved judgment. It was not until the 9th of November that a letter was received by His Majesty’s procurator general from the United States Consul General in London, protesting against the seizure of the goods in question. On the 12th of November a second letter was received from Mr. Skinner, which the procurator general, considering that it contained representations of a diplomatic nature, referred to this Department. Dr. Page will perhaps be good enough to consider this note as a reply to the above mentioned letter as well as to his own note of the 21st ultimo.

In consequence of the decision of the president in this case the proceeds of the goods will be paid to the claimants, and in similar cases where the property in the goods seized has not passed to the enemy at the time of seizure the goods will be released. There will be no need to apply to the prize court except in cases where it is doubtful whether the property has passed or not. This naturally only applies to shipments made before the outbreak of war and without contemplations of war.

A possible result of this decision is that a neutral shipper will receive payment for his goods twice; since, upon tendering the shipping documents to the German consignee he is entitled to be paid the price quite independently of whether the goods reach their destination; while, if the goods have been seized and sold, the proceeds would, under the judgment given in the case of the Miramichi, have been handed back to the neutral vendor.

Dr. Page enquired whether the submission of this case to the prize court indicated an intention on the part of His Majesty’s Government to abandon the policy announced in a telegram to His Majesty’s Ambassador at Washington of September 4. This telegram was as follows:

In order to prevent loss to subjects of neutral powers and to encourage continuance of trade His Majesty’s. Government have taken steps to set free expeditiously and without reference to prize court as many cargoes as possible even though in some cases the cargoes may possibly be liable in law to condemnation as prize. An executive committee with full power to deal with such cases has been appointed.

Sir Edward Grey has the honor to state that His Majesty’s Government have not abandoned and have no intention of abandoning that policy. The executive committee therein referred to is still in existence and has released with the utmost expedition and without the necessity of prize proceedings an enormous amount of cargo, although in some cases they have not as yet been able to deal with applications for release, owing to the claimants being unable to produce any documents. It is however not possible for His Majesty’s Government to abandon the right which every belligerent possesses, to refer particular cases to the prize court, and they do not consider that the telegram referred to justifies the contention that they have abandoned that right.

The interpretation apparently placed upon this telegram by the United States Government amounts to a suggestion that no cargo claimed by an American citizen can be referred to the prize court. It is necessary, to point out, where there are reasonable grounds for regarding goods as enemy property, it is essential that it should be open to the Crown to refer the matter to the prize court for adjudication, for if this cannot be done in such cases the elementary right of a belligerent to condemn enemy property would be defeated by the mere assertion of a claim by a neutral.

It seems probable however that a large proportion of the cases now outstanding in which American claimants are interested will be covered by the decision in the case of the Miramichi and the United States Government may rest assured that if any other cases arise in which American citizens have failed to receive payment for goods shipped before the war to a German destination, such claims will be considered in a generous spirit by His Majesty’s Government.

Foreign Office,
December 5, 1914.

2 Also in reply to the Ambassador’s note of November 21, neither printed. For the instructions under which these communications were made, see the telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain, November 7, ante, p. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521]. Another copy of the British note was received on the same day as enclosure with the Ambassador’s despatch of December 8 (File No. 300.115/1882).

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 800415/1891

[Document 554]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 21, 1914.
[Received 8:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1307. Following note received from Foreign Office in reply my recent representations that undue delay occurred in the releasing by British authorities of vessels carrying cotton from United States to European ports:

The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty have reported that the delay in the treatment of these vessels is no longer than is necessary for military considerations, the provision of pilot’s visit and search at sea and examination at the port of call for contraband. The only vessel with a large cargo of cotton which has been dealt with is the El Paso which arrived in the Downs on December 8. She was boarded at 4:35 p.m. on the same day and was allowed to proceed forthwith to her next port of call, Gothenburg, where she was expected to arrive on December 13.

American Ambassador

The President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (L. H. Kempner) to the Secretary of State FileNo.63.72112/498

[Document 555]

The President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (L. H. Kempner) to the Secretary of State

Galveston, Texas, December 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

Referring to the willingness of the English Government to permit neutral vessels to proceed to neutral ports without detention where the loading of such vessels has been supervised at the port of loading by the British Consul to ascertain that no contraband exists, this matter has been fully discussed to-day with the British Consul who states that the requirements are that two British subjects should be employed during the entire time the vessel is in port, one for day inspection and one for night. It is difficult to secure men satisfactory for such work, and we would like to ask you to take up with the British Embassy the question of ascertaining whether these instructions cannot be modified to such an extent that a practical working arrangement can be outlined. It seems to us that the employment at the expense of the ship of one inspection for day and one for night at each pier where one or more vessels are loading, these inspectors to supervise the loading in this way would accomplish the purpose and be, practical method of dealing with the situation. Will you please take, the matter up with the Embassy and advise us results as soon as possible?

L. H. Kempner

The Secretary of State to the President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (L. H. Kempner) [Document 556]

The Secretary of State to the President of the Galveston Cotton Exchange (L. H. Kempner)

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your telegram December 21. For reasons which should present themselves to you, Department cannot enter into any arrangement with British Government or Embassy here by which British Consuls or their representatives shall witness and visé cargoes of vessels loading from this country to neutral countries. Matter is one of private arrangement to be entered into, if at all, by shipper who may desire to expedite the uninterrupted voyage of his shipment to neutral countries, and therefore to be taken up by shippers with British officials. You may deem it advisable to communicate direct with British Ambassador in this city, who, Department presumes, would facilitate matters along the lines suggested in your telegram.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 300.115/1888

[Document 557]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

825. In re seizure steamer Ellen . Barber and Company, owners of ship, furnish Department with verified copy of ship’s manifest showing consignments of all shipments abroad to specific consignees in neutral countries. In this case and that of steamer Tellus, copies of manifest were submitted to British Consul at New York and affidavits taken from all shippers to effect that shipments were for consumption in the neutral countries to which consigned. Your telegram December 171 stating Foreign Office inform you Ellen detained at Newport because inter alia she has absolute contraband on board cannot be understood in any other light than that the seizure is made merely because there were on board articles which are listed by British Government as contraband.

In re Sandefjord taken to Halifax and detained already some twenty days while cargo is being unloaded in search of contraband, it is currently understood here that this ship was seized and her cargo unloaded upon unfounded rumors or suspicions probably reaching British authorities that ship contained munitions of war. Department is slow to believe seizure of this vessel was made on account of gum, coffee, hogshair, and hog or beef casings which have been taken from vessel. You will present a note to British Government explicitly objecting to the seizure and detention of each of these vessels with their cargoes, asking for release and giving notice that this Government reserves the right of reclamation for damages resulting.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72112/515

[Document 558]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of December 22, 1914, informing me that you are in receipt of a telegram from your Government to the effect that it has decided to add to the list of absolute contraband” resinous products, camphor, and turpentine (oil spirit).1

In reply I have the honor to say that this information is received with profound regret. It is not forgotten that on November 1, I had the honor of receiving a note from you stating that Sir Edward Grey had advised you that resin and turpentine were not on the British list of contraband and that the British Government had no intention of interfering with shipments of these articles. Acting upon the information contained in your said note, the Department advised many interested persons that they might safely ship both resin and turpentine to any of the countries of Europe in neutral bottoms, and the announced position of your Government was given wide publicity. From information coming to the Department, it appears that resin and turpentine have already been loaded in ships carrying cargoes of cotton for various countries of Europe, and that some of these ships have already sailed while others are sailing. This action of your Government will inevitably produce serious complications and confusion, and will be received by American interests involved with alarm.

In this relation, it seems an opportune time for me to say frankly to your excellency that the increasing restriction imposed upon the commerce of neutral countries by the British Government, which restrictions are not deemed to be supported by principle and which result most injuriously to the legitimate trade of this country, produce an acute situation provoking the deep concern of the Department and of the American people. I reserve for future communication the objections which this Government may have to the action, of the British Government in listing resin and turpentine as contraband of war.

Neither is it forgotten that shipments of copper and other products from the United States to the neutral countries of Europe, made prior to the British proclamation and order in council of October 29, have been seized by the British authorities and that apparently the provisions of the said proclamation and order in council are attempted to be applied thereto. Should the same course unfortunately be taken by your Government with reference to shipments of resin and turpentine, occurring before shippers shall have received notice of the recent action of your Government in placing these articles in the list of contraband, resulting in their detention or seizure and that of other cargo shipped in the same vessels, this Government will doubtless be called upon to make urgent representation in behalf of the rights of its citizens thus imperiled.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Ante, p. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457].

Note to Great Britain of December 26, Protesting against Seizures and Detentions Regarded as Unwarranted Note to Great Britain of December 26,1 Protesting against Seizures and Detentions Regarded as Unwarranted

[559] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 26, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/545a

[560] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 27, 1914, 4 p.m.

File No. 768.72/1388

[561] The Secretary of State to the German Embassy

Washington, December 28, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/468

[562] The Secretary of State to the Swedish Minister (Ekengren)

Department of State, Washington, December 28, 1914.

File No. 768.72112/514

[563] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 28, 1914. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 768.72112/546

[564] The Ambassador iii Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 30, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received December 31, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/559

[565] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, December 14, 1914. [Received December 31.]

File No. 763.72112/582

[566] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 31, 1914. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/561

[567] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, January 1, 1915.

File No. 763.72112/630

[568] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, December 31, 1914. [Received January 12, 1915.]

File No. 800.115/2180

[569] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, January 8, 1915. [Received January 23.]

File No. 300.115/2201

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/545a

[Document 559]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)2

Department of State,
Washington, December 26, 1914, 4 p.m. 1

[Telegram]

836. The present condition of American foreign trade resulting from the frequent seizures and detentions of American cargoes destined to neutral European ports has become so serious as to require a candid statement of the views of this Government in order that the British Government may be fully informed as to the attitude of the United States toward the policy which has been pursued by the British authorities during the present war.

You will, therefore, communicate the following to His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, but in doing so you will assure him that it is done in the most friendly spirit and in the belief that frankness will better serve the continuance of cordial relations between the two countries than silence, which may be misconstrued into acquiescence in a course of conduct which this Government can not but consider to be an infringement upon the rights of American citizens.

The Government of the United States has viewed with growing concern the large number of vessels laden with American goods destined to neutral ports in Europe, which have been seized on the high seas, taken into British ports and detained sometimes for weeks by the British authorities. During the early days of the war this Government assumed that the policy adopted by the British Government was due to the unexpected outbreak of hostilities and the necessity of immediate action to prevent contraband from reaching the enemy. For this reason it was not disposed to judge this policy harshly or protest it vigorously, although it was manifestly very injurious to American trade with the neutral countries of Europe. This Government, relying confidently upon the high regard which Great Britain has so often exhibited in the past for the rights of other nations, confidently awaited amendment of a course of action which denied to neutral commerce the freedom to which it was entitled by the law of nations.

This expectation seemed to be rendered the more assured by the statement of the Foreign Office early in November that the British Government were satisfied with guarantees offered by the Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish Governments as to non-exportation of contraband goods when consigned to named persons in the territories of those Governments, and that orders had been given to the British fleet and customs authorities to restrict interference with neutral vessels carrying such cargoes so consigned to verification of ship’s papers and cargoes.

It is, therefore, a matter of deep regret that, though nearly five months have passed since the war began, the British Government have not materially changed their policy and do not treat less rigorously ships and cargoes passing between neutral ports in the peaceful pursuit of lawful commerce, which belligerents should protect rather than interrupt. The greater freedom from detention and seizure which was confidently expected to result from consigning shipments to definite consignees, rather than “to order,” is still awaited.

It is needless to point out to His Majesty’s Government, usually the champion of the freedom of the seas and the rights of trade, that peace, not war, is the normal relation between nations and that the commerce between countries which are not belligerents should not be interfered with by those at war unless such interference is manifestly an imperative necessity to protect their national safety, and then only to the extent that it is a necessity. It is with no lack of appreciation of the momentous nature of the present struggle in which Great Britian is engaged and with no selfish desire to gain undue commercial advantage that this Government is reluctantly forced to the conclusion that the present policy of His Majesty’s. Government toward neutral ships and cargoes exceeds the manifest necessity of a belligerent and constitutes restrictions upon the rights of American citizens on the high seas which are not justified by the rules of international law or required under the principle of self-preservation.

The Government of the United States does not intend at this time to discuss the propriety of including certain articles in the lists of absolute and conditional contraband, which have been proclaimed by His Majesty. Open to objection as some of these seem to this Government, the chief ground of present complaint is the treatment of cargoes of both classes of articles when bound to neutral ports.

Articles listed as absolute contraband, shipped from the United. States and consigned to neutral countries, have been seized and detained on the ground that the countries to which they were destined have not prohibited the exportation of such articles. Unwarranted as such detentions are, in the opinion of this Government, American exporters are further perplexed by the apparent indecision of the British authorities in applying their own rules to neutral cargoes. For example, a shipment of copper from this country to a specified consignee in Sweden was detained because, as was stated by Great Britain, Sweden had placed no embargo on copper. On the other hand, Italy not only prohibited the export of copper, but, as this. Government is informed, put in force a decree that shipments to Italian consignees or “to order,” which arrive in ports of Italy, can not be exported or transshipped. The only exception Italy makes is of copper which passes through that country in transit to another country. In spite of these decrees, however, the British Foreign Office has thus far declined to affirm that copper shipments consigned to Italy will not be molested on the high seas. Seizures are so numerous and delays so prolonged that exporters are afraid to send their copper to Italy, steamship lines decline to accept it, and insurers refuse to issue policies upon it. In a word, a legitimate trade is being greatly impaired through uncertainty as to the treatment which it may expect at the hands of the British authorities.

We feel that we are abundantly justified in asking for information as to the manner in which the British Government propose to carry out the policy which they have adopted, in order that we may determine the steps necessary to protect our citizens, engaged in foreign trade, in their rights and from the serious losses to which they are liable through ignorance of the hazards to which their cargoes are exposed.

In the case of conditional contraband the policy of Great Britain appears to this Government to be equally unjustified by the established rules of international conduct. As evidence of this, attention is directed to the fact that a number of the American cargoes which have been seized consist of foodstuffs and other articles of common use in all countries which are admittedly relative contraband. In spite of the presumption of innocent use because destined to neutral territory, the British authorities made these seizures and detentions without, so far as we are informed, being in possession of facts which warranted a reasonable belief that the shipments had in reality a belligerent destination, as that term is used in international law. Mere suspicion is not evidence and doubts should be resolved in favor of neutral commerce, not against it The effect upon trade in these articles between neutral nations resulting from interrupted voyages and detained cargoes is not entirely cured by reimbursement of the owners for the damages which they have suffered, after investigation has failed to establish an enemy destination. The injury is to American commerce with neutral countries as a whole through the hazard of the enterprise and the repeated diversion of goods from established markets.

It also appears that cargoes of this character have been seized by the British authorities because of a belief that, though not originally so intended by the shippers, they will ultimately reach the territory of the enemies of Great Britain. Yet this belief is frequently reduced to a mere fear in view of the embargoes which have been decreed by the neutral countries to which they are destined on the articles composing the cargoes.

That a consignment “to order” of articles listed as conditional contraband and shipped to a neutral port raises a legal presumption of enemy destination appears to be directly contrary to the doctrine previously held by Great Britain and thus stated by Lord Salisbury during the South African War:

Foodstuffs, though having a hostile destination, can be considered as contraband of war only if they are for the enemy forces it is not sufficient that they are capable of being so used it must be shown that this was in fact their destination at the time of their seizure.

With this statement as to conditional contraband the views of this Government are in entire accord, and upon this historic doctrine, consistently maintained by Great Britain when a belligerent as well as a neutral, American shippers were entitled to rely.

The Government of the United States readily admits the full right of a belligerent to visit and search on the high seas the vessels of American citizens or other neutral vessels carrying American goods and to detain them when theme is sufficient evidence to justify a belief that contraband articles are in their cargoes; but His Majesty’s Government, judging by their own experience, in the past, must realize that this Government can not without protest permit American ships or American cargoes to be taken into British ports and there detained for the purpose of searching generally for evidence of contraband, or upon presumptions created by special municipal enactments which are clearly at variance with international law and practice.

This Government believes and earnestly hopes His Majesty’s Government will come to the same belief, that a course of conduct more in conformity with the rules of international usage, which Great Britain has strongly sanctioned for many years, will in the end better serve the interests of belligerents as well as those of neutrals.

Not only is the situation a critical one to the commercial interests of the United States, but many of the great industries of this country are suffering because their products are denied long-established markets in European countries, which, though neutral, are contiguous to the nations at war. Producers and exporters, steamship and insurance companies are pressing, and not without reason, for relief from the menace to transatlantic trade which is gradually but surely destroying their business and threatening them with financial disaster.

The Government of the United States, still relying upon the deep sense of justice of the British nation, which has been so often manifested in the intercourse between the two countries during so many years of uninterrupted friendship, expresses confidently the hope that His Majesty’s Government will realize the obstacles and difficulties which their present policy has placed in the way of commerce between the United States and the neutral countries of Europe, and will instruct their officials to refrain from all unnecessary interference with the freedom of trade between nations which are sufferers, though not participants, in the present conflict; and will in their treatment of neutral ships and cargoes conform more closely to those rules governing the maritime relations between belligerents and neutrals, which have received the sanction of the civilized world, and which Great Britain has, in other wars, so strongly and successfully advocated.

In conclusion, it should be impressed upon His Majesty’s Government that the present condition of American trade with the neutral European countries is such that, if it does not improve, it may arouse a feeling contrary to that which has so long existed between the American and British peoples. Already it is becoming more and more the subject of public criticism and complaint. There is an increasing belief, doubtless not entirely unjustified, that the present British policy toward. American trade is responsible for the depression in certain industries which depend upon European markets. The attention of the British Government is called to this possible result of their present policy to show how widespread the effect is upon the industrial life of the United States and to emphasize the importance of removing the cause of complaint.

Bryan

2 A pharaphrase of this instruction was sent on December 30 to the British, French, and Russian Ambassadors, for which the exact text was substituted on the 31st.

1 Presented December 28.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 768.72/1388

[Document 560]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 27, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram]

841. Our Embassy at Rome reports that British restrictions on shipping have caused great irritation in Italy and that it seems a Change in feeling is noticeable.1 we have seen evidences of this same irritation in taking with respresentatives of other neutral countries. You can unofficially make this known to the Foreign Office in support of the protests of American shippers. I have communicated the substance of this to the British Embassy here.

Bryan

1 See telegram from the Ambassador in Italy, December 23, ante, p. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280].

The Secretary of State to the German Embassy File No. 763.72112/468

[Document 561]

The Secretary of State to the German Embassy

Receipt is acknowledged of the memorandum of the Imperial German Embassy of December 10, 1914, inquiring whether the United States Government is willing to prevent the British Government from seizing shipments of relative contraband, especially foodstuffs, from this country to Germany.

Soon after the outbreak of the present war, the Department suggested to the several belligerents the propriety of their adhering to the announcements of the so-called London convention as a working basis for the settlement of the rights of neutrals and belligerents in the several respects covered by that convention; but, not being able to obtain from the belligerents an acceptance of the announcements of the convention without conditions or modifications, the Department was impelled to withdraw its suggestion and to give notice to belligerents of its intention to abide by the rules of international law and international usage for the determination of the rights of its citizens as affected by the war.

The right of the citizens or subjects of a neutral country to trade with those of belligerents in all cases of non-contraband goods is plain as is also their right to trade with the subjects of belligerents in goods which are relative contraband, except where such goods are bound or destined for belligerent governments or as supplies for their armed forces.

It is not possible, in advance of the facts in particular cases in which its action may be invoked, for the Department to determine what action would: be appropriate, or what course the Department would pursue. However, the German Embassy is assured that it is the purpose of this Government to extend all appropriate assistance to its citizens whose goods may be seized or detained by any of the belligerents in violation of the rules of international law as those rules have received generally accepted interpretation, and that this policy will be pursued with strict impartiality as to all belligerents.

The Department regrets that it has found it necessary to interpose objection to the acts and practices of belligerents in certain instances, which the Department could but regard as failing in recognition of the right of neutrals.

Department of State,

Washington, December 28, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the Swedish Minister (Ekengren) File No. 768.72112/514

[Document 562]

The Secretary of State to the Swedish Minister (Ekengren)

Department of State,
Washington, December 28, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: I have been much gratified to receive your note of the 18th instant,1 enclosing a copy of a note addressed by the Swedish Government to the German,. British, French, and Russian. Governments, protesting against certain practices which have been adopted in the course of the present war and which interfere with the commercial intercourse between neutral powers contrary to the principles of international law.

Your Government’s note has been read with deep interest. The course pursued by the belligerents during the present war, in many instances in derogation of the rights of neutrals, provokes the deep concern of the Government of the United States.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1 See footnote, ante, p. 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 545].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72112/546

[Document 563]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 28, 1914.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1342. Your 836, December 26,2 received 27th, was presented to Foreign Office to-day. Sir Edward Grey will not return to London until 30th when I shall have a conversation with him on the subject.

American Ambassador

2  Ante, p. 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 559].

The Ambassador iii Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/559

[Document 564]

The Ambassador iii Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 30, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received December 31, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1368. The comment of the Times on your note this morning is kindly but rather perfunctory. The Westminster Gazette, which is understood often to speak for the Government, is friendly and sincere. Most of the other comment is yet, tentative, awaiting [publication] of the note. But there is a strong undercurrent of comment in the newspapers of somewhat less dignity to the effect that the note is proof of the influence of the German propaganda in the United States. In all the papers it shares the big headlines with the war. It has also been said to-day privately, both in official and unofficial circles, that domestic politics inspired it. The United States in several papers and in conversations of which I have [heard] is criticized for protesting about [trade] and failing to protest about Belgium. While, therefore, the more dignified and official reception, of it is courteous, there are evidences of a sharply critical feeling among a large class who say that the United States wishes to make money out of England’s misfortune.

There appears in the condensed report published here a very much harsher sentence than any sentence that the note itself contains and this harsh sentence is used in several large headlines. All the press and some of the ministers of neutral states have asked for full copies of the note and have, of course, in the absence of instructions from you been refused.

The note was delivered to the Foreign Office yesterday, the difficulty of accurately deciphering several passages having [delayed] its [delivery, as I] had expected and as I telegraphed you. But on Monday afternoon I informed Lord Haldane, then the Foreign Office, that I had received such a note which in would be sent to him the next day. I mention this because it was erroneously published here this afternoon that the note was not received at the Foreign Office till to-day, implying that it was given to press in the United States before it was delivered here. I sought Sir Edward Grey to-night and pointed out this error and he very cheerfully promised to see that it was corrected from the Foreign Office.

American Ambassador

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/582

[Document 565]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, December 14, 1914.
[Received December 31.]

A committee has been appointed by the British Government to receive and consider claims made by British, allied or neutral third parties against ships or cargoes which have been condemned or detained by order of prize courts, and to recommend to what extent, in what manner, and on what terms, such claims should be met or provided for out of the prize funds. It is understood that this committee should not be confounded with the committee appointed to dispose of captured cargo before reference to the prize court, as the only claims which the present committee are authorized to consider are claims against ships or cargoes upon which sentence has been passed. Any grant made in respect of them will be made as of grace and out of the bounty of the Crown.

Any person desiring to submit claims for the consideration of the committee should forward them to the secretary, prize claims committee, at the Board of Trade Whitehall, S. W.

Announcements will be made in the press as to the latest date on which claims against particular ships and cargoes should be made.

[File copy not signed]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/561

[Document 566]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 31, 1914.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

13740. Sir Edward Grey has just informed me that he will prepare a note in reply to your note in as short a time as possible “in the same tone.”

Page

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/630

[Document 567]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, January 1, 1915.

No. 5]

Sir: I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your note of the 24th ultimo relative to turpentine and rosin.1

The general subject of the treatment of contraband will doubtless form the subject of an official communication from my Government. In the meantime I venture to make some observations on certain statements in your note under reply.

You state that on November 1 I addressed to you a note to the effect “that Sir Edward Grey had advised me that rosin and turpentine were not on the British list of contraband and that the British Government had no intention of interfering with shipments of these articles.” In that note I stated in reply to an enquiry from your Department that the British Government had not in fact any present intention of interfering with turpentine and rosin. I added that in order to prevent misapprehension or the establishment of a precedent which might prove embarrassing to both our Governments in the future Sir Edward Grey wished me to point out that it would not be advisable to make official statements in answer to individual enquiries as to whether or not specified articles can be held to be contraband. I added that the proper interpretation of the contraband lists was a matter which each government must reserve for the interpretation Of its prize courts.

At the time when this correspondence took place turpentine and rosin although classed as naval stores were obviously no longer, as in past times, contraband of war for that reason, seeing that the construction of warships has radically changed.

Unfortunately it has since transpired that turpentine and rosin are of great importance in certain warlike manufactures and that their free importation to an enemy country would be of assistance to that country in belligerent operations.

In accordance with the principle embodied for instance in. President Johnson’s proclamation of April 29, 1866, these articles assumed the character of contraband Of war as being” articles from which ammunition is manufactured” and were consequently placed on the contraband list. A notification to this effect was officially made on December 22, greatly to the regret of His Majesty’s Government, which found itself forced by the necessity of war to interfere with the free movement of an article in which American and British capital was largely interested.

In taking this measure His Majesty’s Government followed the usage of all maritime nations and notably of the United States when at war, who have invariably claimed and exercised the right of making additions from tune to time to their lists of contraband—a right explicitly confirmed in the Declaration of London. But of course in doing this they are bound by the rule that articles declared contraband must be paid for in full if embarked before the date when the official notification was made.

This was the procedure followed in the case of the shipments of copper seized by British ships. As you are doubtless aware, in every case of a cargo seized which was embarked before notification its full value has been paid, except when the cargo itself has been released. I presume that in your note the course against which you protest is not the seizure but the confiscation of such goods. The confiscation of goods shipped in ignorance would be clearly unwarranted and has not taken place.

Should however your protest be directed against the seizure itself such a protest would be based on a novel doctrine of international law which altogether conflicts with the decisions of the United States prize courts. For the general usage is, I believe, rightly defined in the annex to the Declaration of London in which it is stated” that it would be unjust to capture the ship and condemn the contraband if shipped in ignorance of the declaration but on the other hand the cruiser cannot be obliged to let go on to the enemy goods suitable for use in the war of which he may stand in urgent need.”

His Majesty’s Government propose to be guided in the future as in the past by the accepted principles of international law as gradually evolved between the two countries. There, will doubtless be difficulties and disagreements in the application of accepted principles but I trust there will be no dispute as to the principles them selves or as to their binding force on both parties.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1  Ante, p. 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558].

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 800.115/2180

[Document 568]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, December 31, 1914.
[Received January 12, 1915.]

No. 209]

Sir: Referring to the Department’s instruction No. 84 dated December 16, 1914,1 stating that the British order in council of October 29 should not apply to shipments of copper and meats made prior to the promulgation of the order mentioned, I have the honor to remark that the legal position in these cases does not seem to affect British action in any respect. I do not know whether the point is discussed in the Department’s note to the British Government, which is not being commented upon very extensively, but, if it has not been, it seems to me that particular efforts should be made to obtain an explanation from this Government respecting its attitude towards paragraph 43 of the Declaration of London.

I find everywhere in American comment on these matters that the British Government is deemed not bound by the terms of the Declaration of London. While no doubt this is true in a sense, nevertheless the British Government has publicly, and on many occasions, proclaimed its adherence to the Declaration of London, except as to certain modifications, none of which apply to paragraph 43. Paragraph 43 specifically exempts goods shipped, while unaware of the outbreak of hostilities, other than contraband, from liability to condemnation, or to the costs and expenses referred to in Article 41. Notwithstanding these very plain prescriptions, hundreds of consignments brought into London at the beginning of the war are still in the hands of the prize court, and it seems to be impossible to obtain decisions without producing proofs of American ownership of a most convincing character.

At the present time I am dealing, among many other cases, with lumber consigned by George W. Howe and Company of Pensacola, to J. H. Müller and Son of Hamburg. It is known in the lumber trade throughout the world that the Hamburg concern is a consignment house with large warehouses in which auction sales take place at intervals. The habit of this house is to make advances on consignments, the ownership of which vests in the consignor throughout the proceedings. Messrs. Müller and Son honored the drafts of George W. Howe and Company to the extent of 65 per cent of the value of the goods, and in the usual way, the amount being $1,254.71. As Müller and Son could not get the goods, and as the American concern had a credit at Hamburg of $814.71, the Hamburg concern simply took over this amount, and then drew for the balance of $430. In other words, the Hamburg concern has no interest whatever in the consignment under existing circumstances. Nevertheless, the procurator general intends to press this case in the prize court because Messrs. George W. Howe and Company’s original draft on account was paid, the British contention being that ownership has passed into German hands. It is apparently the intention of the authorities, as revealed by their actual conduct, to weigh with minute care every element of ownership, and although I have repeatedly, and from the very beginning, claimed that non-contraband goods shipped before the war were not subject to seizure, I have been unable to obtain any practical recognition of the principles which the British Government itself publicly declares to be its guides in these matters.

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

1  Ante, p. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/2201

[Document 569]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, January 8, 1915.
[Received January 23.]

No. 730]

Sir: Referring to the telegraphic instructions of the Department. No 825 of December 24 last,1 with regard to the seizure and detention of the steamships Ellen , Tellus , and Sandefjord by the British authorities, I have the honor to enclose herewith to the Department a copy of my note to the Foreign Office in the premises,2 and a copy of Sir Edward Grey’s reply thereto.

I have [etc.]

Walter Nines Page

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

No. 88581/14]
Foreign Office,
January 5, 1915.

Your Excellency: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 30th ultimo on the subject of the detention by His Majesty’s naval authorities of the steamships Ellen , Tellus , and Sandefjord at the ports of Newport, Gibraltar, and Halifax respectively during the month of December.

As regards the S. S. Ellen which was on her way to Scandinavian ports, I have the honour to point out to your excellency that part of her cargo consisted of large quantities of contraband in the form of aluminium and lubricating oil. His Majesty’s Government are satisfied that these supplies were destined for enemy countries and as aluminium was not in all forms on the prohibited exports list of the Norwegian Government there is little doubt but that it could have reached its destination. The vessel was allowed to proceed after discharging the said cargoes which were placed in the prize court.

The S. S. Tellus was detained at Gibraltar for examination and found to be carrying large cargoes of contraband such as aluminium, copper, rubber etc., destined for neutral countries. In view of the receipt from those countries of satisfactory assurances respecting these cargoes they were subsequently allowed to proceed together with the vessel, a small consignment of rubber goods only being placed in the prize court.

With regard to the S. S. Sandefjord I have the honour to point out to your excellency that she was suspected of carrying contraband and was consequently taken into Halifax for a thorough examination of her cargo, of which a large portion was deficient in identification marks. The examination, which was fully justified by the event, showed that her cargo included a consignment of rubber concealed under a false manifest as “gum” and another of hog’s casings which are believed to have been destined for the enemy. Despite the fact that this vessel carried false papers she was allowed to proceed.

In conclusion I have the honour to state that the vessels in question were in no case detained longer than was necessary in order to enable the competent authorities to satisfy themselves with regard to the nature of the cargo on board.

I have [etc.]

[File copy not signed]

1  Ante, p. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557].

2 Not printed.

Special Cases: The “Sturmfels”, “Birkenfels”, and “Schneefels” Special Cases: The “Sturmfels”, “Birkenfels”, and “Schneefels”

[570] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, October 8, 1914. [Received October 19.]

File No. 300.115/860

[571] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

[572] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, November 18, 1914. [Received December 14.]

File No. 300.115/1844

[573] The Consul General at Cape Town (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Cape Town, November 8, 1914. [Received December 15.]

File No. 300.115/1876

[574] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 18, 1914. [Received 9:50 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1834

[575] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, January 12, 1915.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/860

[Document 570]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, October 8, 1914.
[Received October 19.]

No. 79]

Sir: I have the honor to call the attention of the Department to the fact that the German S. S. Sturmfels , from Calcutta to New York, with miscellaneous goods on board, has sought refuge in the Italian Red Sea port of Massaua. I have proposed to the Admiralty that this vessel be permitted to continue on her voyage to New York under a safe-conduct of some kind, in the interests of British and American cargo with which she is laden. I am unable to perceive how the granting of a safe-conduct under these circumstances would alter the British military, position in any way, and undoubtedly the conclusion proposed would be very greatly to the advantage of innocent shippers. I am acquainting the Department with this proposal in order to suggest whether it would not be well to come to an understanding with the British Government applicable to all similar cases. If the British Government assents to this proposal, it will be necessary to obtain also the assent of the German interests involved, but upon this point I see no reason to anticipate difficulty.

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner) [Document 571]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at London (Skinner)

Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

No. 37]

Sir: The Department has received your despatch No. 79 of October 8 reporting that you have proposed to the British Admiralty that the S. S. Sturmfels be permitted to continue on her voyage to New York under a safe-conduct of some kind, and your action in the matter is approved.

The Department awaits further information regarding the attitude of the Admiralty in this case which, should your proposal of safe-conduct be accepted, would undoubtedly establish a valuable precedent for other similar cases. You will report by telegraph regarding the action taken in this case.

I am [etc.]

For the Acting Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1844

[Document 572]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, November 18, 1914.
[Received December 14.]

No. 144]

Sir: Referring to the Department’s instruction No 37, dated October 31 (File No. 300.115/860), I have the honor to state that my suggestion that this vessel [the Sturmfels] be permitted to continue on her voyage to New York under a safe-conduct has not been accepted by the British Government.

Secretary Harcourt, of the Colonial Office, writing under date of November 9, states:

With regard to the Sturmfels which would appear from your letter to be lying in the Italian port of Massowah [Massaua], Mr. Harcourt regrets that it is not possible for him to afford any assistance.

In this connection the following letter received by Lloyd’s from their correspondent at Naples, and dated October 27, is of interest, as indicating the line of conduct which cargo interests should follow in order to recover property contained in German ships seeking refuge in Italian ports:

The German steamer Rhenania, which left Kilindini on July 20 bound for Hamburg, put into this port on July 26, Efforts have been successfully made to obtain discharge of her cargo.

A certain Italian bank, acting on behalf of receivers of cargo, entered an action against the captain and owners of the Rhenania. The receivers refused to pay a 10 per cent deposit for general average which had been demanded, and also claimed damages for detention of goods.

A verdict has been given in favor of plaintiffs, and the following are the principal points in the judgment: (1) Delivery of goods against complete sets of bills of lading;

(2) Proportionate freight to be paid and deposit to cover expenses, subject to adjustment;

(3) The steamer to be liable for damage to the cargo by deterioration caused by detention.

The Rhenania has commenced discharging into bonded warehouses, and delivery is granted.

I have cabled the Department briefly respecting the above matter as directed in my instruction.

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

The Consul General at Cape Town (Murphy) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1876

[Document 573]

The Consul General at Cape Town (Murphy) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Cape Town, November 8, 1914.
[Received December 15.]

Sir: I have the honor to confirm the following telegram, which I purpose sending to the Department tomorrow (Monday):

As cargo Birkenfels all from New York all for Australia, prolonged detention here injures American trade, suggest Department urge London send vessel with cargo Australia for adjudication there.1

In explanation of this telegram, I have the honor to report as follows:

Four German freight vessels were brought into this port as prizes at the beginning of the war, namely, the steamships Hamm, Apolda, Rufidji, and Birkenfels. The first three came from Europe, and only the. Birkenfels from the United States.

In regard to the cargo of the three vessels from Europe, I have received only one inquiry from American owners, and that was for wares not of American but of Swedish origin, namely for ’steel for use in Transvaal mines brought on the Hamm for the Ingersoll Rand Company of New York and Johannesburg.

The Birkenfels, on the other hand, left New York more than a Week before war was declared loaded with American cargo consigned to various Australian ports. It carried no cargo for South Africa, and it came into this harbor only for the purpose of coaling.

Possibly, under the hard rules of war, the vessel is itself a fair prize. I, of course, raise no question on this point as the Birkenfels is German; but apparently the question could be settled as well in British Australia, whither the vessel was innocently bound with its American cargo, as in British South Africa, whose chief harbor it voluntarily entered because its supply of coal was exhausted.

It is however, the American cargo of this vessel in which I am especially interested, and I cannot but feel that America deserves from Great Britain fairer play than it is receiving in this matter.

The South African prize court has already released such parts of the South African cargo on the Steamers from Europe, the Hamm, Apolda, and Rufidji, as has been claimed, these vessels being sent back into the bay with most of the cargo destined for Australia, for further detention. The Birkenfels, on the contrary, still lies in Table Bay with its cargo and, in spite of the fact that the Australian Government has petitioned the Imperial Government to order the vessel and cargo to be sent on to Australia for adjudication, it is believed here that this will not be done. Consequently each individual American shipper or his Australian customer will, greatly to the detriment of American trade, in addition to the inconvenience and loss resulting from delayed delivery of American wares shipped before the beginning of war and themselves perfectly innocent in character and destination, have to pay South African lawyers’ fees (see my despatch No 59 of October 8),1 prize-court fees and Admiralty charges (see m despatch No 71 of October 22),1 docking costs, storage at Cape Town, and additional freights and insurance.

In my opinion, this is not only unnecessary but distinctly unjust.

I therefore venture to suggest for the consideration of the Department, the possible advisability of taking the matter up with the British Government with a view to securing what the Australian Government, acting in behalf of our Australian customers, has thus far failed to secure, namely fair treatment of the simple question of justice and right which is now withheld for technical reasons.

Several of the American shippers have informed me that their shipments consist of samples upon which the coming season’s trade depends. Other shipments consist of railway materials for government-owned railways in Australia. Naturally our British competitors may prefer that future orders for such materials be placed in Great Britain, but it does not seem to be in accordance with the principle of British fair play that our trade should be obstructed by needlessly holding up samples and materials indefinitely at a port to which they were not consigned and from which they could be forwarded without serious risk to a British destination which was honestly fixed prior to the outbreak of war.

In support of some of the above views, I enclose a paraphrase of articles appearing in the October number of the Cape Town Chamber of Commerce Monthly Journal.1

I have [etc.]

George H. Murphy

1 This telegram was duly received, November 9, 7 p.m. (File No. 300.115/1168) and its substance transmitted to the Ambassador in Great Britain, November 18, with no result. The case was brought before the prize court at cape Town and the ship adjudged good prize on November 23, the court refusing to credit the master’s allegation that he had entered the port in ignorance of the state of war. Arrangements for the ship to complete its voyage under the British flag were not completed until March 1915.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1834

[Document 574]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 18, 1914.
[Received 9:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

No. 1297]

I have just received the following memorandum from the Foreign Office:

The United States Government have made representations to His Majesty’s Government on behalf of the owners of cargo on board the German S. S. Schneefels which was captured when on a voyage to the United State and has not been condemned as prize of war at Gibraltar.2 The cargo owners are extremely anxious that in order to avoid the difficulties and expense attending on the transshipment of their cargo at Gibraltar, the ship should be sent on with her cargo to her original port of destination in the United States. His Majesty’s Government, being anxious to assist the United States citizens interested so far as possible, have placed themselves in communication with those representing their interests and have now practically completed the necessary arrangements for enabling the ship to complete her voyage and to deliver the cargo to the owners at the port of destination, although this ship having been condemned as good prize to the Crown is now the property of His Majesty’s Government. The voyage on which she will proceed is, of course, a purely commercial voyage taken in the interests of the American cargo owners and His Majesty’s Government feel confident that in these circumstances the Schneefels will not when in United States waters be subjected to any disabilities which might attach to a public ship. While His Majesty’s Government do not suggest for one moment that the United States Government have any intention of applying such disabilities to the Schneefels, they feel that as the completion of her voyage to the American port to which she was bound could not have been arranged without the consent of His Majesty’s Government, the United States Government will be willing to assure them that no difficulties of the nature indicated will be raised during the stay of the ship in United States waters.

American Ambassador

2 Previous correspondence on this case not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 575]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, January 12, 1915.

[Telegram]

944. Your 1297, December 18. Delay in answer occasioned by necessity of consulting Departments Justice and Commerce. Department Commerce replies no reason why this vessel should not be treated as any other merchant vessel upon arriving, her cargo to be entered as required by American customs laws. If necessary to consummate arrangements for Schneefels and cargo to come forward, you may say to Foreign Office this Government has no objection to according same treatment as to other merchant vessels and has no intention of applying disabilities which might apply to a public ship.1

Bryan

1 The ship sailed February 3, 1915.

Embargoes and related restrictions on trade by European neutral statesEmbargoes and related restrictions on trade by European neutral states

[576] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1914.

File No. 300.115/755a

[577] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, undated. [Received October 11, 11 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/725

[578] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 12, 1914. [Received 11:10 p.m.]

File No. 600.569/8

[579] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1914.

File No. 300.115/725

[580] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 16, 1914. [Received 10:15 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/803

[581] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman)

Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1914.

File No. 165.009/9a

[582] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, undated. [Received October 17, 1914, 7:45 p.m.]

File No. 165.009/10

[583] The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, October 19, 1914. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 165.009/11

[584] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, October 20, 1914. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

File. No 165.009/278

[585] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, October 21, 1914.

File No. 300.115/803

[586] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 22, 1914. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/904

[587] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherland (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1914.

[588] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 26, 1914. [Received October 27, 8:15 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/215

[589] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, October 26, 1914.

File No. 300.115/904

[590] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 27, 1914. [Received 5:45 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/985

[591] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 27, 1914. [Received 5:45 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/967

[592] The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Berne, November 1, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 10:30 a.m.]

File No. 665.11251

[593] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, October 31, 1914. [Received November 2, 11 p.m.]

File No. 165.009/15

[594] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 3, 1914.

File No. 665.11251

[595] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 6, 1914. [Received November 7, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/328

[596] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914.

[597] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 13, 1914. [Received 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/374

[598] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 17, 1914.

[599] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, November 9, 1914.

File No. 300.115/1077

[600] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, November 10, 1914. [Received 8:15 p.m.]

File No. 300.115/1187

[601] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State, Washington, November 17, 1914.

File No. 165.009/29a

[602] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, November 19, 1914. [Received 11:50 p.m.]

File No. 165.009/80

[603] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, November 23, 1914. [Received 10 a.m.]

File No. 165.009/39

[604] The Secretary of the Legation in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, November 24, 1914. [Received 5:15 p.m.]

File No. 800.115/1427

[605] The Consul General at Genoa (Jones) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Genoa, November 30, 1914. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 665.11251/10

[606] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914.

[607] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 5, 1914.

File No. 665.115/16

[608] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 5, 1914. [Received December 6, 9:30 a.m.]

File No. 666:11251/15

[609] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 24, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 600.579/8

[610] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 8, 1914. [Received 8:05 p.m.]

File No. 665.11251/17

[611] The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Copenhagen, November 27, 1914. [Received December 28.]

File No. 300.115/1922

[612] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 8, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received December 9, 1 p.m.]

File No. 165.009/254

[613] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/470

[614] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 12, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 6:05 p.m.]

File No. 665.11251/25

[615] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 165.009/254

[616] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 21, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/500

[617] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 22, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received December 23, 8 a.m.]

File No. 665.11251/37

[618] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72112/500

[619] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 30, 1914, 12 noon. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 665.11251/42

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) File No. 300.115/755a

[Document 576]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State,
Washington, October 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

33. Department has received information from several sources that the Holland-America Steamship Line announces that it will not accept cargo for Dutch ports unless consigned to Netherlands Government with previous permission of Netherlands Government to ship. Consul General, London, 7th instant,2 cabled that shipment of oil cake on steamers Rotterdam and Potsdam detained by British Government, would be permitted to go forward and that board of trade rules officially that no steps will be taken to prevent oil cake arriving in Holland. Action of Holland-America Line has blocked shipments to Dutch ports. Advise Department reasons for this action by steamship line and whether same is based upon some action of Netherlands Government.

Spencer Kellogg and Sons, Buffalo, have consignments of oil cake for shipment on steamer Ryndam sailing 13th and ask assistance to [sic] their agent, Goossens Van Rossem, Rotterdam, in securing permission to ship.

Department has been informed through British Embassy that British Government intend to revise their proclamation with regard to, contraband and that meanwhile goods such as foodstuffs in neutral ships consigned to Holland, in respect of which the Netherlands Government have placed an embargo on exportation, will not be treated as contraband or detained on that ground.1 Furnish Department at once all information you have respecting embargo by Netherlands Government against reexportation of goods. Repeat to Rotterdam for like action.

Lansing

2 Not printed.

1  Ante, p. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382].

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/725

[Document 577]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, undated.
[Received October 11, 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

44. Replying your 33, Foreign Minister says Government will receive oil cakes as consigned. Holland-America Line for present will ship only goods consigned to Government and which may not be exported. List of exports prohibited follows soon.

Van Dyke

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 600.569/8

[Document 578]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 12, 1914.
[Received 11:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

45. Department’s 33. Netherlands Government prohibits export following articles: All cereals, grains and flour, sugar, molasses, sugar beets straw, hay, fodder, salt, cotton, jute, flax, wool, coal, coke, patent fuel, copper, gold, leather, hides, siliculose fruits, medicaments and wound-dressing materials except theobromine, diuretinum, quinine, quinine alkaloid, quinquina bark and products containing it, cocaine, cubebs, nitrate of sodium, ether, acetone, sulphuric acid, machine oil and grease, automobile parts and tires, petrol, carriages, motor cycles, horses except foals, ammunition, powder, surgical instruments, timber for mines, liquid explosives, men’s worsted waistcoats, drawers, socks, gloves, barbed wire, empty sacks.1

Van Dyke

1 The list in full, which is very long, was received on November 11, in a despatch from the Consul General in Rotterdam, October 24 (File No. 600.569/10), not printed. It is fairly well rendered in this abbreviated form, except that a better reading for the item “siliculose fruits” would appear to be “leguminous vegetables.” This was the fourth list received, the first being given by the Consul General in Rotterdam in a telegram of. August 20, not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) File No. 300.115/725

[Document 579]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State,
Washington, October 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

39. Your telegram No 44 is not understood by Department. What is meant by statement, Netherlands Government will receive oil cakes as consigned? Does it relate to single shipment referred to in Department’s telegram No. 33, October 9, or is Netherlands Government willing to have oil cakes which any shipper may desire to send to Holland, as well as other articles, consigned to the Government so that the steamship line will accept such shipments? Must goods, in order to be received by Holland-America Line, first be consigned to Government, and secondly, not be intended for exportation from the Netherlands? Department desires a full and concise reply to its telegram of October 9. Report at once by telegraph.

American cotton shippers are desirous of promptly ascertaining whether Netherlands authorities would prevent exportation of cotton shipped to Holland and destined for Germany. Investigate this matter and report by telegraph.

Lansing

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/803

[Document 580]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 16, 1914.
[Received 10:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

47. Your 39, 15th. Every separate shipment must be consigned to Netherlands Government with consent given by Dutch Consul General, New York. Goods in order to be received by Holland-America, Line must be consigned to Government and not intended for reexportation.

Referring to my 44 and 45 answering your 33, I have already in formed you that exportation of cotton and fodder, including oil cake, is forbidden by Government. Cotton shipped to Holland and intended for Germany is in transit, which Netherlands Government does not forbid, but such shipments are at the shipper’s risk.

Van Dyke

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) File No. 165.009/9a

[Document 581]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman)1

Department of State,
Washington, October 16, 1914.

[Telegram]

American cotton shippers are desirous of ascertaining whether. Norwegian authorities would prevent exportation of cotton, which is not contraband, shipped from the United States to Norway and destined for Germany. Investigate this matter promptly and report by telegraph.

Lansing

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ministers in Sweden and Denmark and the Ambassador in Italy (No. 61).

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.009/10

[Document 582]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, undated.
[Received October 17, 1914, 7:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s October 16 repeated from Christiania. Swedish authorities will not prevent passage through Sweden of cotton shipped here from United States via Norway or Denmark, but will not allow export to Germany of direct shipments from United States to Swedish ports.

Morris

The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.009/11

[Document 583]

The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, October 19, 1914.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 16th. Danish authorities at present have no objection to exportation to Germany of cotton from United States if on through bill of lading but cannot guarantee continuance of this attitude.

American Minister

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File. No 165.009/278

[Document 584]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Christiania, October 20, 1914.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to the Department’s telegram of October 16th. Instructions forwarded to Copenhagen and Stockholm. Foreign Minister-informed me Norwegian authorities do not object to cotton shippers sending cotton to Norway destined for Germany.

Schmedeman

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) File No. 300.115/803

[Document 585]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State,
Washington, October 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

44. Your 47, October 16. Department informed Netherlands Consul General, New York, states he can give no consent to consignment of goods to Netherlands Government, and such consent should be obtained at The Hague. Shippers of meat-food products, inedible oils, and other articles inform Department steamship line is willing to accept shipments consigned to Netherlands Government but not without that Government’s authorization which company states has not been given. Endeavor at once have instructions given Netherlands Consul General in accordance with arrangement reported by you. Report by telegraph.

Lansing

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/904

[Document 586]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 22, 1914.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

51. Answering your 44, 21st. Foreign Minister has just changed information given me October 16 and conveyed in my 47:

From to-day permits for consigning goods to Netherlands Government will not be granted through Consul General, New York, but directly by Government here to the Holland-America Line who will inform their agent at New York accordingly. Only goods whose reexportation is forbidden can be so consigned. Naturally the prohibition of export does not apply to goods In transit destined for belligerent country; such goods, however, cannot be consigned to Netherlands Government.

Van Dyke

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherland (Van Dyke) [Document 587]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherland (Van Dyke)

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

47. Your 51, October 22. Department advised by the meat-packing interests in this country that they have a regular trade in prepared meat products through their branches in Holland for consumption in that country. It appears, however, that prepared meat products have not been placed on the lists of embargoed articles published by the Netherlands Government. The packing, interests here, therefore, are as a practical matter prevented from shipping their goods to Holland and request to be informed as to the ground upon which their products which are extensively used in the Netherlands have not been placed upon the embargo lists of that country. Please bring foregoing immediately to attention of the Netherlands Government and request to be informed of the reason for the apparent omission of packed meats from the list of goods whose exportation is forbidden.

Is your No. 45, October 12, a complete list of all articles embargoed by Netherlands Government?1

Lansing

1  Ante, p. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/215

[Document 588]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 26, 1914.
[Received October 27, 8:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

634. Department’s 399, 12th.2 Foreign Office expresses thanks for information that steps are being initiated for sending shipments of cotton under neutral flag for German spinners and states that no difficulties exist for shipment via Rotterdam or Copenhagen, circumstances being as follows:

Dutch Government has placed embargo on export of cotton; however, through communications on Rhine are assured to Germany by Article 7 of Rhine Shipping Act. Goods are considered as composing through shipments when they are registered as transit goods in bond, even when they are duty free, as soon as the ship carrying them arrives in a Dutch port.

As far as German Government knows, Denmark has not up to the present placed prohibition on exportation of cotton; but even were this to occur, through communications would continue on the condition that the goods would be forwarded by vessel or rail without delay or deposit in a depot. Foreign Office ventures to express expectation that even should difficulties arise, which is not anticipated, American Government will exert itself to have same overcome.

Gerard

2  Post, p. 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) File No. 300.115/904

[Document 589]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State,
Washington, October 26, 1914.

[Telegram]

48. Your 51 October 22. Endeavor to obtain promptly information regarding procedure which should be followed by shippers in this country to obtain permission of Netherlands Government to consign goods to it. Should application be made to steamship line or to Netherlands Government?

Lansing

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/985

[Document 590]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 27, 1914.
[Received 5:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

54. Your 47, 24th. Foreign Minister says meat products not among prohibited exports because meat is plenty in Netherlands. Embargo intended to cover only things specially needed in this country. Articles added to prohibited exports since my 45 of October 12 are: potatoes, lead, cheese. This completes list to date.

Van Dyke

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/967

[Document 591]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 27, 1914.
[Received 5:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

55. Your 48, 26th. Permission to consign goods to Netherlands Government must be had from Mr. Bock of the Department of Commerce at The Hague.

Van Dyke

The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251

[Document 592]

The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Berne, November 1, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 10:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Switzerland receives large amounts of raw material from the United States, especially cotton and metals. At present the transit through Italy of these articles seems to become difficult in consequence of the attitude taken by the British Government. Therefore Swiss Government urgently requests the Government of the United. States to instruct American Ambassador at Rome to assist Switzerland in its efforts to secure from Italy unlimited transit through Italy of raw material, especially cotton, petroleum, copper, lead, iron, coming from the United States and intended for Switzerland, representations to be made by American Ambassador at Rome in most amicable manner, not in the form of complaint or demand. Swiss Government believes that representations made by the Government of the United States in London would be successful.

Stovall

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.009/15

[Document 593]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, October 31, 1914.
[Received November 2, 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

54. Your 61, 16th.1 Foreign Office informs me to-day relative shipment cotton from United States to Germany through Italy:

Transit of goods across territory of Kingdom not prohibited provided such shipments be direct and confined goods from a foreign country and shipped to a foreign country and also provided they are only crossing the territory of the Kingdom without being placed on storage in warehouses or like depositaries.

In case of grain and mineral oils where [due to] lack of cars or through other unforeseen or exceptional circumstances the forwarding of such goods cannot be accomplished immediately after discharge from vessels, the parties interested must come to an understanding with customs authorities of Italy who will decide if, and under what conditions, a temporary stay in Italy of such merchandise may be arranged. But even in the latter case it will be necessary to avoid the placing of such grains and mineral oils on storage in warehouses or tanks or like depositaries without first reaching an agreement with customs authorities.

Nelson Page

1 See footnote, ante, p. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 665.11251

[Document 594]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

455. Switzerland normally receives large amounts of raw material from United States, especially cotton, petroleum, copper, lead, iron. Transit through Italy at present difficult in consequence of attitude British Government. American Ambassador at Rome has been instructed to assist Swiss Government unlimited transit through Italy. Discreetly ascertain attitude British Government.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/328

[Document 595]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 6, 1914.
[Received November 7, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1005. Your 455, November 3. Sir Edward Grey has given me memoranda of an agreement that he is negotiating with utmost rapidity with the Governments of all neutral countries bordering on Germany and Austria for the regulation of neutral commerce. These agreements have two purposes: First, the prevention of contraband and conditional contraband from reaching enemy countries through neutral countries; and second, the subjecting of all bona fide neutral commerce to the least possible trouble or delay, in fact to open the way for its free movement. These neutral governments contiguous to enemy countries are to agree that contraband and conditional contraband shall not be exported. They must be consigned either to the neutral government or to bona fide responsible firms in neutral country who will guarantee domestic use and no, corresponding exportation of articles which the imported contraband may take place of. No shipment consigned in blank or to shipper will be admitted. On such guarantee by neutral governments bona fide commerce between neutral countries will proceed without detention. These negotiations are now in hopeful progress. On the foregoing principle imports into Switzerland through Italy will be dealt with.

I have had and will have conferences with the Swiss Minister and all other neutral ministers and will report progress of negotiations.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 596]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

516. Your 1005, November 6. Department’s 455 was intended for your information merely and does not authorize you to confer with Swiss and other neutral ministers or assist in negotiations in the matter of agreements between Great Britain and neutral countries contiguous to Germany and Austria for the regulation of neutral commerce. Conversations relating to the free movement of American commerce to neutral countries in Europe are being conducted here.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/374

[Document 597]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 13, 1914.
[Received 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1057. Your 516, November 12. I carried out the instructions in your 455, November 3, exactly as I find you intended and I regret the ambiguity of the last sentence of my 1005, November 3, which has led you to misunderstand it The Swiss and other neutral ministers come to see me and tell of their negotiations with the British Government which I encourage for the information they give. I have not “conferred” in any other sense but have merely tried by talking with these ministers to keep myself promptly advised for your information.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 598]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

558. Your 1057, November 13. Your explanation perfectly satisfactory.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) File No. 300.115/1077

[Document 599]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)

Department of State,
Washington, November 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

52. Confusion exists regarding attitude of Netherlands towards shipments of goods respecting which that Government has placed embargo on reexportation. Department’s understanding has been that as to such shipments no difficulty would be experienced in view of British declaration that these shipments would not be interfered with Department now informed by representatives of flour exporters Holland-America Line refuses shipments unless consigned to Netherlands Government on ground that Netherlands has virtually adopted governmental monopoly of principal food products and that shipments to Dutch ports will be denied admission unless so consigned. Advise Department fully and quickly as to exact attitude and course of Netherlands respecting shipments of wheat, flour, foodstuffs, and other products and whether report through Holland line is authentic and to what articles same applies, particularly whether any obstacle to entry to Dutch ports of shipments on American or other neutral vessels of goods such as foodstuffs when not consigned to Government. Department unable to give authentic advice to shippers in absence of definite information.

Flour exporters contracted before war with Holland customers for delivery of particular brands and grades and now prepared to fill contracts. Holland-America Line decline such shipments on ground stated. Plant Milling Company, St. Louis, under such contracts, have at Philadelphia 3,600 sacks for Gebroeders Vreeswijk, Utrecht; 2,000 sacks for H. F. Osieck, Amsterdam, and 20,000 sacks in transit to seaboard. Any action of Netherlands respecting consignments to Holland ports should not affect shipments under contract with Holland purchasers prior to war, especially where shippers have made preparations to fill. Present matter to Government and ask for ruling permitting prior contracts to be filled by consignments to purchasers or that Netherlands give permission for these contracts to be filled by consignments made to it Rush full reply.

Bryan

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1187

[Document 600]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, November 10, 1914.
[Received 8:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

71. Your 52, 9th, received two-day. Information regarding clear and consistent attitude of Netherlands towards shipments has been obtained as follows, confirming 51, [October] 22,1 and 55, 27th2 :

Holland-America Line has contracted with Government that their ships carrying cargo bought by or consigned to Government shall not accept private consignments of contraband or conditional contraband. Under present conditions this creates practical monopoly by Government of imports of cereals and cattle food on account of conditional contraband rules practiced by France and England. Shipment of flour and other foodstuffs consigned to private firms will not be barred from Dutch ports, if carried in American or other neutral bottoms; but Holland-America Line cannot accept such shipments. Netherlands Government has, no idea of forbidding fulfillment of private contracts made before the war. For their safety under existing conditions private Dutch importers having such contracts for American foodstuffs should apply to Department of Commerce here for permission to have such goods consigned to or bought by Dutch Government. Specific reply to your last question will follow as soon as I can get it.

Van Dyke

1  Ante, p. 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586].

2  Ante, p. 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) File No. 165.009/29a

[Document 601]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke)1

Department of State,
Washington, November 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

58. In view that none of belligerents have listed cotton as contraband and that cotton is in fact non-contraband, and in view of British declaration that shipments of cotton on neutral vessels to any of the countries of Europe will not be seized or interfered with, Department considers that no difficulties will be presented by Netherlands Government either to consignments of cotton for German ports via Netherlands or to shipments of cotton consigned to Netherlands concerns for reexportation to Germany. But as American shippers are uncertain of situation, Department would like for you to obtain from Netherlands Government a favorable statement on the two points presented.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Minister in Sweden (No. 2) and the Ambassador in Italy (No. 87).

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.009/80

[Document 602]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, November 19, 1914.
[Received 11:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

78. Your 58. Netherlands Foreign Office informs me that no difficulties will be presented by Netherlands Government to consignments of cotton in transit to Germany or to transshipment if consigned to Netherlands firms. Transit permits can be obtained by Netherlands firms before or upon arrival of shipments consigned to them.

American Legation

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.009/39

[Document 603]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, November 23, 1914.
[Received 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

2. Department’s 2, November 17, 7 p.m. Government here and British Legation without notice British declaration that British Government would not seize or interfere with cotton shipments on neutral vessels to any countries of Europe. However, upon my assurances of this, based on your telegram, British Minister here sent note to this effect to Swedish Foreign Office; whereupon Swedish Foreign Office assures me that Government will not interfere with consignments of cotton for German ports via Sweden or with reexportation to Germany of cotton consigned Sweden concerns.

Morris

The Secretary of the Legation in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State File No. 800.115/1427

[Document 604]

The Secretary of the Legation in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, November 24, 1914.
[Received 5:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

81. Your 52. Netherlands I Government, reserving the right to import and distribute flour, is willing to buy flour at 2.5 forms per hundred kilograms. Above contract price agreed upon at Rotterdam or Amsterdam before the war. These pods may not be consigned to Netherlands Government until the importers have sold them to the Government. Minister of Agriculture states that considerable quantities have already been obtained thus.

Langhorne

The Consul General at Genoa (Jones) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251/10

[Document 605]

The Consul General at Genoa (Jones) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Genoa, November 30, 1914.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

On November 13 Italian Government issued decree that thereafter all goods entering Italy marked bill of lading “To order,” should be considered for Italy and could not be forwarded to foreign countries as heretofore. As result 5,000 bales raw cotton tied up at Genoa and much more in transit.

As these cargoes were shipped before publication of decree, it is suggested that Italian Government be urged not to enforce decree against shipments which were made prior to November 13. If this decree is made operative against these shipments, American shippers will suffer great loss.

Jones

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page) [Document 606]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

98. Consul at Genoa telegraphs that as result of Italian decree respecting consignments to order 5,000 bales cotton now tied up at Genoa and more in transit. These cargoes shipped before publication of decree. Appropriately present matter to Italian Government and seek to have decree so construed or modified as not to apply to shipments made prior to announcement of decree, otherwise American shippers suffering loss. As cotton is non-contraband and so recognized by all belligerents, Department believes that Italian Government, upon presentation of matter, will favorably consider permitting transshipment of cotton from Italian territory.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 665.115/16

[Document 607]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

687. At request of Swiss Government through its Minister here, please bring to attention of British Foreign Office that difficulties have, arisen in shipment of American cotton to Switzerland through Italy, and obtain, if possible, an adjustment of matter. Cooperate with your Swiss colleague.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 666:11251/15

[Document 608]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 5, 1914.
[Received December 6, 9:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

98. Your 99 [98], 4th. Swiss Secretary of Legation in charge has given me Memorandum stating that Sir Edward, Grey has written to Swiss Minister at London that British Government would immediately give instructions allowing cotton to be exported to Switzerland and other neutral powers without longer insisting on interdiction of reexportation by them of cotton and cotton product there-from. Italian Government decree Of November 13, prohibiting exportation cotton is based on apprehension of Great Britain’s stopping ships bringing cargoes vitally necessary for Italy. Mean-time American cotton is stopped while. Egyptian cotton facilitated. Trying secure modification of decree. Informed quickest solution is for Great Britain to notify Italy cotton not contraband. London key to situation.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 600.579/8

[Document 609]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 24, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 594]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that I have received from His Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs copies of lists of articles, the exportation of which the kingdoms of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark have prohibited under agreement with the British Government, and I beg to enclose herewith these copies in duplicate.1 In this connection I further have the honor to inform the Department of the fact that these lists form an integral part of the program as to contraband which has been adopted, by His Majesty’s Government.

I have [etc.]

Walter Nines Page

1 Not printed; of considerable length. They resemble in general the Dutch list summarized ante, p. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]. See also the Ambassador’s telegrams Nos. 1202, December 6, and 1209, December 7, regarding the inclusion of copper in the Swedish list, ante, pp. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251/17

[Document 610]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 8, 1914.
[Received 8:05 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1220. Your 687, December 5. The Swiss Minister here has no knowledge of any specific difficulty about shipment of American cotton through Italy to Switzerland but he informs me that the Italian Government has stopped at. Genoa American cargoes of some sort, whether cotton or not he does not know, bound for Switzerland, because they are consigned to shipper or to order, and that the Italian Government requires all goods in transit to be shipped to definite consignees. I have asked, also, British Foreign Office for information, which is promised if they have any after investigation. The probability is the trouble is with the Italian Government and its shipping regulations.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1922

[Document 611]

The Minister in Denmark (Egan) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Copenhagen, November 27, 1914.
[Received December 28.]

No. 813]

Sir: In amplification of my, telegram of November 25, 6 p.m.,2 replying to the Department’s telegram of November 24, 11 p.m.,2 directing the Legation to make representations to the Danish Government with the view of procuring the release of the cotton cargoes on the steamers Hellig Olav , Van Leer and Frederick , said to have been held up by the Danish authorities, I now have the honor. to report that the Danish Foreign Office informs the that, owing to the scarcity of cotton in Denmark, it has. been found necessary to detain certain cotton shipments in order to replenish the depleted local supply. However, I am assured that, although it is not possible to release the thousand bales on board the Hellig Olav, the Danish Government has granted a dispensation permitting the cargoes of the steamers Frederick and Triton to be reexported to Germany. Subsequent shipments, with the exception of those which it is found necessary to detain in order to supply Danish needs, will, I am also assured, be permitted to proceed to Germany.

The very delicate position of the Danish Government during the present crisis renders its task of maintaining its neutrality, in the face of the pressure which is being brought to bear upon it by the British and German Governments, a most difficult one Its attitude respecting the enforcement of the embargo on exports has consequently been assumed in order to commit itself as little as possible to any definite policy which might subsequently prove to be embarrassing. With this object in view it has alternately enforced and lifted the aforesaid embargo and, as reported in the Legation’s despatch No. 811 of November 18, 1914,1 it finally interpreted the embargo as applying to all commodities except those declared at the place of shipment to be in transit and so described on a through bill of lading to another country.

It now takes the position that the embargo is in no way political and that the articles retained are only such as are necessary for use in Denmark, but furthermore maintains that all shipments are subject to such detention, if needed in this country.

I have [etc.]

Maurice Francis Egan

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.009/254

[Document 612]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 8, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received December 9, 1 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1035. German and Austrian buyers very anxious for cotton but want insurance or public assurance of American Government that shipments of cotton from America to Germany or Austria for Germans or Austrians or to Holland or Italy for Germans or Austrians will not be subject to capture by Allies. Please answer as soon as possible.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/470

[Document 613]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

[Telegram]

737. The Danish Minister here has advised the Department that Mr. Clan, chief of the commercial department of the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, has been sent to London in connection with the general question of the foreign trade of Denmark. It appears that Great Britain desires that Denmark adopt the same system used by Holland in regard to cargoes destined to that country. The Danish Government desires to have Mr. Clan discuss these matters with you in London. Please communicate this to Consul General Skinner, and you are both authorized to enter into informal discussions with Mr. Clan in regard to these matters so far as they affect American trade.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251/25

[Document 614]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 12, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 6:05 p.m.]

[Telegram]

110. My cipher telegram 108, 11th,1 was sent after seeing both Minister for Foreign Affairs and British Ambassador without much satisfaction. [In] subsequent interview have secured informal assurance from British Ambassador that cotton not now impeded by England, and from Foreign Office that all cotton shipped prior to November 13 now held in Italy has been released two-day. Chief difficulty has been Italy holding cotton for her prospective needs. I am trying to secure permission for shipping through Italy of cotton shipped exclusively to order where final destination beyond Italy can be proved as originally intended. Success depends on satisfying Italian Government that Italy can always supply her needs without this measure. No difficulty exists now in shipping cotton through Italy with bills of lading to named final destination beyond Italy. Much complaint still regarding censorship commercial cables.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.009/254

[Document 615]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914, 10 p.m.

[Telegram]

825. Your December 4, 9 p.m.,1 and December 8, 4 p.m. Netherlands Government announce no difficulty will be presented to consignments cotton in transit to Germany or transshipments when consigned Dutch firms who may secure transit permits before or upon arrival of ship. Cargoes of cotton on American and other neutral vessels are going forward to German and neutral ports for transshipment. No cargo cotton has been detained by Allies except incident to detention of alleged contraband cargo. Cotton shippers, wherever practicable, are avoiding involving their shipments with other goods concerning which there is question of contraband. Reliance is placed on British assurance that cotton will be treated as non-contraband and not subjected to seizure. Every encouragement given cotton shippers for present, and prospective shipments to Germany, or Austria, and movement in that direction well under way. Greatest obstacle appears to be difficulty of navigation through North Sea and mine area, and effecting insurance.

W. J. Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/500

[Document 616]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 21, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1308. In conference with interpreter [representative] of the Danish Government the following questions have come up: 1. Is there any probability that meat packers, copper merchants, and other American exporters would agree to refrain from exporting to neutral countries for consumption in neutral countries a larger amount of goods than statistics show were normally imported into those countries during a corresponding period before the war began?

2. Would the United States object if other neutral countries should each appoint a trustee to which all imports for home consumption should be consigned and should prohibit imports for home consumption not consigned to this trustee?

These questions come up also in conversation with representatives of other neutral countries. I ask some expression of opinion; if you think it wise, to give it only for my own information and not to be divulged even as a personal opinion to anyone.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251/37

[Document 617]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 22, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received December 23, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1319. Your 776, December 18.1 Sir Edward Grey informs me that his understanding is that Italy does not prohibit export of cotton, unless it be perhaps because of consignment to order, and that the Italian Government knows that Great Britain will stop no ship because of cotton and no cargo of cotton. When attention was called to the statement that American cotton was stopped while Egyptian was permitted to go, he denied its accuracy, and said that he had had an Egyptian complaint that Egyptian cotton was stopped and American was permitted to go, which also he denied.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/500

[Document 618]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

830. Replying to your No. 1308, December 21, 3 p.m.

1. This is not regarded as practicable or fair to American commerce which must not be shut out from its share of increased trade with European neutrals due to decrease of imports into such countries from countries at war. If this suggestion is in any wise inspired by British Government or is comprehended in its present course toward shipments to Europe, it is effectually answered by recent statement of Premier in House of Commons in defense of remarkable, increased exports of coal and other articles from Great Britain to Scandinavian countries, reported in London Times, which see.

2. The suggested creation by neutrals named of governmental trusts for control of imports for home consumption is a matter primarily to be determined by them, but such a scheme it is believed would upset present trade relations and result in loss to American concerns of established customers and connections and in depression of prices at which neutral sellers would complain, and this Government could not even tacitly participate in bringing about the suggested arrangement. Objections which this Government might find to such schemes, if consummated, would have to be reserved until their effects were known.

3. It has been intimated to the Department quite informally that Great Britain threatens to apply to Denmark and probably other countries of northern Europe Article 2 of the order in council of October 29.1 Discreetly ascertain all available information respecting this. Department would appreciate a concise but full statement from you of the situation as regards Great Britain’s course in matter of trade with Europe, and its negotiation with or pressure brought to bear on European neutrals.

4. The increasing restrictions imposed upon neutral trade by Great Britain’s course provokes deep concern of the Department. The recent action of placing rosin and turpentine in the list of absolute contraband, notwithstanding the previous announcement by the Foreign Office that there was no intention of interfering with that shipment, will necessarily produce serious complications and be received with alarm by those interested, shipment of these articles already having been made while others are now sailing in cargoes of cotton.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409].

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 665.11251/42

[Document 619]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 30, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

141. Am assured by Foreign Office cotton may now be shipped freely to order as before decree of November 13 with no embargo on reexportation.1

American Ambassador

1 Not printed. For summary of reexportation provision, see Department’s No. 564, November 18, 1914, printed ante, p. 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531].

Embargoes By GermanyEmbargoes By Germany

[620] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 165.102/2

[621] Memorandum for the President, by Representative Herman A. Mete, forwarded to the Department of State, August 20, 1914

undated

File No. 165.102/13

[622] The Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association of America to the Secretary of State

Paterson, New Jersey, August 17, 1914. [Received August 21.]

File No. 165.102/5

[623] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 4, 1914. [Received September 5, 5:30 a.m.]

File No. 165.102/19

[624] The Consul General at Berlin (Lay) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Berlin, September 15, 1914. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/34

[625] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 17, 1914.

File No. 165.102/46a

[626] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 19, 1914. [Received September 20, 115 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/47

[627] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 22, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received September 23, 11 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/57

[628] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 25, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 11 a.m.]

File No. 165.102/66

[629] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 26, 1914.

File No. 165.102/79b

[630] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 25, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received September 26, 9:45 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/67

[631] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 25, 1914, 12 p.m. [Received September 26, 12:30 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/68

[632] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 26, 1914, 1 p. m [Received September 27, 5:15 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/69

[633] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 5, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received October 6, 9:30 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/102

[634] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1914.

File No. 165.102/144a

[635] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany(Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 10, 1914.

File No. 165.102/134b

[636] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 165.102/117

[637] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 12, 1914.

File No. 165.102/169

[638] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 14, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received October 15, 3 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/167

[639] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914.

[640] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 31, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received November 1, 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/226

[641] The Ambassador Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of state

American Embassy, Berlin, November 29, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received November 30, 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/274

[642] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 8, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received December 9, 8 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/284

[643] The Ambassador in. Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 24, 1914. [Received 2:45 p.m.]

File No. 165.102/311

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.102/2

[Document 620]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

Representative Metz anxious to learn possible stock of dyestuffs, cotton prints and pharmaceutical supplies and synthetic products available for United States. Also possibility of traffic on Rhine to Rotterdam. Manufacturing works mainly at Höchst, Biebrich, Ludwigshafen, Leverkusen, Ürdingen. Matter most important. Frankfort already instructed but no reply. Endeavor telegraph information earliest possible moment.

Bryan

Memorandum for the President, by Representative Herman A. Mete, forwarded to the Department of State, August 20, 1914 File No. 165.102/13

[Document 621]

Memorandum for the President, by Representative Herman A. Mete, forwarded to the Department of State, August 20, 1914

undated

Practically 75 per cent of the dyestuffs, outside of dyewoods, that are consumed in the entire world are manufactured in Germany in five or six plants located chiefly along the Rhine and Main. Countries like Russia, France, and England, and even the United States to a small extent, have established plants for manufacturing colors, and are now depending entirely upon Germany for their own material from which they carry on the further operations. Every cotton, woolen and silk mill, as well as every, leather manufacturer, paper mill, printer’s ink and paint manufacturer, is dependent upon the products of these German concerns, whether he makes white goods or colored goods, because chemicals are used for sizing and finishing as well as for dyeing. There is not over a sixty days’ supply of textile chemicals and dyes in the United States, carried in stock by the various importers or agents of German concerns. These stocks have been apportioned in such a way that practically every mill will get its pro rata share, based upon its average monthly consumption, to carry it along from four to eight weeks and so far as I know none of these holders of dyestuffs have raised their prices in the least to their old customers. The chemical men, on the other hand, have advanced prices from 30 to 100 per cent upon oxalic acid, chrome, tannin, and other products used in dyeing, printing and finishing in these industries.

Unless the mills can get supplies to keep them going after the present ones are exhausted, it means that unless help is obtained, the cotton, woolen and silk mills, and the industries which use their products, that is the clothing trade, garment works, etc., will be shut down, with the consequent non-employment of hundreds of men and women now in these industries. All theorizing as to making these products here is simply ridiculous. It would take years to establish plants and after they were established, they would be in competition again with the German manufacturers unless the tariff was raised to allow them to work against foreign competition.

The wood dyes have been displaced within the last twenty years by coal tar colors which not only are much faster but easier to manipulate and leave the goods in better condition. We could go back to wood dyes by increasing the output of plants still in existence but if they were increased at all, they couldn’t begin to take care of a fraction of the products now dyed with colors which have replaced the woods. It is like arguing about going back to the hand loom as against the power loom, to talk of going back to dyewoods. Every mill in the United States is vitally interested and any talk of taking export trade from foreigners is out of the question so long as we couldn’t get supplies to satisfy our own market. The chemical works in Germany, even assuming that they have [not?] stopped working, [are crippled?], and I know that plants in which I am interested in Höchst-on-Main, in which seven or eight thousand are employed, are crippled by having probably five thousand called to the colors. This undoubtedly holds good in every other plant in Germany but these factories have enough stock on hand to supply the wants of the world from two to three months, while all those manufacturing countries which include England, Germany, France, Belgium, and Russia are of necessity deprived of these supplies. The only remaining manufacturing countries who are large consumers are the United States, Japan, and China. These goods could be shipped to China and Japan, and to the United States through Holland, and would keep our mills going for at least a year if not another pound were produced in Germany. It is suggested that we get in touch, through our consuls, with these plants which are situated at Höchst-on-the-Main, and Mainkur-on-the-Main, both in the Frankfort district, Ludwigshaven, and Leverkusen on the Rhine in the Cologne district. There is one large plant in Berlin and two in Switzerland but these are not of necessity cut off by water transportation to Rotterdam and dependent upon the railroads. It seems logical, therefore, that if transportation down the Rhine through a neutral country like Holland is possible, we ought to be able to get these goods and keep our mills running. There are certainly men enough left at the works to load the vessels if nothing else. Individual communication with plants is impossible. I haven’t been able to get a word from the works since August 4.

The Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association of America to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/5

[Document 622]

The Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association of America to the Secretary of State

Paterson, New Jersey, August 17, 1914.
[Received August 21.]

Dear Sir: At a meeting of the Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association of America, held at its offices this day, the secretary was, by resolution, directed to bring to your attention the situation in which the silk dyers now find themselves by reason of the European war.

As you probably know, Paterson is the center of the silk industry of the United States and all silk either before or after its manufacture must be dyed.

The Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association of America comprises practically all persons, firms, and corporations engaged in the business of dyeing silk in the United States. The States of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York, and Connecticut are among those in which most of the manufacturing of silk is carried on and this association has been informed that the number of persons employed in the allied industries dependent upon the dyeing of silk and other materials greatly exceeds that employed in any other one industry.

This association recognizes the demands made upon you at this time, but makes its plea because of the most unusual conditions now existing and because also, it is believed, that only by some such action as herein indicated can the great silk business of the United States be protected, probably saved.

In dyeing silk much of the material used can be obtained only from Germany. At present but little of this material can be had because of the war in Europe. This association has been advised, however, that there is plenty of such material in Germany ready for shipment and that, if this material can be moved down the Rhine to some point of shipment, such as Rotterdam, then its transportation to the United States will be a comparatively simple matter.

The war will affect the manufacture of silk in Germany, France, and other countries so that there will be little or no demand for this dyestuff in those countries and therefore, the manufacturers of this dyestuff will facilitate and aid as much as they can the shipment of the material to some neutral port.

We ask you to help us at this most critical time to devise some means by which this material can be moved and transported as above stated.

Respectfully yours,

Silk Dyers, Mutual Protective
Association of America
By Edwin Bodmer, jr ., Secretary

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/19

[Document 623]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 4, 1914.
[Received September 5, 5:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

23. Referring 3, August 27, 2 p.m., concerning shipments dyestuffs, pharmaceutic articles, etc.1 Several firms ready export large quantities from Rotterdam under Dutch flag if assurance given shipments will not be seized. Dispense from export prohibition quinine and caffeine can be secured [sic].

Gerard

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at Berlin (Lay) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/34

[Document 624]

The Consul General at Berlin (Lay) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Berlin, September 15, 1914.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Series 11, relative to German embargo. Tar oil and aniline salts are now forbidden export. Thorium nitrate, salol, acylphometadiïne, silver nucleïnate, and coloring matter, not aniline, are not prohibited. Following articles are doubtful: Dyestuffs for tanning purposes forbidden, otherwise permitted if not. Rattan reeds are not prohibited raw but if used for spinning purposes may be prohibited. Catgut is probably prohibited under head of transparent leather products or aviation supplies. Laboratory apparatus, whether for educational institutions or not, is prohibited if for bacteriological, chirurgical or medical purposes, excepting childbirth, and dental instruments. Potash fertilizers are now, in general, permitted exportation. Certain combinations of potash and sodium ten metals [sic] prohibited. Caustic potash prohibited. Exports for a month now permitted laboratory chemicals if not used manufacture of ammunition explosives. Medicinal preparations aviation purposes may be permitted export. Orders of Imperial. Chancellor relative to embargo, constantly changing. Permits are required if goods are questionable. Plenty of all these materials now for export. Freight regulations as to size would limit, bulky shipment best. Most available and cheapest routes from Berlin and its surrounding country are via Rotterdam or Copenhagen. Italian route much more expensive. Shipping at standstill until last few days. Now moving some.

Lay

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.102/46a

[Document 625]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

186. Unofficial information Germany has placed cyanide under embargo. Supply in mining districts this country and Mexico very limited. Unless cyanide can be had, American mining companies in Mexico and United States will be compelled to shut down with disastrous results. Investigate, and if there is an embargo, request German government to lift embargo on enough cyanide for needs of United States if given assurances that no cyanide will be supplied belligerent countries. Answer immediately.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/47

[Document 626]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 19, 1914.
[Received September 20, 115 p.m.]

[Telegram]

227. Referring to Department’s 186, September 17, 7. p.m. September 9, 2 p.m.1 Have been working on cyanide matter and informed 16th instant by the director of, gold and silver Scheideanstalt that that export now permitted for America and Mexico. Embargo was put on because government here did not want England to get cyanide for Transvaal; therefore, please see that no cyanide is reexported.

[File copy not signed]

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/57

[Document 627]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 22, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received September 23, 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

271. Referring to my telegram No. 227, 19th. The embargo on cyanide is on the kind used in mining industry and was put on to prevent British getting cyanide for their production gold in the Transvaal. Although certain exporters had informed me that the Secretary of the Interior here had agreed to export of dyes, quantities cyanide, on their giving guarantee that consignment was for United States, I am now informed by Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs that because of fear that British may take goods of this kind from Holland ships on the way to America, no exports of dyestuffs, cyanide, chemicals, and medicines will be allowed, although destined for United States, in Holland ships, but I am informed that if American ships are sent to Holland, such exports will then be allowed. Suggest that such ships can bring a cargo of cotton and copper consigned to Holland merchants. Can not such ship under international law come direct to German ports? If America wants dyestuffs, cyanide, and chemicals send these American ships.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/66

[Document 628]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 25, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

33. Referring to question of export of dyestuffs, cyanide, medicines, etc., the position of the German Government that they will only permit export in American ships, or possibly from Italy, seems so extraordinary that there must be something behind it. I think this is the fact, that England has threatened Holland that she will declare war if Holland ships carry goods to or from Germany, and that Germany does not force the situation to keep Holland neutral at all events. This is confirmed by a conversation which must remain confidential which I had with the Dutch Minister here. He told me that because of informal threats from England, Dutch vessels sailing from New York were compelled to refuse cargoes of flour or anything that might benefit Germany. I suggest, if persons interested in America want dyestuffs, cyanide, chemicals, and medicines from Germany, that boat under American flag be sent immediately to Rotterdam.

Gerard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.102/79b

[Document 629]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 26, 1914.

[Telegram]

265. Is potash to be used for agricultural and manufacturing purposes and other articles mentioned in recent instructions for American use only in same category with cyanide, dyestuffs, chemicals, and medicines? Have called conference for September 30 looking toward sending American ship to Rotterdam. Have you suggestions for conference?

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/67

[Document 630]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 25, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received September 26, 9:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

316. The following received from the Foreign Office in writing this evening:

We are ready to allow the transportation to the United States of chemicals, dyestuffs, cyanide of potassium, and medicines on Dutch vessels via Holland if the American Government guarantees that it will allow the distribution of the goods in the United States and Mexico alone, to control the arrival of each single shipment in the United States and to notify us thereof through the Berlin Embassy; and, if any shipments destined for America are seized by our enemies, to protest against such action, as being contrary to international law, with all the means at its command. The same applies to transportation by American ships and by Italian vessels via Genoa.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/68

[Document 631]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 25, 1914, 12 p.m.
[Received September 26, 12:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

288. Am working on the question of export dyestuffs, cyanide and salvarsan, etc. There has been some divergence of views and consequent confusion between Minister of Foreign Affairs and Minister of the Interior. The great fear is that these articles may be taken from neutral vessels by the English. If you can send me an assurance that England will not take these goods when the property of American citizens from neutral vessels, and that United States will guarantee that goods will not be resold to English, I am confident that matter can be arranged. Foreign Office told me yesterday that goods would be allowed to leave Holland in American ships and to-day that probably goods might also leave in Italian vessels from Italy but the question of what should be guaranteed against selling to England still open. Have meeting again to-morrow and hope for a definite answer. Suggest that in the meantime you either get assurances from the British Government or send an American ship to the Netherlands. If the matter cannot be arranged soon, factories will cease manufacture. The following was received in writing from the Foreign Office this evening:

The exportation of cyanide from Germany is prohibited. However, the Imperial Government is willing to meet the needs of American domestic consumption to permit export of relative amount of cyanide. It believes it to be necessary, however, to make condition that the goods are carried under American flag as otherwise in danger of being confiscated by English.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/69

[Document 632]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 26, 1914, 1 p. m
[Received September 27, 5:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

319. Referring to my cipher telegram No. 316 last night transmitting German memorandum about export of dyestuffs, cyanide, etc.

It is evident that either Germany has reason to fear that England will violate international law and take goods of neutrals or for neutrals not contraband of war from neutral vessels, or that Germany hopes through us to keep an open door for export and import of goods not contraband of war and desires our backing or even our [cooperation] to this end. Therefore, I suggest that assurances be obtained from England and France that goods not contraband consigned to America will not be interfered with on neutral vessels and that you then authorize me to answer Germany informally that England and France having given assurances that the rules of international law will not be violated, the citizens of the United States will be glad to receive consignments of goods of this character for use in the United States and Mexico, and that United States, I suggest through the Department of Commerce and Labor, will see that the goods are used only in the United States and Mexico.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/102

[Document 633]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 5, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received October 6, 9:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

413. I believe that the real reason for putting a prohibition on export of dyestuffs, cyanide, etc., was to force us to send a ship to Rotterdam which would bring cotton or other goods needed here from America and I believe that if American ship comes in ballast that German merchants will refuse to ship their goods to America. I have no definite information, but I believe we shall have to meet this issue. Why not send cotton in these ships? Cyanide for mining, most dyestuffs, etc., are made under patents held by Germans. I suppose if Germans refuse to export in American ships or by way of Italy that Congress can authorize manufacture in the United States under these patents. There is a German mining-cyanide factory at Perth Amboy, New Jersey.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.102/144a

[Document 634]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

345. American boat Matanzas leaves New York under ballast October 7, arrives Rotterdam October 20 or 21.1 Will leave Rotterdam for New York October 25 or 26. Will carry chemicals and dyestuffs. Are there objections to the export to this country of aniline salt, aniline oil, benzoic acid, hydrated carbonate potash, caustic potash, permanganate potash, prussiate potash, red and yellow, carbonate potash, carbon tetrachloride, saxonia white arsenic and red arsenic, antimony salt, barium salts, such as chloride, nitrate, carbonate, sulphide soda, bisulphate of soda, epsom salts, chloride of lime, magnesium chloride magnesium oxide, magnesium carbonate. Shippers and manufacturers guarantee that goods destined to United States are for home consumption in United States only and will be sold to consumers here on condition to be used here and not reexported.

Bryan

1 The dispatch of the Matanzas was the outcome of the conference mentioned in Department’s No. 265, September 26, ante, p. 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]. The meeting, held on September 30, under the auspices of departmental officers and attended by a score of representatives of firms and associations interested in the importation of German chemical products, authorized a committee to obtain a ship for the purpose of bringing over such goods.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany(Gerard) File No. 165.102/134b

[Document 635]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany(Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

377. Steamer Matanzas mentioned in Department’s October 7 is under charter of persons particularly interested in securing present shipments of dyestuffs, chemicals, and pharmaceutical products which are urgently needed by American manufacturers and they did not wish to complicate their particular undertaking with outgoing cargoes but this is not to be understood as indicating any policy of American interests not to engage in outgoing cargoes in respect to which the Department is informed plans are now on foot by interested parties. Department understands certain space will be allotted for cyanide.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.102/117

[Document 636]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 10, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

378. Matanzas sailed 7th under ballast and before your recommendations as to raw cotton were received. Have Consul General ascertain amount of raw cotton wanted. If reasonable financial arrangements can be made ships carrying raw cotton will be sent. Department has assurances Congressman Metz is anxious to send raw cotton. Holland-America Line soon to put some boats under American flag which will carry raw cotton. All other boats sent for dyestuffs, etc., will carry raw cotton. Assure German Government no goods sent on Matanzas will be reexported. Guarantees given by all importers receiving goods on Matanzas.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 165.102/169

[Document 637]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

399. Heller and Merz Company, New York, have 2,000 carloads coal-tar dyes consigned them by Bubeck and Dolder, per steamer Nieuw Amsterdam, from Basle, Switzerland, via Rotterdam, held by German Government; similarly 2,300 carloads coal-tar dyes consignee them by Sandoz Chemical Works per steamer Ryndam, from Basle, Switzerland, via Rotterdam, also detained. Make urgent representations to German authorities that these and other like detained shipments may come forward. These shipments property of neutrals who guarantee its use in United States only Shortage of dyestuffs in United States is of urgent importance. Why may not these dyes come forward on ship Matanzas now on its way to Rotterdam under American charter party for cargo of dyestuffs?

Department has information from cotton exporters that cargoes of cotton on neutral vessels intended for German spinners are being arranged. Can you ascertain if such cargoes via Rotterdam or Copenhagen would probably meet with any opposition from embargo by Netherlands or Danish Government on reexportation to Germany? Exporters inquiring on this point.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/167

[Document 638]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 14, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received October 15, 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

505. The German Government and exporters must have guarantee our Government that goods shipped on the Matanzas shall not be reexported. I have already suggested in cable of September 26 that Department of Commerce and Labor be charged with duty of seeing that none of goods are used except in the United States and Mexico. Guarantee of individuals and companies not sufficient.

Gerard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 639]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914.

[Telegram]

448. Your October 14. This Government cannot legally make the guarantee demanded. Importers here will execute bond against reexportation. Give assurances of American Government none will be reexported from United States and Mexico and that everything possible will be done to send cotton and wool to Germany. Foreign Trade Adviser been in New York all week for purpose securing cotton for shipment to Germany and Stephen M. Weld and Company are arranging for shipment of initial cargo of 8,500 bales from New York or Galveston. About two weeks required to assemble cargo. German Ambassador has cabled his Government advising that goods be allowed to be sent on Matanzas. Foreign Trade Bureau, State Department, working in conjunction with German Embassy here in effort to facilitate shipment of cotton. Department advised by American Minister Netherlands cotton shipped to Holland in transit to Germany not forbidden.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/226

[Document 640]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 31, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received November 1, 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

683. Department’s 516, 29th.1 Your 448, 19th, seems satisfactory to German Government as they allow the export of dyestuffs, cyanide, and chemicals.

Gerard

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of state File No. 165.102/274

[Document 641]

The Ambassador Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of state

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 29, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received November 30, 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

950. Hear rumors that the German Government, displeased by the sale of American war materials to England and France, may place difficulties in the. way of exportation of dyestuffs, etc. Under the circumstances information for communication to the German Government concerning shipments of cotton in addition to those mentioned in Department’s 650, November 1.6, 8 p.m.,1 would doubtless prove useful in helping to insure permission for comtinued exportation dyestuffs, etc.

Gerard

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/284

[Document 642]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 8, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received December 9, 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1036. Informed that one month’s supply of dyestuffs has been released for the shipment by German authorities and that shipment was started for Rotterdam yesterday. Shipment to be made on Matanzas and is to be of about 2,200 tons, practically filling steamer. Further release will be made of amount of dyes damaged on Sun as soon as this amount is established. No further release for any period until present shipment has been used up.

Gerard

The Ambassador in. Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 165.102/311

[Document 643]

The Ambassador in. Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 24, 1914.
[Received 2:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Berlin’s 1171, 22d. Am informed further half-month dyestuff supply has been released amounting to about 1,100 tons for shipment on Berwind.

Gerard

Embargoes By the Allied statesEmbargoes By the Allied states

[644] Representative Julius Kahn to the Office of Foreign Trade Advisers

House of Representatives, Washington, October 2, 1914.

File No. 611.416/7

[645] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 6, 1914.

[646] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 23, 1914. [Received 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 300 114 /01.3

[647] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

[648] The Secretary of the National Association of Wool Manufacturers (W. L. Marvin) to the Secretary of State

Boston, October 29, 1914.

File No. 611.479/22

[649] The Acting Secretary of Commerce (William J. Harris) to the Secretary of State

Department of Commerce, Washington, October 30, 1914.

File No. 611.46c9/1

[650] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

File No. 611.459

[651] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

File. No. 611.511 9/2a

[652] The Consul General at Sydney, Australia (Bray), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Sydney, undated. [Received November 2, 1914, 9 a.m.]

File No. 611.479/27

[653] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 2, 1914. [Received November 3, 8 a.m.]

File No. 300.115/1063

[654] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 3, 1914.

File No. 611.419/33a

[655] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (Bray)

Department of State, Washington, November 3, 1914.

File No. 611.479/23a

[656] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Singapore (Cunningham)

Department of State, Washington, November 3, 1914.

File No. 611.46d9/a

[657] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, November 6, 1914. [Received 4 p.m.]

File No. 611.419/34

[658] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 6, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received November 7, 8 a.m.]

File No, 611.419/36

[659] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 11, 1914.

File No. 011.479/43a

[660] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page).

Department of State, Washington November 11, 1914.

File No. 611.419/47a

[661] The Secretary of State to this Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 611.419/48a

[662] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, November 14, 1914. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 611.51L9/6

[663] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 17, 1914. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 611.419/50

[664] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 17, 1914. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 611.479/52

[665] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 19, 1914. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 611.479/56

[666] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 611.51L9/7

[667] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914.

File No. 611.46c9/8

[668] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 611.419/50

[669] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914.

File No. 611.46c9/12

[670] The Secretary of the Embassy in France (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, December 4, 1914. [Received 12 midnight.]

File No. 611.51L9/9

[671] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, undated. [Received December 7, 1914, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 611.46c 9/11

[672] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Sharp)

Department of State, Washington, December 9, 1914.

File No. 611.51L9/10

[673] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 14, 1914. [Received 6:45 p.m.]

File No. 611.419/92

[674] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 1914.

File No. 611.479/96

[675] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 611.479/89

[676] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 23, 1914.

File No. 611.419/106a

[677] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 23, 1914. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

File No. 611.479/97

[678] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 23, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 8. 30 p.m.]

File No. 611.479/98

[679] The Ambassador in France (Sharp) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, December 24, 1914. [Received 11 p.m.]

File No. 611.51L9/15

[680] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 28, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 611.419/107

Representative Julius Kahn to the Office of Foreign Trade Advisers File No. 611.416/7

[Document 644]

Representative Julius Kahn to the Office of Foreign Trade Advisers

House of Representatives,
Washington, October 2, 1914.

Dear Sirs: Confirming telephone conversation had with your office this morning relative to the embargo placed on Australian meats by the Australian government, would state that I received a telegram this morning which reads as follows:

Government of Australia has placed embargo upon shipments of Australian meats to this country. This will work a hardship on Pacific Coast owing to fact immense quantities handled here will seriously affect business interests in this city.1 Acting Secretary of State Robert Lansing has correspondence bearing on this case. Use your best efforts to have Australian Government revoke this order. All big packing houses and cold storage concerns on this coast deeply interested. This merchandise is for Pacific Coast consumption only and principally to fill United States Army and Navy contracts.

I will greatly appreciate it if you will look into this matter and advise me what, if anything, can be done in the premises.

Yours very truly,

Julius Kahn

1 San Francisco.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 645]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 6, 1914.

[Telegram]

268. Following telegram sent American Consul General, Sydney:

Commonwealth’s embargo on meat works especial hardship on Pacific Coast and those who made contracts prior to embargo. Department does not understand why exportation is forbidden in Australia when allowed in England. At first favorable opportunity inquire what authorities are willing to do.

Inquire if it can be arranged to lift embargo as far as United States is concerned.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300 114 /01.3

[Document 646]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 23, 1914.
[Received 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

887. United States Steel Products Company, 30 Church Street, New York, urging through London manager that Embassy make representations to British Government with a view to having raised embargo on shipments of manganese ore from India to United States. Manager states company dependent upon this source of supply and if embargo not raised will sustain great loss. Further that two steamers loaded with company’s ore are held in Bombay whose speedy release is desired. Please instruct.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 647]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

[Telegram]

407. Your October 23, 887. You may use your good offices in behalf of the company with a view to bringing about compliance with its request.

Lansing

The Secretary of the National Association of Wool Manufacturers (W. L. Marvin) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.479/22

[Document 648]

The Secretary of the National Association of Wool Manufacturers (W. L. Marvin) to the Secretary of State

Boston, October 29, 1914.

Dear Sirs: The report is apparently confirmed that as a war measure an embargo has been placed upon the exportation of wool from Australia to any country except the United Kingdom. This sweeping measure will have a serious effect upon the wool manufacturing industry of the United States.

Australasia, including New Zealand, is the greatest producer of raw wool, in the world, its output reaching about 700,000,000 pounds annually. Australia is the principal source of our supply of imported wools suitable for clothing purposes, and under the new tariff law these imports from Australia have been largely increasing.

Many American mills have lately made engagements of Australian wools, and other mills were preparing to place considerable orders. There was a prospect that a great and valuable trade would be done direct. But the reported embargo will not only prevent Americans from making further purchases, but will prevent the shipment of wools already purchased and required for the use of American machinery.

On behalf of this association, which represents the major part of the active woolen machinery of the United States, I would respectfully urge that immediate steps be taken by the Department of State, through representations to the British Government, to secure a modification of the embargo that will allow Australian wools to move as needed to the ports of this country. There can be no question that. American manufacturers will be willing to give the most conclusive guarantees that wools bought by them will be consumed in American mills, and that none will be allowed to pass into the possession of enemies of the United Kingdom and her colonies.

I am [etc.]

Winthrop L. Marvin

The Acting Secretary of Commerce (William J. Harris) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.46c9/1

[Document 649]

The Acting Secretary of Commerce (William J. Harris) to the Secretary of State

Department of Commerce,
Washington, October 30, 1914.

Sir: I enclose herewith a letter dated the 27th instant from Mr. P. W. Litchfield, factory manager, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio, regarding an embargo placed on crude rubber coming from Far East ports by the British Government, and recommend that anything possible be done to relieve the situation.

Respectfully,

William J. Harris

[Enclosure]

The factory manager of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company (P. W. Leitchfield) to the Secretary of Commerce (Redfield)

Akron, Ohio, October 27, 1914.

Dear Sir: We note that the British Government has placed an embargo on crude rubber coming from the Far East ports, notably Ceylon and Singapore, to any American port, specifying that it can only be shipped through British ports. We have rubber coming from this location at the rate of about $1,000,000 per month, and have contracts for delivery of this rubber for prompt shipment up until next July.

We wish you would use all means in your power to have this embargo lifted, as we cannot see any sense to it at all, as crude rubber is not contraband.

This seems to be an attempt on the part of the British Government to prevent the export of rubber to Germany. All the rubber which we buy is used in our factories here at Akron, Ohio, and at Bowmanville, Ontario.

We will be subjected to serious loss if this embargo is allowed to stand.

Yours very truly,

The Good Year Tire and Rubber Company
By P. W. Litchfieid , Factory Manager

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.459

[Document 650]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

[Telegram]

439. Carnegie Steel Company, Pittsburgh, has been receiving manganese ore from India under contract extending over period of years with Central Provisions Prospecting Syndicate, London, and is willing to guarantee consumption in America and not to be reexported. Ask Foreign Office if embargo by India against shipment to United States can be removed.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File. No. 611.511 9/2a

[Document 651]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

[Telegram]

220. American firms inform Department France embargoes chrome ore from New Caledonia except to France and Allies. Chrome ore used in leather tanning, cotton printing, paints, batteries, electrical apparatus, special automobile steel products, hearth furnace linings as well as for ferrochrome. Output in New Caledonia sufficient for war purposes of Allies and industries in United States. Harbison-Walker Refractories Company, Pittsburgh, request permission for exportation of chrome ore from New Caledonia, through Chalks and Sons, Finsbury Pavement, London, E. C., England, to be used exclusively for refractories in United States. Natural Products Refining Company, Jersey City, for manufacture of bichromates used in dyes, colors, and tanning. E. J. Laving and Company, Philadelphia, representing the Chrome Company, London, owners Thiebaghi Mines, New Caledonia, for same uses and electric batteries. Inform Foreign Office, discreetly ascertain views. Cable.

Robert Lansing

The Consul General at Sydney, Australia (Bray), to the Secretary of State File No. 611.479/27

[Document 652]

The Consul General at Sydney, Australia (Bray), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Sydney, undated.
[Received November 2, 1914, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Except with consent Minister Customs prohibited wool, hides, woolly sheepskins, meat, coal, flour, wheat, sugar. Official guarantees against reexport facilitate permits. Minister being urged modify restrictions on exports to United States.

Bray

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 300.115/1063

[Document 653]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 2, 1914.
[Received November 3, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

966. Department’s 407, October 28 [27]. Foreign Office advises me under date of November that as regards cargoes of steamships Kassala and Waddon, loaded with manganese ore for United States Steel Products Company, special licenses will be issued by the Government of India if Government of United States will give assurance that ore will be consumed in the United States. Requests suggestions as to future consignment in order that needs of American manufacturers may be supplied without risk of promoting to detriment of British Government the export of manganese ore, whether of Indian or other origin, to countries with which Great Britain is at war. I shall await Department’s instructions.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.419/33a

[Document 654]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

454. American interests greatly desire lifting of embargoes on wool and rubber. Inquire as to grounds on which these embargoes rest and whether shipments might be allowed to this country from United Kingdom, its colonies and settlements.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (Bray) File No. 611.479/23a

[Document 655]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Sydney, Australia (Bray)

Department of State,
Washington, November 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

American woolen interests greatly desire lifting Australian embargo on wool. Inquire as to grounds upon which embargo rests and whether shipments might be allowed to United States. Importers would, if required, doubtless guarantee against reexport.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Singapore (Cunningham) File No. 611.46d9/a

[Document 656]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Singapore (Cunningham)

Department of State,
Washington, November 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

American rubber interests greatly desire lifting Straits Settlements embargo on rubber. Inquire as to grounds upon which embargo rests and whether shipments might be allowed to United States. Importers would, if required, doubtless guarantee against reexport.

Lansing

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.419/34

[Document 657]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, November 6, 1914.
[Received 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My October 29.1 To my request that American importers be permitted to obtain delivery of all wool contracted for prior to October 6, Board Trade replies to-day no exceptions can at present be made in favor of such contracts. Permits will be granted only when shown that such wool is for manufacture goods for Allied governments.

Inform American Woolen Company.

Skinner

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No, 611.419/36

[Document 658]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 6, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received November 7, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1006. Your 454, November 3 Have taken up informally to ascertain reasons. Embargo was Imposed, first, to insure abundant supply of these articles and manufactures thereof for this kingdom and for the military uses of Allied armies, and, second, to prevent articles and manufactures thereof reaching the enemies’ armies through any neutral country. The principle on which this, Government is proceeding in, such cases is to require by whatever neutral government which wishes embargo raised a guarantee that no such articles and manufactures thereof will be exported from the neutral country. The inability of our Government to give such a guarantee will, I am sure, cause a refusal if a formal request to raise embargo he presented.

I await further instructions.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 011.479/43a

[Document 659]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 11, 1914.

[Telegram]

513. Department informed that Rosenthal Brothers, manufacturers, Columbus, Ohio, have made extensive purchases wool skins and lambskins in Australia prior to embargo on shipment such articles, and that English and O’Brien, Boston, are owners 600 bales wool purchased through Australian agent, prior to embargo. Both firms give assurances goods are intended solely for use in this country and are willing to furnish any possible guarantees goods will not be reexported. Through consular representatives in Australia, Department endeavored to ascertain if goods could not be forwarded and is now informed that permission for shipment must be obtained from authorities at London. In view of representations of American purchasers, as to urgent need of goods in their business and in view of the fact that purchases were made prior to embargo, you may inquire of British Government if shipments of goods in question can be permitted. It seems possible embargo does not apply to goods purchased before it went into effect.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page). File No. 611.419/47a

[Document 660]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page).

Department of State,
Washington November 11, 1914.

[Telegram]

518. Your November 91 American importers have applied for license to export wool from the United Kingdom in response to announcement from the British Government that they would entertain applications for licenses, but so far have obtained permission. Some American concerns having purchases of wool in British. Isles before war, to which embargo ought not, it seems, to apply; agreed to resale of wool there as an accommodation to their English correspondents, anticipating subsequent permission to export other wool. Wools are urgently needed by American manufacturers.

Department informed that auction sales of Wool in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa will soon occur. In view of embargo by colonial governments against export of wool except to United Kingdom, American interests cannot safely purchase in absence of understanding by which they will be able to have wool purchases exported to this country. Department hope that British Government will not pursue policy which may cripple American manufacturers. Moreover, if American manufacturers are not to obtain necessary supply of wools, prices of American woolen goods which British interests may desire will be excessively high, if indeed exportations of woolens from this country must not ultimately cease. Present this matter to British Government at once and press for a definite statement of the exact course to be pursued by British Government respecting American supply of wools from British territories. Department will consider reasonable arrangements to secure against exportation of wool so obtained from United States to countries at war with. Great Britain. Department hopes that applications for licenses now or hereafter presented will be granted is our manufacturers are complaining at unsatisfactory situation,

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to this Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.419/48a

[Document 661]

The Secretary of State to this Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

526. American interests deeply concerned and gravity of situation such in regard to the embargoes on rubber and hides, Department feels this should be brought to the attention of the British Government. It would seem not to the commercial or other interests of Great Britain to pursue a policy which would cripple American manufacturers and depress British interests in the colonies. If American manufacturers are not to obtain necessary supplies, prices of American goods which British may desire will be greatly increased, if, indeed, the exportations from this country be not ultimately prevented.

Present this view to the British authorities and press for definite statement of course to be pursued by British Government respecting American supply of rubber and hides from British territory. Department will consider reasonable arrangement by American exporters to secure against reexportation from United States to enemy countries of British Government. Department earnestly hopes that permits will be allowed for all excess over needs in Great Britain.

Bryan

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.51L9/6

[Document 662]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, November 14, 1914.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

277. Your 220, 31st.1 Foreign Office answers that as chrome ore in New Caledonia is destined only for use of Army and Navy, it regrets that authorization for exportation to United States cannot be granted.

Herrick

1  Ante, p. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.419/50

[Document 663]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 17, 1914.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1078. Your telegram November 12, 5 p.m., re rubber and hides, and your 546, November 16.2 At Sir Edward Grey’s suggestion, counsel of the Foreign Office and Anderson are now drawing up a proposed arrangement to be submitted to you, the general idea of which is as follows:

It will be understood that the British Government will permit direct exportation of rubber, hides, and manganese and after present pressing demand for wool is satisfied of wool also from colonies to the United States under satisfactory guarantee against reexportation. It will be understood that the United States Government will not object to stopping of copper, petroleum, rubber, and hides that are evidently destined to enemy country. The British Government will of course not stop cargoes that are satisfactorily guaranteed for neutral use and if any such cargo should be stopped, British Government will pay for it. The exact statement of this proposed general arrangement will be telegraphed at the end of the conference of lawyers.

American Ambassador

2 No. 546 not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.479/52

[Document 664]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 17, 1914.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1079. Your 507, November 10, and 513, November 11.1

Sir Edward Grey informs me that all meat and wool and wool skins in the United Kingdom and colonies are required by British on account of war and that preembargo contracts cannot be filled because the necessities of the state must override all private contracts. This derangement of trade is one of necessary results of war and from such derangements British subjects of course suffer more and more of them suffer than neutrals.

American Ambassador

1 No. 507 not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.479/56

[Document 665]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 19, 1914.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1092. Your 268, October 6,2 and 407, November 10, re embargo of meat from Australia.3 Foreign Office states exports of meat from England are quite small. They are mainly to France, owing to special circumstances, and to British possessions. Were such exports large to other destinations, it would doubtless be found necessary to impose restrictions. In view of the importance of the Australian supply for Military and other purposes, British Government regret they do not see their way to recommend to the Australian Government the abandonment of their present policy.

American Ambassador

2  Ante, p. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646].

3 No. 407 not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 611.51L9/7

[Document 666]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

[Telegram]

303. Your 277, November 14, communicated to interested parties. Natural Products Refining Company replies, “Need chrome ore to supply bichromates for reaching [bleaching?], dyeing of cotton, also tanning. Quantity needed, 2,000 tons, so small cannot affect supply for Army Navy purposes.”

Add National Electrolytic company Niagara Falls, New York, to list in Department’s of October 31.1 Renew representations.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.46c9/8

[Document 667]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

640. American steel and other interests crippled because of prohibition shipment of plumbago from Ceylon. American plumbago shippers willing to give bond to English Ambassador here, or other officer, against exportation from this country. Plumbago supply of Ceylon greater than English demand. Matter taken up with British Embassy here, which will doubtless communicate with British Government.2 Keep in touch with situation and discreetly inquire attitude of British Government.

Lansing

2 Two notes to the British Ambassador, November 24, 28, not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.419/50

[Document 668]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

660. Your November 17, 1078. American interests are greatly exercised over embargoes.

Importers declare their willingness to give guarantees against reexportation. Situation is urgent and you will urge the British Government to submit proposals for arrangement which will result in so lifting embargoes as to permit export to United States in quantities sufficient for needs of our manufacturers.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.46c9/12

[Document 669]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

681. British Embassy here states has no knowledge reason for Ceylon embargo plumbago and will not take up matter with Government. Telegram to shippers from Ceylon informs them authorities at Colombo willing to release plumbago under proper guaranty. Ascertain attitude British Government and whether bond running to British Government filed with British Embassy here, conditioned against exportation from United States except to Canada, will be acceptable.

Bryan

The Secretary of the Embassy in France (Bliss) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.51L9/9

[Document 670]

The Secretary of the Embassy in France (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, December 4, 1914.
[Received 12 midnight.]

[Telegram]

349. Your 303, 25th. Mr. Garrett given to understand by Foreign Office that French Government might possibly grant request, if American Government would give assurance that chrome ore sold to American manufacturers was destined for American consumption and would not be exported.

Bliss

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.46c 9/11

[Document 671]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, undated.
[Received December 7, 1914, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1201. Your 640, November 28, 660, December 2, 665, December 2,1 and 681, December 4, presented and are covered by my 1199, December 6.2

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542]. This is the Ambassador’s telegram conveying the proposed “working arrangement” with regard both to embargoes and to interference with ships and cargoes.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Sharp) File No. 611.51L9/10

[Document 672]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Sharp)

Department of State,
Washington, December 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

360. Your 349, 4th. American importers will give any bond required, assuring importations chrome ore for American consumption only. Renew representations.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.419/92

[Document 673]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 14, 1914.
[Received 6:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1259. Sir Edward Grey informs me that the British Government will not issue further licenses for the supply of manganese to the Carnegie Steel Company, the Teneriffe Steel Company, and the United States Steel Products Company, as it seems evident that any shortage of this substance from which these companies may be suffering is due to their having sold their previous stocks to the German Government.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.479/96

[Document 674]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 1914.

[Telegram]

806. Owners ship Aryan, now at Sydney, desire consent to load merino wool for Boston. Ship sailed for Sydney before embargo and wool was purchased for American mills expecting shipments by her. Both ship and wool owned by American citizens. Wool valued over million dollars. Interested parties claim they will suffer great damage as mill will probably be obliged to close. Are willing to give reasonable guarantees that wool will be manufactured in America and against its reexportation. Use your good offices to communicate this request to Foreign Office. It has been brought to Department’s attention in several instances that American importers purchased and paid for wool in British colonies before outbreak of war and are greatly inconvenienced and will suffer losses unless wool can come forward.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.479/89

[Document 675]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

[Telegram]

815. Hides from Melbourne for Avery and Lowry, Boston, guaranteed against reexportation from United States. Use good offices to secure export. Sydney cabled.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 611.419/106a

[Document 676]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 23, 1914.

[Telegram]

819. Representatives rubber interests furnish Department with form of guaranty they will give where license to export plantation rubber is granted by British Government, guaranteeing, in case of manufacturers of rubber goods, that they will not, during embargo, directly or indirectly export or procure exportation waste or crude rubber to any country at war with Great Britain or neutral European countries which have not given satisfactory assurances against reexportation of waste or crude rubber and manufactured products thereof listed by Great Britain as absolute or conditional contraband. In cases of importers and dealers in rubber, guarantees additional to the above against sale of rubber or manufactured rubber products to any person or concern who has not given guaranty in foregoing form. Department hopes British Government will modify existing embargo to permit American importers obtain needed supply crude rubber from British colonies.

Two thousand and odd tons rubber purchased and paid for by American concerns now held London and Liverpool. Department understands informally British Embassy here is conferring with home government respecting releasing this rubber. While this would not relieve situation, it would help materially.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.479/97

[Document 677]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 23, 1914.
[Received 8:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1325. Your 806 presented but I have small hope for reasons explained in my 1080 [1079] of November 17. See last sentence of that telegram. No wool allowed to be exported from Great Britain or colonies.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.479/98

[Document 678]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 23, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 8. 30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1326. Your 815, December 22. I have presented same but British Government awaits our answer to proposed arrangement, see my 1199, December 6.1

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542].

The Ambassador in France (Sharp) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.51L9/15

[Document 679]

The Ambassador in France (Sharp) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, December 24, 1914.
[Received 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

403. Department’s 257, November 11.2 French Government authorizes export chrome ore New Caledonia provided seller gives bond at customhouse, port of departure, to be released by French consul at New York upon arrival shipment.

Sharp

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 611.419/107

[Document 680]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 28, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1351. Your 838, December 26 [24?], and 839, December 26, and [819], December 23.3 I have presented same, but I have little hope of success till an answer is received to the proposed working arrangement which the British Government means to cover this and other difficulties caused by embargo.

American Ambassador

3 Nos. 838 and 839 not printed.

Projects of cooperation with other American states for the protection of neutral tradeProjects of cooperation with other American states for the protection of neutral trade

[681] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 8, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/335a

[682] The Acting Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister (Naón)

Department of State, Washington, November 9, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/372a

[683] The Argentine Minister (Naón) to the Secretary of State

Argentine Legation, Washington, November 9, 1914. [Received November 10.]

File No. 763.72112/357

[684] The Minister in Peru (McMillin) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lima, November 10, 1914, noon. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/356

[685] The Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister (Naón)

Department of State, Washington, November 13, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/357

[686] The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs (Salinas) to the Chilean Minister at Washington (Suárez-Mujica)

Santiago, November 13, 1914. [Left at the Department of State by the Minister, November 17, 1914.]

File No. 763.72112/683

[687] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Buenos Aires, November 18, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 7:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/399

[688] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Buenos Aires, November 18, 1914. [Received December 18.]

File No. 763.72112/494

[689] The Secretary of State to the Argentine Legation

Washington, November 18, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/407a

[690] The Minister in Peru (McMillin) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Lima, November 10, 1914. [Received November 28.]

File No. 763.72112/433

[691] The Peruvian Minister (Pezet) to the Secretary of State

Peruvian Legation, Washington, November 30, 1914. [Received December 3.]

File No. 763.72112/438

[692] Resolution adopted by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union, December 8, 1914

December 8, 1914

File No. 710.001/121

[693] The Peruvian Minister (Pezet) to the Secretary of State

Peruvian Legation, Washington, December 12, 1914. [Received December 14.]

File No. 763.72112/477

[694] The Venezuelan Minister (Dominíci) to the Secretary of State

Venezuelan Legation, Washington, December 14, 1914. [Received December 16.]

File. No. 763.72112/502

[695] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Peru (McMillin)

Department of State, Washington, December 18, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/433

[696] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister (Pezet)

Department of State, Washington, December 18, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/477

[697] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chilean Ambassador (Suarez-Mujica)

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/683

[698] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister (Pezet)

Department of State, Washington, December 29, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/438

[699] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Buenos Aires, December 11, 1914. [Received January 7, 1915.]

File No. 763.72112/585

[700] The Secretary of State to the Venezuelan Minister (Dominíci)

Department of State, Washington, January 13, 1915.

File No. 763.72112/502

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72112/335a

[Document 681]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 8, 1914.

[Telegram]

490. The Argentine Government is desirous of obtaining information in regard to the course pursued by the United States in cases of contraband cargoes which have been seized or detained by the British authorities, and requests unofficially that its Minister at London may hold informal conversations with you on this subject. At the instance of the Argentine Minister, therefore, you may advise him entirely unofficially as to the course followed by the United States in its representations to Great Britain regarding seizures and detentions of contraband.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister (Naón) File No. 763.72112/372a

[Document 682]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister (Naón)

Department of State,
Washington, November 9, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: In compliance with your request of to-day to be informed as to the position of the United States in the matter of detentions by British authorities of vessels carrying alleged contraband of war, I would advise you that this Government has stated its position in reference to vessels detained, pending the receipt of guaranties regarding the non-exportation of their cargoes, in order that His Britannic Majesty’s Government might not labor under the misapprehension that the United States admitted the propriety of their action. This Government stated that under the existing rules of international law and usage the neutral owner of articles on a neutral vessel bound to a neutral port, which articles under certain conditions might acquire the character of contraband, is not responsible for their future disposition by the government of the neutral port of their destination, or by the person to whom they are bona fide consigned in the ordinary course of trade. The treatment which such goods may receive after delivery to the consignees in a neutral country is a matter between the belligerent government investigating the shipment and the neutral government concerned, for which a bona fide shipper should not be made to suffer. In the opinion of this Government, the belligerent right of visit and search requires that the search should be made on the high seas at the time of the visit and that the conclusion of the search should rest upon the evidence found on the ship under investigation and not upon circumstances ascertained from external sources. That evidence, in the view of this Government, should make out a prima facie case to justify the captor in taking the vessel into port. To take vessels into custody and send them into a port of the belligerent without prima facie evidence to impress the cargo with the character of absolute or conditional contraband constitutes, in the opinion of the United States, a justifiable ground for complaint by a neutral government, and a basis for a legal claim for damages against the belligerent government which has detained the vessel for the purpose of inquiry through other channels as to the ultimate destination of the cargo or as to the intended action of the government of the neutral country of destination.

This Government therefore reserved on behalf of its citizens interested in any such vessels or cargoes the right to hold His Britannic Majesty’s Government responsible in damages, and requested that this method of detention be discontinued, and that visit and search of vessels be made at sea with the greatest expedition possible under the circumstances.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Argentine Minister (Naón) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/357

[Document 683]

The Argentine Minister (Naón) to the Secretary of State

Argentine Legation,
Washington, November 9, 1914.
[Received November 10.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary: In confirmation of the conversations that I have had the honor to conduct with your Department relative to the means of dealing with the obstacles and injuries inflicted upon Argentine interests, in this case identical with those of the United States, by the British Government’s interpretation of conditional contraband and by the detention of neutral vessels carrying cargoes consigned to neutral countries, I have the pleasure of expressing to your excellency the gratification with which the Argentine Government would see the establishment of a close understanding between our two Governments upon the maintenance of a doctrine which would best protect their common interests and upon a method of procedure which would prevent the damage caused to the commercial interests of both countries by the British Government’s present interpretation.

With respect to the doctrine, my Government insists, as your excellency’s Government has done in regard to the United States, that the rights and duties of the Argentine Republic and of its citizens in the present European war are perfectly defined by the rules and principles of international law, and it understands, therefore, being disposed, as it is, strictly to conform to those duties, that it must also protest in each particular case when its rights are encroached upon or their exercise interfered with by authorities in the service of His Britannic Majesty. Consequently, whenever an Argentine vessel with cargo consisting of native products and bound for a neutral port is detained, the Argentine Government will notify the British Government of its protest, of its denial of any right warranting such detention, and of its determination to hold the Government of Great Britain responsible for any damages which that detention may cause Argentine interests to suffer, and which will be made the subject of discussion when circumstances permit.

With respect to the method of procedure, the Argentine Government is willing, as is the American Government, that such non-recognition of said right of detention, after having been formulated in general terms to cover all cases, be argued separately in each case in an amicable manner, taking into consideration the special circumstances attendant thereon, in order to reduce said damages as far as possible, without prejudice to the presentation in each case also of the respective protest, if circumstances render it advisable. The Argentine Government likewise believes that, in furtherance of the effectiveness of the understanding between our two Governments, the Ambassador of the United States and the Argentine Minister at London should be instructed to keep each other informed of the progress of their respective representations in each case and to adopt uniform interpretations and methods of procedure. The proposed understanding might be definitely rendered formal by an acknowledgment of this note accepting the statements herein made.

I understand, Mr. Secretary, that the foregoing constitutes an exact expression of our conversations on the position of the two Governments in the matter in question.

I avail [etc.]

R. S. Naón

The Minister in Peru (McMillin) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/356

[Document 684]

The Minister in Peru (McMillin) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lima, November 10, 1914, noon.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I have received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs for transmission to the Department a memorandum deploring the interruption of the commerce of peaceful nations by the nations at war; it expresses the belief of the Peruvian Government—

that the moment has arrived for the American Republics to take joint action to guarantee the inviolability of their trade routes by keeping them in all their extent free from the effects of hostilities between belligerent naval forces.

It has been communicated by Peru also to the Governments of the Argentine Republic, Brazil, and Chile. The text by the pouch.

McMillin

The Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister (Naón) File No. 763.72112/357

[Document 685]

The Secretary of State to the Argentine Minister (Naón)

Department of State,
Washington, November 13, 1914.

Sir: I have received your note of the 9th instant confirming the conversations which you have had at the Department relative to an understanding between the Argentine and the United States Governments upon the steps to be taken to prevent any damage which may be caused to the interests of either country by the interpretation placed upon conditional contraband by the Governments of Great Britain and her allies and by the detention of neutral vessels carrying cargoes consigned to neutral countries.

The statement made by you of the position of your Government regarding the definition of the rights and duties of the Argentine Republic and of its citizens in the present war, and the intention of your Government to protest in each particular case when those rights so defined are interfered with by the authorities of His Britannic Majesty and of his allies, holding their respective governments responsible for any resulting damages, coincides with the attitude of this Government in this matter.

As to the method of procedure in applying this policy the Department desires to state that inasmuch as the interests of the two Governments may not be identical in the same vessels and cargoes, it is understood to be impossible to make joint representations to the British Government in particular cases. This Government therefore understands that it is the desire of your Government to have representations to the British Government in these matters made separately but in harmony with each other, and that to this end the representatives of our Governments advise each other of the progress of their respective representations in each case. Upon this understanding the Government of the United States is gratified to inform you that it will cooperate with your Government in the matters herein mentioned.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs (Salinas) to the Chilean Minister at Washington (Suárez-Mujica) File No. 763.72112/683

[Document 686]

The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs (Salinas) to the Chilean Minister at Washington (Suárez-Mujica)

Santiago, November 13, 1914.
[Left at the Department of State by the Minister, November 17, 1914.]

[Telegram]

Our minister at Rio de Janeiro informs me that Chancellor Müller has requested of the British Minister the establishment of a neutral zone in the Atlantic from the American coast to the meridian of Cape Verde, in order to prevent the serious disturbances which have been caused to the American maritime commerce by the present European conflict. I have answered him as follows:

This Government has already been seeking means to diminish the disturbances which the activities of the belligerents off the American coasts have been causing to the maritime commerce of the nations of this continent, and had, the first place, considered the idea of fixing a neutral zone within which said commerce would not fee disturbed. Nevertheless, a careful study of the question leads me to think that a measure of this nature will not be accepted by the Government of Great Britain, and that, even though it were accepted by that Government, it would not be productive of any appreciable results in the sense desired. As a matter of fact, it seems doubtful that the British Government would accept a measure which in reality would be of much greater profit to Germany, whose merchant marine is now totally paralyzed, than to England which still maintains a maritime movement of some vitality in American waters. On the other hand, the efficacy of such a measure would have very little weight on the commercial interchange between Europe and America, because the danger would continue beyond the neutral zone, that is to say, in European waters wherein the situation of belligerent ships would remain as it is to-day. Consequently, the advantages of the measure would be restricted to the interchange between American countries. Finally, the enormous extent of the neutral zone would render the surveillance required by our neutral duties still much more difficult and costly than it is to-day, unless the measure were to be a merely illusory one. By reason of these considerations, I believe that every proposition which, like the one formulated by Señor Müller, is intended as a solution in accord with the belligerents, should be carefully studied.

On my part, I have sought a solution, which would restrict as far as possible the activities of belligerent ships in these waters and minimize the inconveniences of the present situation, by means of agreements made directly among the American countries without requiring the acquiescence of the belligerents. I believe that this end would be achieved by regulating the provisioning of war vessels in American ports in the manner indicated:

memorandum

The activities displayed by the belligerent nations in American waters have seriously disturbed the maritime commerce and the economic life of the countries of this continent, and especially of those in South America whose trade is carried almost in its entirety in British or German bottoms.

This situation points clearly to the advisability of American countries adopting measures in modification of the Hague convention, the practical effect of which would be to drive from these waters the belligerent naval forces, or, at least to render more difficult their stay therein, and to restrict the activity of warlike operations. In practice, the enforcement by American Governments of the provisions contained in paragraph 2 of Article 19 of convention No. 13 of the Second Peace Conference, is promoting, contrary to their desire and their interests, naval hostilities off their coasts. In accordance with those provisions, belligerent vessels in every American country are allowed to take sufficient coal to reach the nearest port of their own country, and as such a port is either a British or a German port, the amount of coal taken is always considerable and enables the vessels to make cruises of considerable length. They may likewise renew their supply of fuel under similar conditions in ports of other American countries within the period of three months and, after this period, even in the port where they took their first supply, in accordance with Article 20 of the same convention. In practice, the enforcement of these provisions is inconsistent with Article 5 of the above-mentioned convention, which forbids belligerents to make neutral ports the bases of their naval operations against their adversaries. This inconsistency is easily explained, because evidently the convention had in view conflicts in one continent alone, without bearing in mind the extension of such conflicts to a different continent. The plentiful supply of fuel with which at present the naval vessels of the nations at war are provisioned is the fundamental cause of their presence in these waters.

The same convention affords the means of solving the difficulty. In the fourth and fifth paragraphs of the preamble heading its provisions, the following is set forth:

Fourth. Seeing that it is, for neutral powers, an admitted duty to apply these rules impartially to the several belligerents;

Fifth. Seeing that, in this category of ideas, these rules should not, in principle, be altered, in the course of the war, by a neutral power, except in a case where experience has shown the necessity for such change for the protection of the rights of that power.

It is not, therefore, to be doubted that the American countries are empowered to establish new rules in the present conflict, since the existing ones work to the detriment of their free commerce and even place them in the necessity of rendering to the belligerents an unneutral service, and of thus violating, against their will, their neutral duties. In the opinion of the Government of Chile, such rules might be as follows:

First. To limit the coal to be supplied to belligerent vessels in each American port to the amount necessary to enable them to reach the nearest coaling port in the country nearest to that in which the fuel supply shall have been taken.

This limitation upon the supply of coal would prevent the belligerent vessel receiving it from engaging in warlike operations without running the risk of becoming unable to reach another port in which she could take a fresh supply of fuel.

The effects of the above measure would undoubtedly and rapidly manifest themselves by a diminution in warlike activities in American waters and by a greater tranquillity in the commercial movement.

Second. To establish as a penalty for violations by merchant vessels of the neutrality rules prescribed by each country a prohibition against furnishing fuel to any vessel belonging to the company owning the vessel which has violated the rules.

In this manner a hindrance would be placed in the way of such false declarations as are commonly made by certain vessels with regard to their ports of destination, for the purpose of taking on large quantities of coal which are later delivered to war vessels.

Third. The concentration in certain points of each country of vessels interned on account of violations of neutrality or which should have voluntarily manifested their intention of remaining in the country until the end of the war.

The purpose of this provision is that of saving the American countries the trouble and expense incident to the surveillance of an extensive coast line.

The above provisions would be adopted separately by the different countries, in order to avoid the delays which are inevitable in negotiation of a collective convention, and would be put into force simultaneously on a date previously agreed upon.

The undersigned has discussed these ideas with the Ministers of the United States, Argentina, and Brazil in Santiago, who have expressed their frank approval. Please read this telegram to the Secretary of State, and let me know his opinion.

Salinas

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/399

[Document 687]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, November 18, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 7:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs verbally requests me to inform you that he considers [it] very important that Argentine Minister’s suggestion concerning mediation of Pan American Union with belligerents relative to neutral shipping in South American waters be adopted.

Lorillard

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/494

[Document 688]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, November 18, 1914.
[Received December 18.]

No. 371]

Sir: Referring to my No. 362,1 respecting Argentine neutrality in the present European war, I have the honor to report that, owing to the German naval victory off the Chilean coast, the seizure of merchant vessels by German cruisers in the alleged territorial waters of other South American countries, and the detention by various belligerent war vessels of merchant steamers in the South Atlantic, there has been of late considerable anxiety expressed in this country lest mercantile navigation be temporarily suspended in the South Atlantic. In the course of a conversation to-day with Dr. Murature, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, he informed me that he had instructed the Argentine Ambassador at Washington to suggest to you that the Pan American Union should be authorized by all the American Republics to propose to the belligerents that certain sections of the southern Atlantic and Pacific should be closed to naval warfare and that the belligerents should come to some arrangement with the union as to the protection of neutral shipping. Dr. Murature said that he understood that this suggestion had been favorably received by you and that the details of the plan are at present under consideration. He added that the present navigation conditions are intolerable and are a serious menace to the transportation of the Argentine exports. At the same time he requested me to cable you of what great importance he deems it that his suggestion should be adopted. This I promised to do; and have accordingly sent you my telegram of November 18, 6 p.m.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard

1  Post, p. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106].

The Secretary of State to the Argentine Legation File No. 763.72112/407a

[Document 689]

The Secretary of State to the Argentine Legation

Memorandum

In compliance with an oral request from the Minister of the Argentine Republic to be furnished with a memorandum regarding the detention by British authorities of certain American vessels and cargoes and regarding the representations which have been made to the Government of Great Britain by the Government of the United States in instances where such detention has taken place, the Department of State has the honor to furnish the Minister with the following information in relation to these matters:

The American tank steamer John D. Rockefeller, owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, left Philadelphia September 26 last for Copenhagen with a cargo of illuminating oil and was detained by the British authorities at Kirkwall, Orkney Islands. The Department instructed the American Ambassador at London to bring to the attention of the British Government the facts regarding the ownership of the vessel and cargo and regarding their destination and to request that, if the facts were as represented to the Department, the vessel be released at once and allowed to proceed to her destination. Both ship and cargo were released after a brief detention.

The American tank steamer Brindilla, now owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and formerly owned by the Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft, a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company, sailed from New York October 13 last with a cargo of oil owned by Americans, on a voyage, as the Department was informed, to Alexandria, Egypt, and was taken into port at Halifax by the British cruiser Caronia. The Ambassador was instructed to acquaint the British Government with the Department’s information in relation to the ownership, cargo, and destination of this vessel, and to state that this Government found difficulty in seeing cause for the detention of an American vessel with a cargo of petroleum bound for the port of Alexandria, Egypt, and therefore requested that the vessel and cargo be released immediately. Under date of October 22, 1914, the Ambassador reported that he had been informed by the British Foreign Office that orders had been given for the release of the vessel, the British authorities having received information that the ship’s cargo was expected at Alexandria.

The American steamer Platuria left New York October 5 with a cargo of illuminating oil for Aarhus, Denmark, and was taken into port at Stornoway by a British vessel. The Ambassador at London was instructed to say in his communication to the British Government regarding this case that the Government of the United States did not perceive that there could be any justification for the seizure and detention of this American vessel bound, according to this Government’s information, for a neutral port with a neutral cargo of petroleum, and therefore requested that vessel and cargo be immediately released. Under date of November 3, 1914, the Department was informed by the American Consul General that the master of the ship had received notice of her release.

The steamer Chr. Knudsen, a tank steamer, flying the flag of Norway, which vessel for some years has been chartered by the Interocean Transport Company of New York, an American corporation, left New York October 7 last for Copenhagen with a cargo of gas oil consigned to Det Danske Petroleum Aktieselskab, a Danish corporation, and on October 23 was brought into port at Kirkwall by British authorities. The owners of the cargo represented to the Department that there was no question as to the neutral destination of the cargo. The Ambassador at London was instructed to bring these facts to the attention of the Foreign Office and to use his good offices with a view to effecting the immediate release of the vessel and her cargo. On November 3, 1914, the Ambassador reported that orders were being given for her release.

The American Steamer Kroonland, which sailed October 15 from New York for Naples and Piraeus with consignments of copper, rubber and other articles shipped by American citizens, was detained at Gibraltar, where she had entered the port and was held, as the Department was advised, awaiting orders from England. It appeared from representations submitted to the Department by shippers, extensively supported by affidavits, that, in accordance with the usual practice of trade, bills of lading were made “to order” of the shippers; that the goods were not intended by the shippers for a belligerent government or its military or naval forces; and that there was not even evidence warranting the belief that they were destined ultimately for delivery in belligerent territory.

The Department instructed the Ambassador at London to inform the British Government that the Department considered that, unless investigation on the part of the British authorities had disclosed facts in relation to the detention of the vessel and her cargo other than those that had been represented by the owners, both ship and cargo should be released at once, and that if the British authorities were not prepared to take such action, the Department felt warranted in requesting that this Government be furnished promptly with a statement of the grounds for the detention of the ship.

The Ambassador was further instructed to say that this Government did not question the right of British authorities properly to visit and search neutral merchant vessels for the purpose of ascertaining if they are carrying contraband or performing unneutral services to a belligerent, but if such search did not disclose any offense on the part of a vessel she should be promptly released; that the detention of the vessel appeared to be equivalent to a seizure; and that the Department could not perceive that the vessel could be properly held awaiting orders from the British authorities at London regardless of what any available evidence on the ship might show relative to her destination and the destination of her cargo.

The Ambassador subsequently reported that he had been informed by the British Foreign Office that the Kroonland had been detained at Gibraltar on the ground that her cargo of copper, while ostensibly destined for Naples, was really destined for Germany and was therefore seizable as contraband.

The Department, having later been informed that the vessel would be released but that the cargo would be held for adjudication by the prize court, instructed the Ambassador at London to point out to the British Government that copper was listed by the British authorities as conditional contraband up to October 29, nearly two weeks after the Kroonland sailed from America, and to say that this Government could not admit that shipments of copper on the vessel were legally subject to seizure and confiscation in the absence of evidence showing them to be destined for the armed forces of government of a belligerent country. The Ambassador was further directed to say that, if the copper was held on the ground that it was shipped under bills of lading drawn to order of shippers, which is the usual practice of the trade, the Department deemed it necessary to state that it could not acquiesce in the detention of the shipments in question on this ground.

As bearing on the general question as to the proper manner of the exercise of the right of search and of seizure, attention may be called to the fact that, in reply to communications from the British Government to the effect that the steamers Platuria and Chr. Knudsen had been detained pending the receipt of guarantees from Denmark against the reexportation of the Cargoes of these vessel, and that orders were given for the release of the vessels on the receipt of satisfactory guarantees, the Department informed the British Government that it appeared to the Government of the United States that the detention of the vessels carrying cargoes for neutral destinations until assurances had been obtained that the cargoes would not be exported from a neutral country after having arrived there, was legally unjustifiable; that under existing rules of international law and usage a neutral owner of articles on a neutral vessel bound to a neutral port, which articles under certain conditions might acquire the character of contraband, is not responsible for their future disposition by the Government of the neutral port of their destination, or by the persons to whom they are bona fide consigned in the ordinary course of trade; and that, in the opinion of this Government, the belligerent right of visit and search requires that the search should be made on the high seas at the time of visit and that the conclusion of the search should rest upon the evidence found on the ship under investigation and not on circumstances ascertained from external sources.

Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1914.

The Minister in Peru (McMillin) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/433

[Document 690]

The Minister in Peru (McMillin) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Lima, November 10, 1914.
[Received November 28.]

No. 100]

Sir: Following my cable of November 10, 12 noon,1 I have the honor to forward herewith translations of a note and a memorandum received from Minister for Foreign Affairs Gazzani with the request that the latter be transmitted to the Department for consideration by our Government. As it is lengthy I sent only a brief notice of its contents by cable, reserving the full text for transmission by the pouch.

I have [etc.]

Benton McMillin

[Enclosure—Translation]

The Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Gazzani) to the American Minister (McMillin)

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru presents his compliments to his excellency, the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America, and has the honor to enclose for transmission to the State Department a memorandum relative to the urgency of an agreement between the republics of the American Continent intended to reduce the great injuries which their foreign trade suffers through the hostilities undertaken by the warships of the belligerent nations of Europe on the American coasts of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

Peru, which is one of the nations most directly injured and whose coasts have been the first on which hostile actions have taken place, would feel obliged if the Government of the United States would give this matter a preferent and favorable consideration, granting to the same its valuable support, without which it would not be possible to reach the desired solution or enforce respect for the same on the belligerent parties.

As on this point it is only desired to come to an agreement in good faith that will be reciprocally advantageous, the memorandum has been communicated by cable to the Governments of the Argentine, Brazilian, and Chilean Republics with the suggestion that, in the event of its receiving a favorable reception, they should give instructions to their respective diplomatic representatives in Washington to discuss the subject there.

J. Fernando Gazzani takes this opportunity [etc.]
Lima, November 6, 1914.

[Subenclosure—Translation]

The Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs to the American Legation

Memorandum

The vicissitudes suffered by maritime commerce in South America since the beginning of the present European war suggest the necessity of putting an end to the constant interruptions which they produce, and which inflict enormous injuries upon the economic interests of the American Republics, careful always to observe the strictest neutrality.

Commercial traffic along the South American coasts is carried on chiefly in English and German vessels. The latter suspended their voyages at the very beginning of the war, while English ships have had to submit to repeated interruptions, resulting in the total suspension of the import and export trade of some countries, among them being Peru.

This intolerable situation was due to the energy with which the naval forces of the belligerent powers have carried their hostilities even into these regions so remote from the theater of war, thereby causing more inconvenience and injury to neutrals than effective damage to the contending parties. Besides the fact that there has been relatively little destruction of merchant vessels on the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of South America, no real loss has even resulted therefrom to the shipowners, who are protected by special insurance; so that the injurious effects may be said to have fallen only upon the neutrals.

Such a situation cannot possibly continue. Wars, while still considered a necessary evil, have a radius of action limited by the interests of neutrals, which are obviously more worthy of respect than are those of the belligerents in destroying and ruining one another. Hostilities are justified as an unavoidable necessity in order to paralyze the offensive action of the enemy and escape the injury which may result from it; but hostilities are not tolerable which have no influence on the final outcome of the war, especially when they injure neutrals primarily and seriously and the belligerents only secondarily and Slightly.

The modern idea of the independence of nations and of the respect due their commercial interests insures to them the inviolability of these interests not only within their own territory but also in what may be called their traffic zones, through which their commerce is fed and sustained, especially if, as in the present case, a separate continent is in question. It is inconceivable that a region not subject to the political action or influence of the belligerents, and where the struggle chiefly jeopardizes neutral interests, should be the scene of an armed conflict. This is the reason for the localization of wars, which has always been brought about either through the action of the parties themselves or through outside pressure confining them within the limits of the belligerent countries, and thereby preventing the possibility that the extension of hostilities may affect interests involving other nations in the struggle. Neutral powers have always sought and obtained this localization of war since the middle of the nineteenth century.

In the present European war, which has unfortunately already been extended to Asia, it is not admissible that America, and especially South America, should also become a battlefield. The American countries are not bound up with the European nations either politically or by reason of their interests. The hospitality which they systematically accord to everything from abroad which may contribute to their advancement and development can not be extended to the point of permitting the coasts of the American Continent to be used for the maintenance of a permanent system of persecution of merchant vessels and for an intermittent and sterile struggle which benefits no one and injures all.

For this reason the Peruvian Government believes that the time has come for making felt the joint action of all the American Republics to guarantee the inviolability of their trade routes by freeing them throughout their extent from the effects of the hostilities of the belligerent naval forces. An agreement to this effect, asserting that America will not permit its commerce within the maritime area corresponding to the continent (which area may be considered marked by a line equidistant from the other continents on both the Pacific and the Atlantic sides) to be subject to the contingencies of the present European war, would afford a sufficient guarantee to mitigate at least in part the consequences of the crisis which has already begun to be felt very acutely, and it would enforce respect for the interests affected, such respect not seeming thus far to have entered the minds of the belligerent powers.

It is permissible to suppose that such an attitude would not be regarded unfavorably by these powers themselves, since it would benefit them likewise, by virtue of the guarantees which would be granted to their merchant vessels, besides relieving them of the obligation of detaching squadrons at such a distance to protect the vessels of their nationality or to pursue those under the enemy’s flag.

1  Ante, p. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684].

The Peruvian Minister (Pezet) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/438

[Document 691]

The Peruvian Minister (Pezet) to the Secretary of State

Peruvian Legation,
Washington, November 30, 1914.
[Received December 3.]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a memorandum prepared by the Foreign Office of Peru, a copy of which, I am informed, was handed to the American Minister at Lima, and likewise was sent to the Governments of the South American Republics.1

I have been requested to lay the said document for its consideration before the members of the Governing Board of the Pan American Union, at its next meeting; it being the desire of my Government that some joint action may be taken by the American Republics to safeguard the interests of neutrals in the American Continent and to free our commerce from the effects of the present European war, that already have caused a serious paralyzation of trade in several of the countries of South America, and brought about a condition most harmful to the general economic interests of neutral nations.

Accept [etc.]

F. A. Pezet

1  Ante, p. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690].

Resolution adopted by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union, December 8, 1914 File No. 710.001/121

[Document 692]

Resolution adopted by the Governing Board of the Pan American Union, December 8, 1914

December 8, 1914

The Governing Board of the Pan American Union

Declares: 1. That the magnitude of the present European war presents new problems of international law, the solution of which is of equal interest to the entire world.

2. That [in] the form in which the operations of the belligerents are developing they redound to the injury of the neutrals.

3. That the principal cause for this result is that the respective rights of the belligerents and of the neutrals are not clearly defined, notwithstanding that such definition is demanded both by general convenience as by the spirit of justice which doubtless animates the belligerents with respect to the interests of the neutrals.

4. That considerations of every character call for a definition of such rights as promptly as possible upon the principle that liberty of commerce should not be restricted beyond the point indispensable for military operations.

On these grounds the Governing Board of the Pan American Union

Resolves: 1. A special commission of the same is hereby appointed, to consist of nine members, of which the Secretary of State of the United States shall form part, acting as chairman thereof, ex officio.

2. This commission shall study the problems presented by the present European war and shall submit to the Governing Board the suggestions it may deem of common interest. In the study of questions of a technical character, this commission will consult the board of jurists. Each government may submit to the committee such plans or suggested resolutions as may be deemed convenient, on the different subjects that circumstances suggest.

The Peruvian Minister (Pezet) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/477

[Document 693]

The Peruvian Minister (Pezet) to the Secretary of State

Peruvian Legation,
Washington, December 12, 1914.
[Received December 14.]

The Minister of Peru presents his compliments to the Honorable Secretary of State and has the honor to enclose copy of a memorandum prepared by his Government in reference to the best means of protecting the foreign commerce of the neutral countries of America from the damages caused by the European war now existing.

[Enclosure—Translation]

The Peruvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Peruvian Minister in the United States (Pezet)

Memorandum

The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Peru has taken into special consideration the important memorandum contained in telegram No. 49 which the Minister of Foreign Relations of Chile made known to him to-day, through the Consul General of Chile at Callao relative to measures for lessening the disturbances caused to the countries of the American continent by the activity of the belligerents in the present European conflagration.

The Government of Peru is glad to see the special attention of the Government of Chile enlisted in a matter of such import and trusts that it may be possible to arrive at an agreement that would reduce to a minimum the injuries sustained by the foreign trade and general financial condition of the nations of America since the outbreak of war in Europe.

Foreseeing those grave consequences, the Peruvian Government from the start concerned itself with promoting joint and harmonious action on the part of all those nations, to the end of safeguarding their rights and interests which could not escape being affected by the war. That is what inspired its first general propositions of last August to the American, Argentine, Brazilian, and Chilean chancelleries on the subject of neutrality rules applicable to belligerent ships; it was to the same purpose that action was initiated ten days ago toward prompting an American continental agreement with the object of imposing on belligerents for the first time respect for the inviolability of the American highways of commerce, as a new principle of international law arising out of the needs of a situation created by the devastating clash of such formidable elements of force and destruction.

The fundamental object of the agreement which the Peruvian Government is seeking once clearly determined, there can enter into consideration no possibility that such an agreement may prove injurious to this or that belligerent and meet with its more or less open opposition. Since all that we seek is to prevent violent aggressions from being carried beyond their proper theatre to the enormous distance at which America lies, and since in support thereof a pacific right of self-preservation is invoked, which is obviously more worthy of respect than the right of destruction and annihilation which each belligerent claims against his enemy, there is no occasion to ask which of the combatants will accept it. Let us proclaim, maintain, and enforce the right of the neutral nations, consolidated in the form of a continental agreement, to keep hostilities away from geographical areas not involved in the natural influences and effects of the war, where prevails a normal, valuable, and peaceful trade, which is experiencing disastrous effects to the extent of crisis and ruin, daily aggravated by the continuance of such a state of things. The territorial waters fiction and, to a certain degree, the very right of asylum for ships of the belligerent countries in neutral harbors, have as their true foundation the safeguarding of moral and physical interests whose defense could not be subordinated to the right of aggression, if it may be so called, of one belligerent against the other. Respect of territorial waters and of vessels accorded asylum was enforced without ascertaining who might complain against those principles being put in practice; it was enough to know that they were the result of justified necessity, and the principles have grown to the estate of a right and of a right that is compulsory.

The new doctrine advanced by the Peruvian Government is but the broadening of that principle at the behest of modern necessities; since the progress in naval construction, the development of international commerce, and the multiplication of colonies beyond the seas have made it possible to carry war without great effort into regions which formerly found in their remoteness assurance against the action of war.

To-day the three-mile maritime zone has proved extremely scanty and inadequate to shield neutral states from the immense injuries wrought by sea forays and naval battles on their coasts; therefore the protected zone of neutral territory and commerce must be enlarged. New rights are born of the changes worked by time. In the Franco-Prussian war of 1870 not a single naval battle was fought; less than a half century thereafter, naval engagements have taken place on the American coasts of greater importance and of earlier date than on the coasts of the belligerents themselves.

But even if it were necessary, in this movement for the protection of neutral interests, to take into account and consideration the convenience of the belligerents, there does not seem to be any likelihood of well-grounded opposition from the British Government. The inviolability of the highways of American commerce within a certain area around the continent would, to a certain extent, free the traffic between Europe and America. In the present phase of the European war this freedom would be particularly to the advantage of Great Britain and France, since it is well known that, all access to the German coast being prevented, that Empire cannot carry on an export or import trade. The German vessels sheltered in a good many American ports, while they would be freed from the menace of British cruisers on these coasts, would be unable to return to their own country, with or without cargo, as they could never cross the seas that wash the German ports. The measure suggested by the Peruvian Government is not open to criticism on the ground of its slight bearing on commercial intercourse between Europe and America, because the widening of the neutral zone would reduce the war risk in even greater proportion; since, that risk being confined to European seas, the maritime preponderance of one of the belligerents would mean commercial freedom to its merchant vessels. Finally, the further extension of the neutral zone does not make supervision much more difficult, because, besides the possibility of confining such supervision to the commercial lanes, which for greater safety might be marked out with considerable precision, there is no doubt that the belligerents, aware that the agreement embraced all the countries of America, would find it so strong that they would not seek deliberately to violate it.

The suggested measure of restriction upon the coaling of belligerent vessels in neutral ports would not achieve the desired result. A belligerent vessel, obliged to make a coasting voyage and to enter a port of each country along the way to replenish its coal supply, would be offered greater opportunities of meeting with merchant vessels of the other belligerent country, and so would do greater harm to commerce. Furthermore, there would be set up a rule of compulsory pro rata in the supplying of coal which might prove detrimental to the country required to furnish it; for instance, it would be inconvenient to Peru to have to deliver coal at Callao (where the stock of that fuel has been reduced owing to the difficulty of transportation caused by the war) to a belligerent vessel which in Chile was allowed to take just enough to bring it to the Peruvian coast; and the difficulty would perhaps be worse in Guayaquil, if the vessel had to proceed northward. On the other hand, while the restriction might have some effect in lessening the warlike activities of ships cruising without their own colliers, from the point of view of really eliminating danger to commerce on the American coasts, which is the end to be sought, it would be unproductive of results. It would be ineffective in the case of squadrons which, like those already reported to be sailing for South America, are accompanied by vessels that supply them with fuel. Equally nugatory would be the prohibition upon coaling merchant vessels guilty of violations of neutrality, because they could not be prevented from taking coal from other vessels of the same or some other nationality.

The Government of Peru has, for the first time, obtained knowledge of the action taken by the Brazilian Chancellery for the delimitation of a neutral zone in the Atlantic Ocean. In principle, that initiative, of which no notification was received here, coincides fundamentally with that taken by the Peruvian Government and deserves the most earnest support. It needs only to be generalized, so as to comprise also the American coasts of the Pacific, and to be broadened as to the bases for defining the zone, which must not be left to the convenience of any of the belligerents, but must be established in the light of the necessity of enlarging the rights of the neutrals.

Peru, for her own part, without obstinately insisting upon any particular formula, places in the service of the cause she has espoused all her quota of good will to facilitate an agreement of all the nations of America in a matter that is of vital importance to them and that can only be happily settled in a broad spirit of continental solidarity.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Lima , November 17, 1914.

The Venezuelan Minister (Dominíci) to the Secretary of State File. No. 763.72112/502

[Document 694]

The Venezuelan Minister (Dominíci) to the Secretary of State

Venezuelan Legation,
Washington, December 14, 1914.
[Received December 16.]

[Translation]

No. 300]

Excellency: By reason of the wealth, power, and connections of the warring states the present European conflict affects the interests of all nations to a degree that makes it to-day a serious and urgent problem for the entire international community. The Government of Venezuela therefore deems it the duty of all members of the community to express fully their own opinions, so that an exchange of views may result in greater precision and uniformity of projects for alleviating the consequences of the present situation and perchance bringing it to an earlier and more favorable end.

Actuated by this consideration, the Venezuelan Chancellery has prepared the enclosed memorandum which I have the honor to forward to your excellency under special instructions from my Government. It believes that the task of defining neutral rights and duties in the light of the new conditions introduced by modern war should be entrusted to a congress of neutrals summoned for the purpose of considering their revision, now become imperative, which should then submit whatever conclusions it may reach to a congress of all the nations, so as to have them embodied in international law as an effective conquest of civilization and a pledge of peace for the future. The said congress might establish a new duty for neutrals, that of jointly mediating in conflicts of such magnitude as the present one.

The initiative in that congress belongs to the nations of America and my Government believes that the commission recently appointed by the board of governors of the Pan American Union is the proper body to study and prepare the program of questions to be solved by the congress of neutrals.

The Government of Venezuela would be very much gratified if, in the event of acceptance of the scheme it proposes, the initiative in calling the meeting should come from the United States of America, on account of the exceptional situation it now occupies with regard to both belligerents and neutrals and as a fitting climax to the work that President Wilson and Secretary of State Bryan have been carrying forward with strong and serene enthusiasm in the cause of universal peace.

I avail [etc.]

Santos A. Dominíci

[Enclosure—Translation]

The Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Venezuelan Minister in the United States (Dominíci)

Memorandum

In time of war the duties of neutrality come into consideration at every turn. The neutrals themselves, in justification of some measure demanded or opposed by some one of the belligerents, plead the duties that their position as neutrals imposes upon them. But at the bottom of all this lies the fact that neutrals have not only duties to perform; they also have rights which they may claim. Like any other juridical situation, neutrality begets interdependent rights and duties. Modern writers on international law, notably Richard Kleen among them, have expounded the doctrine on this point with such clearness that its most remote consequences may be descried and clearly defined. In the light of pure doctrine then, it seems that the rights of neutrals, if they are to remain as sacred as those of the belligerents, must be conserved absolutely intact. It is generally admitted, however, that the neutrals, obliged as members of the International community not to hamper the belligerents in the freedom of their war operations, may be called upon to suffer, not a curtailment of their rights, but a certain temporary modification in the exercise of those rights. This proposition, elastic as it is, does not seem to come up to the standard of strict justice. Neither does it apply to a number of cases where the neutrals suffer, not a mere temporary modification in the exercise of their rights, but clearly a more or less pronounced impairment of those rights. Hence arise two tendencies which, upon the occurrence of a state of war, strive for predominance in international practice: on the one hand, the contention that the rights of war should be given the preference and that the interests of the belligerent should prevail; on the other, the aspiration to perfect and enlarge the rights of neutrals, without ignoring the legitimate rights of war, which aspiration has been steadily gaining ground in proportion to the progress of international law and whose aim is to bring about a reasonable equipoise of interests in greater conformity with justice. That these two tendencies exist, that the equipoise sought after is just, is shown in the history of certain great nations which, as their own interest might dictate at the moment, that is to say, according as they might be belligerents or neutrals, have stood for each of the two tendencies in turn.

An impartial examination of the question in time of peace when no circumstantial interest warps judgment, leads to the conclusion that in a conflict of neutral and belligerent rights, while they are both equally entitled to respect, the neutral rights at least have in support of their claim to preference reasons that surpass those of the belligerent. War is a disturbance, necessary in many cases, unavoidable in some, but a calamity in all, the effects of which the belligerents are the first to feel and deplore, the responsibilities for which they try to evade. When war occurs the belligerent, though he may be driven to it by exigencies and circumstances for which he may not be responsible, nevertheless represents and maintains in existence a departure from normal international conditions. The neutrals, on the contrary, continue to lead the regular harmonious life of peace and their rights should not on that account be inconsiderately impaired, or curtailed, or disparaged. To this very clear argument the belligerent may object that he is defending his own paramount right to existence and freedom. Important as this fundamental right may be and is, it is none the less true that it is limited by the doctrine and practice of nations. The prohibition upon the use of certain cruel or excessive methods of warfare against the enemy is a manifest restriction on the right of defense. Therefore, further restrictions on belligerent rights in the interest of the rights of neutrals would not be repugnant to doctrine or practice. Such restrictions are more and more imperatively demanded by the circumstances under which modern war is waged. There could no doubt be some talk of temporary modifications in the exercise of neutral rights in the wars of yore, when international life was undeveloped or not very intense, and the phrase might even be employed in connection with neutrals of our day if war were confined within a certain region or limited and restricted in a definite manner to two nations, provided these did not rank, because of their importance or position, among the strong factors in the activities of the world. But that expression can in no wise be accepted when dealing with conflicts like that which is now holding the world in concern and suspense, in which several of the wealthiest and most civilized nations are engaged, and that at a period of intense international life, when the internationalization of all interests is growing daily more intimate, complex, and inextricable, to the extent that the injury done to one people is keenly, immediately, and surely felt by the most remote peoples.

There is no more convincing proof of this than the general unsettlement which, at the very beginning of the present conflict, overtook and disconcerted the interests that are preeminently the most international, namely: commercial intercourse, economic activities, credit transactions, gold circulation, all that goes to make up the wealth of the world. The mere declaration of war was followed, together with the economic injury that belligerent nations and their subjects can not escape, by a like injury to the neutral states and their inhabitants, falling not only upon such of their interests as were involved in the territory and the people of the belligerent states but also upon their most vital interests within their own territories.

Thus the action of the belligerents, whether they declare or accept war, is felt in the territory of neutrals as directly as in their own.

It is also true that some thought has been given in times of peace to amending the laws of war in consideration of the interests that war may affect. But actual war develops so rapidly that the slow evolution of the laws bearing upon it must unavoidably lag behind, notwithstanding the boldest endeavors. An instance of this, very notable and of the highest importance, is found in the doctrine regarding neutral commerce in time of war. This doctrine recognizes the right of a neutral to trade with a belligerent except for a restriction which at first sight appears just and necessary: contraband of war. That is the law. The actual facts are quite another matter and tend to invalidate the law. Implements of warfare have multiplied to such a degree that the military art draws upon the most diverse industries. At the outbreak of a conflict, the whole industrial organization of a powerful state is brought into concerted action for the sole purpose of the common defense. War makes use of the most varied products, of the most dissimilar raw materials. Thus, due to the mere development of the machinery of war, the list of articles that are or may be considered contraband of war shows a tendency to lengthen and to grow to boundless proportions. Far away are now the times when ordinary gunpowder and its components, lead and some other metals were the only commodities open to distinct suspicion. In these days one is astounded at the number of articles which in earlier wars no one could have suspected would some day be put on the contraband list. Unfortunately the list, as it grows longer, includes materials of the widest application. The prohibition therefore affects not only the warlike industries but also, and in a serious manner, the industries of peace. The neutrals’ right freely to trade in the materials and products of these is on the road to annihilation.

These facts, arising out of the ever growing intimacy of the internationalization of interests, which is working a gradual evolution in even such strict principles as that of sovereignty, justify the belief that even though the sovereignty and integrity of neutrals subsist unscathed as to their persons, the same may perhaps not be said as to their interests, however vital and profound.

Hence, if the meaning of neutrality never was indifference, much less can it be called so in these days. Neutrals can not remain indifferent to the world-wide economic losses that will probably result from the present European war if it should last indefinitely, as there is some reason to apprehend. All will suffer equally, even though some countries may seem for the moment to profit by the war.

At the same time the vastness of the war, involving many of the great civilized nations of the world, jeopardizes, together with the most considerable economic interests, the precious fruits of civilization that are not the exclusive patrimony of this or that people but belong in common to all. The conclusion must be that, in opposition to the active right of the belligerents, arises the right of the neutrals to unite and organize, in the place of their previous passivity and by the grace of their new-found solidarity which for the moment unites them in defense of their injured interests, for effective and beneficent action in behalf of their own security.

There is no lack of precedents for an assertion of that right. History records cases of leagues of neutrals for the defense of freedom of commerce and navigation, such as that between Sweden and Denmark in 1693, and that even more important one which grew out of the manifesto of Catherine of Russia in 1780. While the principle now appears incontrovertible, its scope and mode of application demand more extended discussion. Its definition would fall to a congress of neutrals which would have to reconsider, as is now imperative, the rights and duties of neutrality, in the light of the innovations ushered in by modern war. Repudiating as contrary to equity and justice the proposition that the right of the belligerent should prevail over that of the neutral, the congress might set up a new duty, that of neutrals to unite in the presence of conflicts of the magnitude of the present one which works such direct and serious injury upon them, and to organize the protection of their own interests; the logical consequence whereof would be the further right of mediation which would be exercised at once, subject to such restrictions and limitations of time and circumstance as would keep it within the bounds of respect due to the rights of the belligerents. Mediation thus fortified would be much more efficacious than the customary mediation of international practice. While the latter has a certain appearance of officiousness and cannot be undertaken without the consent of both belligerents, the mediation of a league of neutrals, without entirely avoiding that appearance, offers the most decided advantage of representing, together with the good offices of impartial states, the voice of those who also work for the respect and the defense of their assailed interests.

The conclusions arrived at by the congress would be forthwith referred to an assembly of all the nations, and upon being unanimously accepted, as they must be, on the grounds of justice and convenience, since the belligerent of to-day will be the neutral of to-morrow, they would be embodied in the law of nations as an effective conquest of civilization and a pledge of peace for the future. One step farther in that direction would lead to the creation of a permanent body which would, at the first indication of a conflict, represent the league of neutrals and, by asserting its rights, might, in most cases, avert a rupture and, in all, limit the area, duration and scope of the hostilities.

In the case of the present conflict, which involves nations of Europe and Asia, the initiative in organizing a congress of neutrals belongs to the nations of America. Absolutely and unquestionably neutral, the American nations are called upon by their geographical situation, by their wide connections with all the belligerent peoples, by their character as pacific powers, by their traditional exertions in the cause of international arbitration, and by the serious jeopardy in which the war has placed their present conditions and their future advancement, to perform the great duty of mediation.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Peru (McMillin) File No. 763.72112/433

[Document 695]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Peru (McMillin)

Department of State,
Washington, December 18, 1914.

No. 40]

Sir: The Department is in receipt of your despatch No. 100, dated the 10th ultimo,1 enclosing a copy of a note and memorandum received by you from the Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs “relative to the urgency of an agreement among the republics of the American Continent intended to reduce the great injuries which their foreign trade suffers through the hostilities undertaken by the warships of the belligerent nations of Europe on the American coasts of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.”

As it is understood that the Pan-American Neutrality Commission has been organized to consider the suggestions of the various American governments as to the maintenance of their neutrality, a specific reply to the Peruvian Foreign Minister’s memorandum on this subject does not appear to be called for at this time.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690].

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister (Pezet) File No. 763.72112/477

[Document 696]

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister (Pezet)

Department of State,
Washington, December 18, 1914.

The Secretary of State of the United States of America presents his compliments to the Minister of Peru, and has the honor to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of his memorandum of December 12, transmitting one in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru suggests certain modifications of international law by which the neutral nations of the American Continent might minimize the injurious effects of the European war on their commerce and finances.

The Secretary of State begs to convey to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, through the Minister of Peru, his thanks for being permitted to read his timely and interesting memorandum on this important subject, which is receiving the careful consideration of the Department of State.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chilean Ambassador (Suarez-Mujica) File No. 763.72112/683

[Document 697]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chilean Ambassador (Suarez-Mujica)

Memorandum

In a memorandum received at the Department of State on November 17, 1914, the Ambassador of Chile communicated to the Secretary of State a telegram addressed to the Ambassador by the Chilean Minister of Foreign Relations, dated November 13, 1914, in relation to the proposed establishment of a neutral zone in the Atlantic Ocean, from the American coast to the meridian of Cape Verde, in order to prevent the serious disturbances which have been caused to American maritime commerce by the present war in Europe.1

In the telegram the views of the Chilean Minister of Foreign Relations, as communicated to the Brazilian Government, are expressed, and the Chilean Ambassador is instructed to communicate the same to the Secretary of State and to request an expression of his opinion thereon.

In reply the Secretary of State begs to say that he understands that the Pan-American Neutrality Commission, composed of representatives of the American Republics, will consider the suggestions presented in the Chilean Ambassador’s memorandum.

Robert Lansing

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

1  Ante, p. 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686].

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister (Pezet) File No. 763.72112/438

[Document 698]

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Minister (Pezet)

Department of State,
Washington, December 29, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of November 30,2 transmitting a copy of a memorandum prepared by the Foreign Office of Peru,3 which you inform me you have been requested to lay before the Governing Board of the Pan American Union and which proposes that the governments of the American Continent define a maritime area corresponding to the continent, within which their commerce shall be declared free from interference by public vessels of belligerents.

The memorandum has been read with profound interest and I beg your acceptance of my thanks for your courtesy in furnishing me with a copy of it.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
[File copy not signed]

2  Ante, p. 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691].

3  Ante, p. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/585

[Document 699]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, December 11, 1914.
[Received January 7, 1915.]

No. 380]

Sir: Referring to my telegram of November 18, 6 p.m.,1 with respect to the Argentine proposal that the Pan American Union at Washington should be authorized by all the American Republics to come to an agreement with the belligerent nations of Europe as to the protection of neutral shipping and the discontinuance of belligerent acts in American waters, and to my No. 371 of November 18 on the same subject,2 I have the honor to report that the acceptance of Dr. Naón’s proposal by the union on December 8 has been received with approval by the official and semiofficial press. The members of the Foreign Office are particularly jubilant over what is considered a decided success for their initiative. In business circles and among those not directly connected with the Government it must be confessed that there is no special enthusiasm on this subject as it seems to be the general opinion that little of practical importance can be accomplished by the Pan American Union in the premises. Now that the German war vessels in this part of the world have been destroyed, it seems to be the impression among practical persons that there is at present no further need for the good offices of the union.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard

1  Ante, p. 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687].

2  Ante, p. 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689].

The Secretary of State to the Venezuelan Minister (Dominíci) File No. 763.72112/502

[Document 700]

The Secretary of State to the Venezuelan Minister (Dominíci)

Department of State,
Washington, January 13, 1915.

No. 5]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 14th ultimo, with which you enclose a memorandum prepared by your Government, suggesting that a congress of neutrals be established for the purpose of defining the rights and duties of neutrals in the light of modern warfare, and that the conclusions of the congress be submitted to a congress or convention of all nations in order that such conclusions might be embodied in international law. The memorandum also suggests that the initiative in calling this congress be taken by the Government of the United States.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that this Government deeply appreciates the sentiments contained in the memorandum of the Venezuelan Government and embraces this opportunity to assure you that the memorandum has been read with deep interest and will receive the consideration of this Government.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
John E. Osborne

Mine laying and the establishment of maritime danger zonesMine laying and the establishment of maritime danger zones

[701] The Netherlands Chargé d’Affaires (De Beaufort) to the Secretary of State

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 763.72/134

[702] The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State

Danish Legation, Bar Harbor, Maine, August 6, 1914. [Received August 8.]

File No. 763.72/298

[703] The Swedish Minister (Ekengren) to the Secretary of State

Swedish Legation, Bar Harbor, Maine, August 7, 1914. [Received August 9.]

File No. 763.72/292

[704] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 7, 1914. [Received August 9, 6 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/257

[705] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 763.72/364

[706] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 11, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 11:25 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/339

[707] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 11, 1914.

File No. 763.72/566

[708] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Washington, August 13, 1914.

[709] The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State

Danish Legation, Bar Harbor, Maine, August 12, 1914. [Received August 14.]

File No. 763.72/377

[710] The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 14, 1914. [Received August 15.]

File No. 763.72/419

[711] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 19, 1914. [Received August 20.]

File No. 763.72/552

[712] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 20, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 5:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/544

[713] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 23, 1914. [Received August 24.]

File No. 763.72/640

[714] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 30, 1914. [Received August 31.]

File No. 763.72/692

[715] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, New York, September 10, 1914. [Received September 12.]

File No. 763.72/853

[716] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

London, October 2, 1914. [Received in the Department of State, October 3, 1914.]

File No. 763.72/1104

[717] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 28, 1914. [Received October 12.]

File No. 763.72/1075

[718] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, October 9, 1914. [Received October 20.]

File No. 763.72/1107

[719] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 28, 1914. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1141

[720] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 2, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received November 3, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1161

[721] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 3, 1914. [Received November 4.]

File No. 763.72/1171

[722] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, November 4, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received November 5, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1172

[723] The Ambassador in Russia (Marye) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, November 5, 1914. [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1174

[724] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, November 6, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1178

[725] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, November 6, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1177

[726] The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, November 9, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1193

[727] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman)

Department of State, Washington, November 10, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1177

[728] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, November 10, 1914. [Received November 25.]

File No. 763.72/1257

[729] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 27, 1911, 9:13 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1266a

[730] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 13, 1914. [Received November 30.]

File No. 763.72/1268

[731] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1276a

[732] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 4, 1914. [Received 5:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1279

[733] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 17, 1914. [Received December 7.]

File No. 862.801/1

[734] The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, London, December 11, 1914. [Received December 21.]

[735] The Swedish Minister (Ekengren) to the Secretary of State

Swedish Legation, Washington, undated . [Received January 15, 1915.]

File No. 763.72112/617

[736] The Secretary of State to the Swedish Minister (Ekengren)

Washington, January 22, 1915.

The Netherlands Chargé d’Affaires (De Beaufort) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/134

[Document 701]

The Netherlands Chargé d’Affaires (De Beaufort) to the Secretary of State

Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of my Government I have the honor to apprise your excellency, as required by Article 4 of the convention of 1907 concerning submarine mines, that the North Sea and Goeree passes have been obstructed with submarine mines and that preparations are being made to obstruct the other passes.

Be pleased [etc.]

W. de Beaufort

The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/298

[Document 702]

The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State

Danish Legation,
Bar Harbor, Maine, August 6, 1914.
[Received August 8.]

Mr. Secretary of State: In accordance with Article 4 of the convention signed at The Hague on October 18, 1907, with regard to submarine mines (convention relative à la pose de mines sousmarines automatiques de contact), I have been directed to notify you that the Danish Government, in order to maintain the neutrality of Denmark, to keep all military operations away from the Danish coasts and territorial waters, and to maintain communication between the various parts of the Kingdom has decided to bar the Danish territorial waters in the Sund, the Great Belt and the Little Belt by mines.

I beg to request that you will be so good as to acknowledge the receipt of this notification.1

I have [etc.]

C. Brun

1 Acknowledged August 11.

The Swedish Minister (Ekengren) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/292

[Document 703]

The Swedish Minister (Ekengren) to the Secretary of State

Swedish Legation,
Bar Harbor, Maine, August 7, 1914.
[Received August 9.]

Sir: In conformity with telegraphic instructions received to-day from my Government I have the honor to inform your excellency that mines being planted at different points in the Swedish territorial waters, navigators are invited to conform with the regulations issued by the Swedish local authorities and not visit any Swedish port without employing pilot.

My telegram of this date is hereby confirmed.1

With renewed assurances [etc.]

W. A. F. Ekengren

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/257

[Document 704]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 7, 1914.
[Received August 9, 6 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Foreign Office informs me German ports strewn with mines, and requests that shippers be warned in time against navigating in ports which might serve as bases for foreign forces.2

Gerard

2  The exact text of the German verbal note of August 7, which is thus inaccurately summarized, was not received in the Department of State until 1920, when it was found to have been as follows:

The Foreign Office has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America that during the state of war in which the German Empire now finds itself, the necessity will arise, according to prospects, of blockading with mines the points of departure for attacks on the part of hostile fleets against Germany, and the ports of shipment, departing and arriving, of troop transports.

The Foreign Office begs the United States Embassy to bring this to the knowledge of its Government as soon as possible in order that shipping may be warned in due time against entering harbors and roadsteads which may serve as bases for the hostile forces.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72/364

[Document 705]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

Department has received intimation from Embassy, Berlin, and also from other sources, apparently based upon remarks of Mr. Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, that belligerent powers are scattering contact mines in the Channel. You will informally make inquiries as to whether there is any foundation for such reports.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/339

[Document 706]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 11, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 11:25 p.m.]

[Telegram]

333. Your August 10, 1 p.m. The naval attaché is assured by Admiralty officials that Admiralty have not laid and will not lay mines in navigable waters except at entrance of ports they wish to defend. Sir Edward Grey tells me that Germany has been laying contact mines in the North Sea. The German mine-laying ship Königin Luise , recently destroyed by H. M. S. Amphion, was engaged in laying a line of contact mines to extend across the North Sea.

American Ambassador

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/566

[Document 707]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to communicate to him the following telegram which he received last night from the Foreign Office:

The Germans are scattering contact mines indiscriminately about the North Sea in the open sea without regard to the consequences to merchantmen. Two days ago four large merchant ships were observed to pass within a mile of the mine field which sank H. M. S. Amphion. The waters of the North Sea must therefore be regarded as perilous in the last degree to merchant shipping of all nations. In view of the methods adopted by Germany the British Admiralty must hold themselves fully at liberty to adopt similar measures in self-defence which must inevitably increase the dangers to navigation in the North Sea. But, before doing so, they think it right to issue this warning in order that merchant ships under neutral flags trading with North Sea ports should be turned back before entering the area of such exceptional danger.

British Embassy,
Washington, August 11, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) [Document 708]

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Memorandum

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Britannic Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires and acknowledges the receipt of his memorandum of August 11, 1914, communicating a telegram received by him from the Foreign Office stating that the Germans are scattering contact mines indiscriminately in the open waters of the North Sea without regard to the consequences to merchantmen, thus rendering these waters perilous to the shipping of all nations, and that in view of the methods adopted by Germany the British Admiralty hold themselves at liberty to adopt similar measures in self-defense, thus increasing the dangers to navigation in the North Sea.

It is not stated in the memorandum whether the contact mines are floating or anchored, but it is presumed from the expression “scattering contact mines indiscriminately” that it was the intention to convey the idea that the mines referred to are floating mines.

The limitation placed upon the use of floating contact mines by Article 1 of the Hague convention of 1907 relative to the laying of automatic submarine contact mines is that they shall become harmless within one hour after being laid.

The Secretary of State is loath to believe that a signatory to that convention would wilfully disregard its treaty obligation, which was manifestly made in the interest of neutral shipping.

All restrictions upon the rights of neutrals upon the high seas, the common highway of nations, during the progress of a war, are permitted in the interests of the belligerents, who are bound in return to prevent their hostile operations from increasing the hazard of neutral ships in the open sea so far as the exigencies of the war permit.

If an enemy of His Majesty’s Government has, as asserted, endangered neutral commerce by an act in violation of the Hague convention, which can not be justified on the ground of military necessity, the Secretary of State perceives no reason for His Majesty’s Government adopting a similar course, which would add further dangers to the peaceful navigation of the high seas by vessels of neutral powers.

The Secretary of State, therefore, expresses the earnest and confident hope that His Majesty’s Government may not feel compelled to resort, as a defensive measure, to a method of naval warfare, which would appear to be contrary to the terms of the Hague convention and impose upon the ships and lives of neutrals a needless menace when peaceably navigating the high seas.

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914.

The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/377

[Document 709]

The Danish Minister (Brun) to the Secretary of State

Danish Legation,
Bar Harbor, Maine,
August 12, 1914.
[Received August 14.]

Mr. Secretary of State: With reference to the note which I had the honor of addressing to you on the 6th instant regarding the intended closing of Danish territorial waters by mines during the present wars in Europe, I have been directed to furthermore notify you, in accordance with Article 4 of the Hague convention of October 18, 1907, that submarine mines have now been placed in the southern part of the Sund, between the island of Sealand and the island of Amager, and in the adjoining parts of the Bay of Kjøge.

I beg to request that you will be so good as to acknowledge the receipt of this notification.

I have [etc.]

C. Brun

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/419

[Document 710]

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

The British Embassy presents its compliments to the Department of State, and with reference to its memorandum of August 11 on the subject of contact mines in the North Sea has the honour to communicate the following telegram received from His Majesty’s Government:

German action and the measures it may entail are a source of grave danger to shipping. British Admiralty will, however, from time to time and subject to naval exigencies, try to indicate certain routes and channels for trade to pass to the Scheldt, and they do not wish in any degree to keep trade away from the English Channel.

Difficulties in the way of a guarantee for the Rhine, which is nearer to the center of war, are at present insuperable.

British Embassy,
Washington, August 14, 1914.
[Received August 15.]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/552

[Document 711]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

His Britannic Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires presents his compliments to the United States Secretary of State and has the honour to acknowledge the receipt of his memorandum of August 13, in which, with reference to the action of Germany in placing contact mines in the North Sea and the right reserved by His Majesty’s Government to take similar measures in self-defence, the Secretary of State expresses the hope that His Majesty’s Government may not feel compelled to resort to a method of warfare which would appear to be contrary to the terms of the Hague convention of 1907 and impose upon the ships and lives of neutrals a needless menace when peaceably navigating the high seas.

His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires lost no time in fully informing His Majesty’s Government of the views which the Secretary of State was good enough to express in the memorandum under reply, and he now begs to communicate a further expression of Sir Edward Grey’s views as received by telegraph.

It is stated that there is no doubt whatever that automatic contact mines have been placed by Germany in the high seas where they are dangerous to merchant shipping, as a German mine-laying vessel was caught in the act. It is not alleged that they are a breach of any convention concluded at The Hague to which Germany is a party, but that does not make them less dangerous to merchant shipping.

His Majesty’s Government share the reluctance of the Secretary of State to see the practice extended and the danger to neutral shipping increased. At the same time His Majesty’s Chargé d’Aifaires is instructed to point out that if Great Britain refrains from adopting the methods of Germany, the result is that Germany receives immunity unless the neutral powers can find some means of making Germany feel that she cannot continue to preserve all facilities for receiving trade and supplies through neutral shipping while impeding British commerce by means the use of which by Great Britain is deprecated by the United States Government.

British Embassy,
Washington, August 19, 1914.
[Received August 20.]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/544

[Document 712]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 20, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 5:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Sir Edward Grey showed me Barclay’s despatch about your conference with him about mines and the answer that Grey telegraphed to Barclay three days ago. Grey seemed puzzled and somewhat surprised at our wish to exact from him a pledge which would give the Germans license to use mines and bind the English not to use them. I understand that the Hague convention of 1907 relating to laying of contact mines is not operative in present war by reason of Article 7.

American Ambassador

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/640

[Document 713]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to communicate to him the following telegram received from the Foreign Office yesterday, summarizing the naval position of the war up to date:

The Admiralty wish to draw attention to their previous warning to neutrals of the danger of traversing the North Sea. The Germans are continuing their practice of laying mines indiscriminately upon the ordinary trade routes These mines do not conform to the conditions of the Hague convention; they do not become harmless after a certain number of hours; they are not laid in connection with any definite military scheme such as the closing of a military port or as a distinct operation against a fighting fleet, but appear to be scattered on the chance of catching individual British war or merchant vessels. In consequence of this policy neutral ships, no matter what their destination are exposed to the gravest dangers. Two Danish vessels, the S. S. Maryland and the S. S. Broberg , have within the last twenty-four hours been destroyed by these deadly engines in the North Sea while travelling on the ordinary trade routes at a considerable distance from the British coast. In addition to this, it is reported that two Dutch steamers clearing from Swedish ports were yesterday blown up by German mines in the Baltic. In these circumstances the Admiralty desire to impress not only on British but on neutral shipping the vital importance of touching at British ports before entering the North Sea, in order to ascertain according to the latest information the routes and channels which the Admiralty are keeping swept and along which these dangers to neutrals and merchantmen are reduced as far as possible. The Admiralty, while reserving to themselves the utmost liberty of retaliatory action against this new form of warfare, announce that they have not so far laid any mines during the present war and that they are endeavouring to keep the sea routes open for peaceful commerce.

British Embassy,
Washington, August 23, 1914.
[Received August 24.]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/692

[Document 714]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

The British Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to communicate the text of a telegram received to-day from Sir E. Grey:

His Majesty’s Government have learnt that on or about August 26 an Iceland trawler is reported to have struck a mine 25 miles off the Tyne and sunk, and at least one foreign newspaper has stated that the mine was English. Although the German action in laying mines has forced the Admiralty to reserve to themselves the right to do likewise, the statement already made by His Majesty’s Government that no British mines have been laid remains absolutely true at this moment. The mines off the Tyne were laid 30 miles to seaward, not as part of any definite military operation nor by German ships of war, but by German trawlers of which a considerable number appear to have been engaged on this work; the number of one such trawler actually seen to be doing this was A. E. 24 Emden. It would be well if the conduct of those who ordered her to perform this act were carefully considered by neutral powers.

British Embassy,
Washington, August 30, 1914.
[Received August 31.]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/853

[Document 715]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
New York, September 10, 1914.
[Received September 12.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: By direction of my Government, I have the honor respectfully to bring the following to your excellency’s knowledge:

No foundation for idea prevalent among neutrals abroad that sea trade with Germany is tied up by blockade of German ports. No port is blockaded and nothing stands in the way of neutral states’ sea trade with Germany.

Assertions from England that North Sea is infested with German mines incorrect.

Neutral vessels bound for German North Sea ports should steer by day for a point 10 nautical miles northwest of Helgoland. There German pilots will be provided to bring ships into port.

Neutral vessels should steer direct for Baltic Sea ports, off every one of which there are pilots.

Prohibition of coal export not extended to bunker coal, and coaling assured.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72/1104

[Document 716]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

London, October 2, 1914.
[Received in the Department of State, October 3, 1914.]

[Telegram]

The German policy of mine laying combined with their submarine activities makes it necessary on military grounds for Admiralty to adopt countermeasures. His Majesty’s Government have therefore authorized a mine-laying policy in certain areas and a system of mine fields has been established and is being developed upon a considerable scale. In order to reduce risks to non-combatants the Admiralty announce that it is dangerous henceforward for ships to cross area between latitude 51° 15’ N. and 51° 40’ N. and longitude 1° 35’ E. and 3° E. In this connection it must be remembered that the southern limit of the German mine field is latitude 52° N. Although these limits are assigned to the danger area it must not be supposed that navigation is safe in any part of the southern waters of the North Sea. Instructions have been issued to His Majesty’s ships to warn east-going vessels of the presence of this new minefield. You should inform Government to which you are accredited without delay.

[File copy not signed]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1075

[Document 717]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 28, 1914.
[Received October 12.]

No. 476]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a protest made by the British Government against the methods pursued by the German Navy in laying mines in the North Sea.

This protest was enclosed to me by His Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, in a communication requesting that it be forwarded to the Government of the United States.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

His Majesty’s Government consider it their duty to bring before the notice of the United States Government the practice which is being pursued by the German naval authorities in laying mines on the high seas on the trade routes, not only to British but to neutral ports, and in furtherance of no definite military operation. His Majesty’s Government have reason to think that fishing vessels, possibly disguised as neutral, are employed for the purpose, and lay these mines under the pretense of following the ordinary avocations of fishing. Mines have been found in several cases as much as 50 miles from the coast.

This practice has already resulted, since the commencement of the war, in the destruction of eight neutral and seven British merchant and fishing vessels, so far as at present ascertained, with the loss of some sixty lives of neutral and non-combatant persons.

The practice of laying mines indiscriminately and in large numbers on the high seas, entirely regardless of the dangers to peaceful shipping, is in flagrant violation of the accepted principles of international law and contrary to the primary dictates of humanity. It is also in direct contradiction with the language of Baron Marschall von Bieberstein, who, as first German delegate at the Peace Conference of 1907, spoke as follows: “We do not intend, if I may employ an expression used by the British delegate, ’to sow mines in profusion on every sea’. . . We do not hold the opinion that everything which is not expressly forbidden is permitted.”

The freedom of the seas for peaceful trading is an established and universally accepted principle; this fact has never been more clearly recognized than in the words of the report of the third committee of the Second Peace Conference, which dealt with the question of submarine contact mines: “Even apart from any written stipulation it can never fail to be present in the minds of all that the principle of the liberty of the seas, with the obligations which it implies on behalf of those who make use of this way of communication open to the nations, is the indisputable prerogative of the human race.”

This principle received further recognition in the third article of the convention relating to the laying of submarine contact mines:

When anchored automatic contact mines are employed, every possible precaution must be taken for the security of peaceful shipping.

The belligerents undertake to do their utmost to render these mines harmless after a limited time has elapsed, and, should the mines cease to be under observation, to notify the danger zones as soon as military exigencies permit, by a notice to mariners, which must also be communicated to the Governments through the diplomatic channel.

Not only have the German Government neglected to take every possible precaution for the safety of neutral shipping, but they have, on the contrary, deliberately and successfully contrived to sow danger in its track. The mined zones have not been kept under observation nor has any notification of their locality ever been made. The provisions of this article, which the German Government are pledged to observe, have therefore been violated in three distinct ways.

Article 1, Section 2, of the same convention has equally been violated by the German Government, for the mines which they have laid have in numerous instances been found adrift from their moorings without having become harmless. Yet the German Government made no reservation respecting this article either when signing or ratifying the convention.

The degree of respect with which the German Government treat their written pledges, and the pledges given verbally in their name by their representatives, is sufficiently apparent from what is stated above. It is brought into yet higher relief in the light of the following statement made by Baron Marschall before the third committee of the last peace conference, and repeated by him in full, and with added emphasis, at the eighth plenary meeting of the conference:

A belligerent who lays mines assumes a very heavy responsibility toward neutrals and peaceful shipping. . . . No one will resort to such means unless for military reasons of an absolutely urgent character. But military acts are not governed solely by principles of international law. There are other factors: conscience, good sense, and the sentiment of duty imposed by principles of humanity will be the surest guides for the conduct of sailors, and will constitute the most effective guarantee against abuses. The officers of the German Navy, I emphatically affirm, will always fulfil, in the strictest fashion, the duties which emanate from the unwritten law of humanity and civilisation.

His Majesty’s Government desire to place on record their strong protest against the illegitimate means of conducting warfare which has been resorted to by their adversaries. They feel that its manifest inhumanity must call down upon its authors the censure and reprobation of all civilised peoples.

Foreign Office,
September 26, 1914.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1107

[Document 718]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, October 9, 1914.
[Received October 20.]

No. 704]

Sir: Confirming my telegram No. 184 of this date,1 relative to the placing of submarine mines in the Adriatic Sea, I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy and translation, together with its enclosure, of a note from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, giving the text or the advice inserted in the Journal officiel in regard thereto.

I have [etc.]

Myron T. Herrick

[Enclosure—Translation]

The French Minister of Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador in France (Herrick)

The Minister of Foreign Affairs has the honor to transmit to his excellency the Ambassador of the United States, the accompanying notification made in conformity with the stipulation of Article 3, paragraph 2, of the eighth convention of The Hague, 1907, relative to the use of submarine mines.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Bordeaux , October 6, 1914.

[Subenclosure—Translation]

Notice published in the “Journal officiel”

Automatic mines having been sown in the Adriatic Sea by the Austro-Hungarian Navy, the French naval forces have been obliged to resort to similar measures in the said sea.

However, in order to avoid that inoffensive neutral ships should suffer harm such as has been unjustly caused by the Austro-Hungarian mines, the mines laid down by the French Navy are in conformity with the provisions stipulated by the eighth convention of The Hague, 1907.

The zone that is dangerous to navigation, comprises the territorial waters of the Austro-Hungarian Kingdom and the channels between the islands along the coast of Dalmatia.

Notice is hereby given to all whom it may concern, in conformity with Article 3, paragraph 2 of the aforesaid convention.

Approved:

The Minister for Marine, Victor Augagneur

Attest:

The Vice Admiral Chief of Staff, Pivet

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1141

[Document 719]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 28, 1914.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to my 926,1 October 27. A German mine field has been discovered off the north coast of Ireland and the British Admiralty warns shipping not to pass within 60 miles of Tory Island. One British ship bound from Manchester to Montreal struck a mine there and went down. This mine field is in a location which suggests that it was meant rather for merchant than naval ships.

Part of channels of the Thames have been closed by Admiralty.

A Dutch ship struck a mine 40 miles north of Ymuiden and sank.

The sinking of the passenger boat across the Channel by a mine is disputed.

Page

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1161

[Document 720]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 2, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received November 3, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

961. Sir Edward Grey informs me that the Germans laid mine fields north of Ireland from ships flying neutral flags. They are directly in the path of some of the transatlantic liners and the Olympic the other day was in dangerous proximity to the mines. This danger constantly spreads over a wider area.

American Ambassador

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1171

[Document 721]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 3, 1914.
[Received November 4.]

No. 375]

Sir: In compliance with instructions received from Sir Edward Grey, His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, I have the honour to enclose herewith copy of a telegram which he has addressed to me recommending certain routes to be followed for ships wishing to trade to and from Norway, the Baltic, Denmark, and Holland.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure]

The British Foreign Office to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

November 3, 1914

Please inform Government to which you are accredited that the Admiralty are issuing the following announcement:

During the last week the Germans have scattered mines indiscriminately in the open sea on main trade route from America to Liverpool via north of Ireland. Peaceful merchant ships have already been blown up with loss of life by this agency. The White Star liner Olympic escaped disaster by pure good luck and but for warnings given by British cruisers other British and neutral merchant and passenger vessels would have been destroyed.

These mines can not have been laid by any German ship of war. They have been laid by some merchant vessels flying neutral flag which have come along the trade route as if for purposes of peaceful commerce and while profiting to the full by immunity enjoyed by neutral merchant ships have wantonly and recklessly endangered the lives of all who travel on the sea regardless of whether they are friend or foe, civilian or military in character.

Mine laying under neutral flag and reconnaissance conducted by trawlers, hospital ships, and neutral vessels are the ordinary features of German naval warfare.

In these circumstances, having regard to the great interests entrusted to the British Navy, to the safety of peaceful commerce oh high seas, and to the maintenance within limits of international law of trade between neutral countries, the Admiralty feel it necessary to adopt exceptional measures appropriate to the novel conditions under which this war is being waged.

They therefore give notice that the whole of the North Sea must be considered a military area. Within this area merchant shipping of all kinds, traders of all countries, fishing craft, and all other vessels will be exposed to the gravest dangers from mines which it has been necessary to lay and from warships searching vigilantly by night and day for suspicious craft.

All merchant and fishing vessels of every description are hereby warned of the dangers they encounter by entering this area except in strict accordance with Admiralty directions. Every effort will be made to convey this warning to neutral countries and to vessels on the sea, but from the 5th of November onwards tine Admiralty announce that all ships passing a line drawn from the northern point of the Hebrides through Faroe Islands to Iceland do so at their own peril.

Ships of all countries wishing to trade to and from Norway, the Baltic, Denmark, and Holland are advised to come, if inward bound, by the English Channel and Straits of Dover. There they will be given sailing directions which will pass them safely so far as Great Britain is concerned up the east coast of England to Farn Island, whence safe route will, if possible, be given to Lindesnsæs Lightship. From this point they should turn north or south according to their destination, keeping as near the coast as possible. Converse applies to vessels outward bound.

By strict adherence to these routes the commerce of all countries will be able to reach its destination in safety so far as Great Britain is concerned, but any straying even for a few miles from the course thus indicated may be followed by serious consequences.

British Embassy,
Washington, D. C.

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1172

[Document 722]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Christiania, November 4, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received November 5, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me he has received a note from the British Government saying that British Admiralty has issued statement that after November 5 the North Sea must be considered military area. Vessels sailing for and from the United States must change their route and pass through English Channel. Norwegian American Line have informed the Minister for Foreign Affairs they can not run their large steamships on this route owing to low water. This would seriously affect American exports. Norwegian Government has requested British Government to change route. If this is not granted Norway, Sweden, and Denmark will probably protest.

Schmedeman

The Ambassador in Russia (Marye) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1174

[Document 723]

The Ambassador in Russia (Marye) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, November 5, 1914.
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Russian Government officially notifies Embassy that it has placed mines in zone from 58° 50’ north latitude and to east of twenty-first meridian, also at entrance of Gulf of Riga and around Åland Islands and consequently entrance and exit of Finnish and Riga gulfs forbidden.

Marye

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1178

[Document 724]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, November 6, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Considerable feeling here because British closing North Sea. Swedish Government issued protest.

American Minister

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1177

[Document 725]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Christiania, November 6, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to my cable of November 4, 5 p.m., the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me Norwegian Government has sent a protest to the British Government against closing of the North Sea. Denmark and Sweden will do same. Norway depends on the United States for large amount of supplies. The Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed a hope that they will have the support of the United States and the United States Government will protest.

Schmedeman

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1193

[Document 726]

The Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Christiania, November 9, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me British Government has until further order consented to allow large steamers of Norwegian American Line to take route north of Scotland.

Schmedeman

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman) File No. 763.72/1177

[Document 727]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Norway (Schmedeman)

Department of State,
Washington, November 10, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

1. Your November 6, 11 a.m. You may inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs that this Government does not see its way at the present time to joining other governments in protesting to the British Government against their announcement that ships entering the North Sea after November 5 do so at their own peril.

Bryan

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1257

[Document 728]

The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, November 10, 1914.
[Received November 25.]

No. 30]

Sir: With reference to my telegram of November 7 [6], 1914, regarding the indignation in Sweden on account of the closing of the North Sea by the English Government, I have the honor to transmit herewith the text of a circular issued by the war-risks insurance commissioners of Sweden.

I have [etc.]

Ira N. Morris

[Enclosure]

Circular issued by the Swedish war-risk insurance commissioners

The Swedish Government has protested against the British Admiralty’s proclamation and has reserved full liberty to act in the premises. The war insurance commissioners consider that under the present conditions they should permit insured vessels with policies unchanged to follow either the usual route or the one proposed by the British Admiralty.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72/1266a

[Document 729]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 27, 1911, 9:13 p.m.

[Telegram]

628. Press reports state that British Government has mined the River Tyne and the Firth of Forth. Please investigate and report to Department. An early reply is requested.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1268

[Document 730]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 13, 1914.
[Received November 30.]

No. 261]

Sir: With reference to my cipher telegram No. 823, dated November 12, 1914,2 I have the honor to transmit to you herewith a copy in translation of the reply of the German Government to the protest of the British Government against the laying of German mines.3

I have [etc.]

James W. Gerard

[Enclosure—Translation]

Reply of the German Government to the protest of the British Government against the laying of German mines

It has been brought to the knowledge of the German Government that the British Government addressed a note to the neutral powers under date September 20, 1914, protesting against the laying of German mines. It is asserted in the protest that the mines were laid in a way contrary to international law and in forbidden localities; that they were not sufficiently anchored or under proper observance; and were not notified to the neutrals in accordance with rule. Furthermore, attention is called to the declarations of the first German delegate at the Second Hague Peace Conference which are in contradiction with such practice and likewise to the deliberate injury to neutral trade which Germany’s action on the open sea is alleged to involve.

The German Government makes the following reply to this protest:

I

In condemning the alleged German practice the British Government relies on the eighth Hague convention of October 18, 1907, relative to the laying of automatic submarine contact mines. It overlooks the fact that under Article 7 of this convention its provisions do not apply unless all the belligerents are parties to the convention. Now Russia, which is allied with England, has not ratified the agreement; it is therefore not binding by international law on any of the participants in the present war.

Nevertheless the German Government has voluntarily held itself bound by its provisions, with the exception of Article 2, with regard to which France as well as Germany made express reservations. The assertion of the British Government that these provisions have been violated by Germany is emphatically denied.

II

1. The British Government finds it a breach of international law that the German mines were apparently laid by fishing vessels, possibly under neutral flag, under the pretense of following the ordinary peaceable avocations of fishing. This assertion is incorrect and an invention; the German mines were laid exclusively by German warships.

2. The British Government complains that German mines were laid as far as 50 miles from the British coast and not only on British but neutral trade routes. The convention does not stipulate how far from the coast and ports of an enemy mines may be anchored, and there is no established practice in this respect in international law; moreover, the English statement of the distance of the German mines from the menaced coast is much exaggerated. The mines have been laid as close as the conditions of the anchoring grounds and the character of the coast permitted. The assertion that neutral trade routes have been blocked is untrue; no German mines have been laid in any trade route from the high seas to a neutral port.

3. The British protest maintains further that in numerous cases German mines were found adrift without having become harmless. The anchoring of mines by Germany has been carried out with all possible precaution. If some have drifted from their moorings in consequence of currents or storms, their number is certainly much smaller than that of mines laid by England which have drifted ashore on the Belgian and Dutch coasts and have caused damage there through their undiminished explosive power.

4. The obligation of keeping mines under surveillance, which the British Government complains has been violated, can naturally be enjoined upon a belligerent only as long as he retains command over that part of the seat of war where he has laid mines in a manner permitted by international law. As a rule, therefore, this obligation will apply only to defensive mines but not to offensive mines. When a belligerent has properly laid offensive mines and has duly notified their laying he is relieved of all further responsibility.

5. In the British protest the charge is made that the German Government never issued any proclamation as to the places where mines were laid. This charge is not founded in fact. On August 7, 1914, the German Government communicated to all the neutral powers that the trade routes to English ports would be closed by mines by Germany.1 Neutral shipping was therefore notified of the fact of the laying of the mines and the zones where it had to look out for German mines. If the German Government did not give the exact situation of the various mines, this may well be understood from the conditions which forced the laying of the mines.

III

The volume of strong words and moral indignation with which the British protest denounces the German Government to the neutral powers is not, therefore, justified at all by Germany’s practice. This protest is plainly nothing but a cloak to cover up the serious violations of existing international law laid down in the Declaration of London indulged in by England and a pretext to prepare public opinion for the closing of the North Sea, contrary to international law, which has since taken place and is equivalent in its economic importance to a blockade of neutral coasts. In view of these facts it is doubly remarkable that the British Government constitutes itself the advocate of the “established and generally accepted principle of the freedom of the seas for peaceful trade.” Obviously in the eyes of England, which is at war, the only peaceful trade is that neutral trade which brings goods to England, but not that which carries or might carry goods to her opponents.

The German Government is convinced that the continual violation of neutral trade by England will everywhere place the British protest in its true light. The German Government is satisfied that for its part, in taking the measures required by military exigency, it has reduced, as far as possible, risk or injury to neutral shipping, and has strictly followed the rules hitherto applied by civilized nations to maritime warfare. On the other hand, the infringement of vital neutral interests by England is capable of justification by no military exigency, since it has no connection with any military operations and is merely intended to strike at the economic system of the adversary by crippling legitimate neutral trade. This fundamental disregard of the very freedom of the seas which it has invoked deprives the British Government of any right to appear as the advocate of this freedom in the question of the laying of mines, which is far less injurious to neutrals.

Berlin , November 7, 1914.

1 Forwarded, December 8, to the Ambassador in Great Britain for transmission without comment to the Foreign Office.

2 Not printed.

3  Ante, p. 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717].

1 See footnote 2, ante, p. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72/1276a

[Document 731]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1914, 10 p.m.

[Telegram]

667. Department’s 628, 27th. War Risk Bureau of Treasury Department very anxious for reply as sailing of number of steamers being delayed awaiting information.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1279

[Document 732]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 4, 1914.
[Received 5:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1194. Your 628 November 27 and 667, [December] 2. British Government replies that military exigencies prevent their notifying Government of United States as to where mines are planted. On November 21 they issued a notification as follows:

River Tyne, all incoming vessels from the northward must call for a pilot off Blyth and those from the southward off the River Wear; outgoing vessels are to discharge their pilots off one or the other of these places. Firth of Forth, all incoming vessels must call for a pilot at a station to be established on the Isle of May; outgoing vessels are to discharge their pilots at the same station. It will be dangerous for any vessel to be under way to the westward of the Isle of May without a pilot.

They state that if these instructions are carried out commerce can utilize these ports with safety.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 862.801/1

[Document 733]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 17, 1914.
[Received December 7.]

No. 271]

Sir: With reference to your cable No. 598 of November 9, 1914, and my reply No. 8501 of November 16, I have the honor to transmit to you herewith a copy in translation of a communication received from the Imperial Foreign Office, dated November 14, 1914, relative to the regulations for navigation in the German bay of the North Sea.

Two copies of the publication, entitled Nachrichten für Seefahrer, in which these regulations are printed, are likewise enclosed.

I have [etc.]

James W. Gerard

[Enclosure—Translation]

The German Foreign Office to the American Embassy

No. II U 4970—89541]

The Foreign Office has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America in reply to the note verbale of 12th instant, F. O. No. 1078, that the following are the material regulations, governing navigation in the German bay of the North Sea:

1. Steamships are permitted to make for the German coast, to enter or leave the mouths of rivers only from sunrise to sunset, and in clear weather. Ships attempting to point for the coast in the dark, in foggy or thick weather, run the risk of being shot at.

2. All commercial steamers bound for the Eider, Elbe, Weser, and Jade must first point for the Listertief Buoy; those bound for the Ems should make directly for its mouth.

3.In the interest of the safety of the ships, a pilot is obligatory from the Listertief Buoy.

4. If ships can not obtain pilots, on account of bad weather or for other reasons, they must either anchor or put out to sea again.

The approximate location of the Listertief Buoy is 55° 3¾’ N., 8° 17½’ E.

For the rest reference made to issue No. 59 of the Nachrichten für Seefahrer of 4th instant, pages 1006 and 1007, two copies of which are attached.1

American shipping interests can obtain any further information from the Nachrichten für Seefahrer which is accessible to them.

Berlin , November 14, 1914.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State [Document 734]

The Consul General at London (Skinner) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
London, December 11, 1914.
[Received December 21.]

[Extract]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a full copy of a circular which I have received from the Admiralty in regard to the navigation of the North Sea and English Channel. . . .

I have [etc.]

Robert P. Skinner

[Enclosure]

Navigation in the North Sea and English Channel

It is requested that shipowners on receiving these instructions will use their utmost endeavour to communicate them as confidentially as possible to the masters of their vessels, impressing upon them the necessity for preventing the information from reaching the enemy. These instructions should not be allowed to come into the hands of any persons who are not directly affected by them.

The previous notice on navigation in the North Sea (dated the 14th October, 1914) is cancelled.

a. general instructions

1. local naval or military authorities may, at any time when they consider it necessary, close a port during certain hours without previous warning.

2. Attention is called to the notice on the inside cover of all Admiralty Sailing Directions and their supplements, and to the following Admiralty Notices to Mariners of 1914: No. 1 of 1st January.

No. 1528 of 14th September, Thames Approaches.

No. 1690 of 28th October, River Thames.

No. 1706 of 3d November, Mined Areas.

No. 1727 of 7th November, River Mersey.

No. 1730 of 10th November, Orkney Islands.

No. 1752 of 16th November, East Coast Ports.

In the Notice to Mariners, No. 1752 of 16th November, the position of the pilotage station for the River Humber to be established by the 27th November should read “7 miles ESE. (magnetic) from Spurn Point.”

3. All lights may be extinguished and other aids to navigation removed or altered at any time without previous warning.

b. mines

4. So far as is known at present there are, in addition to the minefields mentioned in Admiralty Notice to Mariners, No. 1752 of 1914, the following principal mined areas: (a) Off the Tyne.

(b) Off Flamborough Head.

(c) Off Southwold (southern limit 51° 54’ N.)

(d) British minefield within latitude 51° 15’ N. and 51° 40’ N., longitude 1° 35’ E. and 3° E.

c. special information as to english channel and downs

5. On and after the 10th December lights, buoys, and fog signals in the English Channel and the Downs eastward of a line joining Selsey Bill and Cape Barfleur and south of the parallel 51° 20’ N., will be liable to extinction or alteration without further notice.

Trinity House pilot stations will be established as follows by the 10th December:

St. Helens, Isle of Wight: Where ships proceeding up Channel can obtain pilots capable of piloting as far as Great Yarmouth.

Great Yarmouth: Where ships from the North Sea bound for the English Channel or intermediate ports can obtain pilots capable of piloting as far as the Isle of Wight.

Dover: Where ships from French Channel ports, but no other, can obtain pilots for the North Sea.

The Sunk Light Vessel: Where ships crossing the North Sea between the parallels 51° 40’ N. and 51° 54’ N., but no others, can obtain pilots for the English Channel. Pilots also can be obtained at London for the Channel and the North Sea.

6. Both before and after the above date (10th December, 1914) all vessels entering the North Sea from the Channel, or vice versa, must pass through the Downs, where they will be given directions as to their route.

d. passages—general

7. On and after 10th December, 1914, vessels proceeding up or down Channel eastward of the Isle of Wight are very strongly advised to take pilots, as navigation will be exceedingly dangerous without their aid (see paragraph 5).

8. Vessels proceeding up or down the east coast should keep within 3 miles of the coast when consistent with safe navigation. The only exception to this is when passing the mouth of the Tyne. Here all vessels should pass not less than 4 miles but not more than 8 miles from the coast between Sunderland and Blyth. Vessels bound to the Tyne must take a pilot off one of the above ports, as stated in Admiralty Notice to Mariners, No. 1752 of 1914.

e. particular, passages

(Note: In each case return voyages should be made on same routes.)

9. East coast ports to French ports: See paragraphs 5, 6, and 8.

10. East coast ports to Dutch ports: Proceed as directed in paragraphs 5 and 8. Leave the English coast between the parallels of 51° 40’ N. and 51° 54’ N.; proceed between those parallels as far as longitude 3° E., shape course thence to destination. Vessels using this route (which passes between the British and German mine fields) must clearly understand that they do so entirely at their own risk.

11. East coast ports to Scandinavian or Danish ports: Proceed as directed in paragraphs 5 and 8 as far as Farn Island; then steer for the vicinity of Lindesnæs, and thence to destination, keeping in territorial waters.

12. From Atlantic and Irish ports or ports on the south or west coasts of Great Britain to Scandinavian or Danish ports: Proceed via English Channel, being guided by paragraphs 5, 6, 7, 8, and 11.

13. Sailing vessels bound to Scandinavian or Danish ports: Pass to westward of Ireland and of St. Kilda. Then make the Faroe Islands, and proceed from thence to destination, keeping 50 miles to the north of the Shetland Islands.

14. All vessels bound from east coast ports to west coast ports in the United Kingdom, and vice versa, must pass through the English Channel, and not round the north of Scotland.

Admiralty War Staff,
Trade Division,
30th November, 1914.

The Swedish Minister (Ekengren) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/617

[Document 735]

The Swedish Minister (Ekengren) to the Secretary of State

Swedish Legation,
Washington, undated 1 .
[Received January 15, 1915.]

Memorandum

In consequence of the British Admiralty’s proclamation with regard to the navigation on the North Sea, Sweden has issued a protest, as have also Denmark and Norway, in which the Swedish Government refuses to recognize any right for a belligerent power to restrict the navigation of a neutral country as far as its traffic on the high seas is concerned and His Majesty’s Government reserves for itself full liberty of action with regard to the British proclamation and to its consequences as to commerce, the navigation, and the fisheries of Sweden.

Upon negotiations held in Stockholm and initiated by the Swedish Government, that Government as well as the Governments of Denmark and Norway have, besides, addressed to the Governments of England, Russia, France, and Germany similar notes 2 containing a protest drawn up in general terms and directed against certain measures which are inconsistent with the principles of international law and which have been resorted to by certain of the belligerent powers. Especially has been pointed out the danger caused by the mining of common Commercial routes on the high seas and the inconvenience of neutral vessels being compelled to follow certain specially defined routes and to call at certain ports.

In this note attention has also been drawn to the great damage inflicted on the commerce of all neutral powers by the arbitrary alterations of the rules concerning contraband and the seizure and searching of vessels undertaken by the belligerents.

The Swedish Minister has been ordered by his Government to inform the Secretary of State about the above and to ascertain the position which he holds with regard to these questions.

It would be gratifying to the Swedish Government if the steps thus taken toward the preserving of the rules laid down by international law and in the interest of peaceful intercourse receive the sympathies of the United States of America.

The text of the note of protest tendered to the governments of the a foresaid belligerent powers will later be transmitted.

1 The date of receipt of this memorandum is apparently not correctly indicated, the earliest stamp feeing of January 14, 1915. Copies of the Swedish note to the belligerent governments, which it states “will later be transmitted,” were communicated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Minister in Sweden on November 14, 1914, and by the Swedish Minister to the Department of State on December 18.

2  Ante, p. 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 545]

The Secretary of State to the Swedish Minister (Ekengren) [Document 736]

The Secretary of State to the Swedish Minister (Ekengren)

The Secretary of State has received the undated memorandum of the Minister of Sweden in which, by order of his Government, he brings to the notice of the Secretary of State the fact that in consequence of the British Admiralty’s proclamation with regard to navigation on the North Sea, the Government of Sweden has issued a protest in which the Swedish Government refuses to recognize any right of a belligerent power to restrict the navigation of a neutral country as far as its traffic on the high seas is concerned, the Swedish Government reserving for itself full liberty of action with regard to the British proclamation and to its consequences to the commerce, navigation, and fisheries of Sweden.

The Swedish Minister also states that as a result of negotiations held in Stockholm on the initiative of the Swedish Government, that Government as well as the Governments of Denmark and Norway, has addressed to the Governments of England, Russia, France, and Germany notes containing a protest drawn up in general terms and directed against certain measures which are inconsistent with the principles of international law and which have been resorted to by certain of the belligerent powers, with special reference to the danger caused by the mining of common commercial routes on the high seas and the inconvenience to neutral vessels compelled to follow certain specially defined routes and to call at certain ports.

In answer to the request of the Swedish Minister, that the Government of the United States announce its position with regard to these questions, the Secretary of State has the honor to inform him that the Government of the United States awaits the receipt of the text of the note of protest, whereupon it will not fail to give the matter its most earnest attention.

Department of State,

Washington, January 22, 1915.

The transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag for the repatriation of Americans abroadThe transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag1 for the repatriation of Americans abroad

1 See S. Doc. No. 563, 63d Cong., 2d Sess., containing opinion of Hon. Cone Johnson, Solicitor for the State Department, relative to the transfer of merchant ships during war, rendered August 7, 1914.

[737] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 1, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/49

[738] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 5, 1914, 1 p.m. [Received 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/7

[739] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 6, 1914, 1 a.m. [Received 6:45 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/24

[740] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 6, 1914, 7 p.m.

[741] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 6, 1914.

[742] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 7, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received 8:40 p.m.]

File No. 195.1/163

[743] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914.

[744] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, undated. [Received August 10, 1914, 3 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/123

[745] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, August 9, 1914. [Received August 10, 7:30 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/126

[746] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 10, 1914, 4 a.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/153

[747] The Consul General at Genoa (Jones) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Genoa, undated. [Received August 13, 1914, 2 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/224

[748] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1914.

[749] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, undated. [Received August 13, 1914, 9:40 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/232

[750] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 840.48/378a

[751] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and the Minister in Belgium

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914, 3 p.m.

File No. 840.48/364a

[752] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 15, 1914. [Received 7:10 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/279

[753] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 840.48/278

[754] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 8 p.m.

File No. 840.48/862a

[755] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 16, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received August 17, 8 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/304

[756] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 17, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received August 18, 6:05 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/490

[757] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 18, 1914, midnight. [Received August 19, 7 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/334

[758] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914, 8 p.m.

[759] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 20, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received August 21, 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/360

[760] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, undated. [Received August 22, 1914, 6:50 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/374

[761] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 24, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received August 25, 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/410

[762] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914.

File No. 840.48/374

[763] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 28, 1914. [Received 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/439

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/49

[Document 737]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 1, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

A limited moratorium was declared last night. Its scope will probably be extended.

If the old law prohibiting flying of the American flag on foreign-built ships were so amended as to permit foreign bottoms owned by American citizens to fly the flag of the United States, it would give great additional facilities to America in this emergency.2 Thousands of Americans unable secure sailing.

Herrick

2 See also the suggestions in telegram from the Ambassador in Germany, July 31 and August 1, ante, pp. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/7

[Document 738]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 5, 1914, 1 p.m.
[Received 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Following addressed to me by Judge Gary, chairman of the American committee:

There are estimated to be at least 30,000 Americans in Europe desirous of returning to America. Conditions relating to food, shelter, and lack of funds make it imperative that transportation facilities be furnished by American Government, as present limited means of transportation will not suffice to convey them to America within six months.

Therefore we earnestly request you to obtain authorization of American Government for you to secure immediately the use of such ships as can be obtained in Europe flying neutral flags and also that the American Government be urged to secure promptly transports or other craft in American or other waters and placed at your disposal or of some other official in order to relieve distressing conditions.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/24

[Document 739]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 6, 1914, 1 a.m.
[Received 6:45 a.m.]

[Telegram]

283. The American relief committee request me to send the following resolution adopted by them:

Resolved that the United States Government be requested to instruct its diplomatic representatives in Europe to obtain agreements of their respective foreign governments to refrain from interference with any vessels that a committee of American citizens may charter for the sole purpose of carrying American citizens home who are detained by the derangement of shipping caused by the present war; if possible, that vessels so chartered may be permitted to fly the American flag.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 740]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 6, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 6, 1 a.m. Ascertain whether British Government would be willing to enter such agreement. Other European nations at war have been asked whether they are willing to enter such arrangements.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) [Document 741]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 6, 1914.

[Telegram]

Report whether French Government would enter agreement with other powers at war to refrain from interference with any vessels which a committee off American citizens may charter for sole purpose of conveying to the United States American citizens who are detained in Europe by derangement of shipping.

Bryan

1 The Same, Mutatis Mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Germany, Russia, Austria–Hungary, and the Minister in Belgium.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/163

[Document 742]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 7, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received 8:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

296. Mr. G. H Adhere to-day handed me copy of following telegram he states he had had sent to you:

Please authorize immediately Embassy here to do needful in passing S. S. Viking , Lloyd’s Register 543, under United States flag, and accepting British Board of Trade certificates for captain, officers, and crew. Shall be ready to sail Monday with 400 Americans for New York. British Government promises every assistance and your reply received to-day. Request contained in your telegram August 5, 7 p.m., should be made to the American Embassy at London.

I do not understand that I have authority to place foreign shipping under the United States flag and ask you for explicit instructions.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 743]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your 296. You may say to Mr. Browne, Savoy Hotel, that under United States law Viking cannot be registered as an American ship; that, if sale and transfer of vessel is made in good faith, conveying complete title to American owner, vessel is entitled to fly the flag of the United States but will not be entitled to the protection accorded the regular registered vessels of the United States. Department is considering advisability of asking belligerent governments to permit all vessels bearing American refugees from European countries to the United States unmolested voyage.

Bryan

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/123

[Document 744]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, undated.
[Received August 10, 1914, 3 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Belgian Government states that it can see no occasion for entering into formal agreement with other powers to refrain from interference with vessels chartered for sole purpose of conveying to United States citizens who are detained in Europe through derangement of shipping. The Government considers that these ships are clearly covered by Article 4 of eleventh convention Hague, relative to certain restrictions to the exercise of the right of capture in maritime war.

Whitlock

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/126

[Document 745]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, August 9, 1914.
[Received August 10, 7:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Austro-Hungarian Government agrees to exemption from military law such vessels as may be chartered by Americans for transportation citizens to the United States on condition that vessels are used exclusively for purpose named and that other belligerent states agree to proposal. They ask to be kept fully informed.

Penfield

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/153

[Document 746]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 10, 1914, 4 a.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s telegram 6th instant. Russian Government does not fully understand inquiry but says it would not interfere with neutral vessels which may be chartered by citizens’ committee.

Wilson

The Consul General at Genoa (Jones) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/224

[Document 747]

The Consul General at Genoa (Jones) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Genoa, undated.
[Received August 13, 1914, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Two German liners here in port, Moltke and König Albert . If Government will use its good offices with England, possibly I could arrange sailing these ships to carry home stranded destitute Americans.

J. Jones

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 748]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department is informed that steamers Moltke and König Albert are now at Genoa and could be of great assistance in relief work by carrying home many stranded and destitute Americans. You may informally approach the Foreign Office, pointing out that Genoa is the rendezvous for thousands of Americans in southern Europe who are unable to find transportation to the United States, and inquire whether, in these circumstances, and if the United States guarantees that all of the passengers are American citizens, the British Government will be disposed to regard these ships as free from capture during the passage from Genoa to New York. Department is making similar inquiry of French Government.

Referring to your August 12, 9 p.m.,1 you may inform Anderson of Department’s action in this case.

Bryan

1 The Same, Mutatis Mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France.

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/232

[Document 749]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, undated.
[Received August 13, 1914, 9:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

German Government agrees to refrain from interference with American transports on condition that all other nations at war assure the United States of their respective willingness to agree. Also German Government will issue passes to these ships on hearing from you to this effect.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 840.48/378a

[Document 750]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)2

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

For the purpose of providing necessary transportation for Americans in Europe, many of whom are in distress and need to come home as quickly as possible, the Government is considering the chartering of ships to be used exclusively for this purpose. There are not immediately available suitable ships of American or English registry. It may be possible for the Government to charter for the specific purposes indicated four or more German ships now in American waters of large passenger-carrying capacity. Possibly these ships would or could be sent on these particular voyages under the American flag, but it would be necessary, in all probability, to have them manned partly or largely by their present German officers and crews, although the ships would be in charge and under the general supervision of a United States official or officials. The ships would be coaled and provisioned so that they would not have to take on supplies of any kind while in a foreign port, nor would any of the officers or crew, except Americans, be permitted to go ashore. As these ships are now in American waters, fully manned and ready to sail promptly, it would be of the greatest assistance to our American citizens abroad if such arrangements could be promptly made. It should not be necessary to charter the ships for a longer period than sixty or ninety days at the utmost. Please take this question up immediately with the British Government and ascertain if it would be willing to assist this Government in removing its nationals from England to the extent indicated by permitting the German ships so chartered to enter some harbor, to be designated by the British Government, and if the British Government would be willing to extend every facility to such ships for this purpose only. If the British Government desires, none of the ships need tie up at any dock and the passengers and their baggage may be put aboard the ships by tenders. If the British Government will cooperate, kindly indicate the port at which these ships may enter.

It is very important to have a reply at the earliest possible moment.

W. J. Bryan

2 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in France.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and the Minister in Belgium File No. 840.48/364a

[Document 751]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and the Minister in Belgium

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914, 3 p.m.

[Circular telegram]

Notify the Government to which you are accredited that the Government of the United States regards ships chartered for the sole purpose of returning to the United States Americans stranded in Europe through lack of transportation facilities arising from the effects of the war as neutralized under principles of international law and as coming within the meaning of Article 4 of the Hague convention of 1907 relative to rights of capture in naval warfare neutralizing vessels charged with philanthropic mission. Ask the Government for a declaration to this effect.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/279

[Document 752]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 15, 1914.
[Received 7:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Hamburg-American Line and German Government have most kindly consented that one of German Hamburg-American boats now in New York shall sail from America to Germany around north of Scotland to German port for sole purpose of taking Americans home. Hamburg-American Line consents that American naval crew take charge, keeping, of course, part of German crew and officers on board. Boat to be under United States flag for the trip and return to America around north of Scotland and then remain in New York as before until end of war. I will sell tickets here before boat leaves America so as to see that it is worth while for boat to start. American Embassy, Rome, informs me all boats full until October. American Legation, Hague, reports American Embassy, London, says only sailing American Line certain. Suggest you ask British Government both to consent to this and to arrange with France and other powers at war to agree.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 840.48/278

[Document 753]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your telegram August 15 via Rome relative to German Hamburg-American boats now in New York just received. Will at once take up matter with British and French Governments. Would the German Government be willing to have other German boats here used under the same conditions to carry Americans from other Atlantic ports according to the needs of Americans abroad?

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page) File No. 840.48/862a

[Document 754]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

This Government is considering the charter for not to exceed ninety days of four or more German ships of large carrying capacity to be sent on voyages under the American flag for the purpose of transporting Americans from Europe to the United States. Please ascertain from the Italian Government if there would be objection to any of these chartered vessels entering Italian ports for the sole purpose indicated. An early reply is important.

Bryan

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/304

[Document 755]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 16, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received August 17, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegram of yesterday concerning neutrality of foreign ships used solely to repatriate Americans. In view of suspicion of French Government regarding German ships now lying in neutral ports and in absence of denial of reported sailing of the Vaterland armed from New York, I respectfully request authority to defer representations in sense of above telegram until England, as greatest maritime power, can first be sounded on this question. Effective discharge of heavy responsibility of repatriating Americans and of protecting German and Austro-Hungarian interests so dependent upon maintenance of very cordial relations existing between this Embassy and Foreign Office that I dread taking any step which might be misconstrued. Public opinion in France appreciates attitude of American press and grateful for donations to Red Cross and American Ambulance.

Herrick

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/490

[Document 756]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 17, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received August 18, 6:05 a.m.]

[Telegram]

In support of suggestion in my August 16, 6 p.m., that England be sounded first in re neutralization German vessels now lying in New York Harbor, am informed by Foreign Office that British Admiral is in command of Allied fleets in Atlantic. Have discreetly ascertained without submitting Department’s proposal that France would oppose it and have it on the authority of Foreign Office that at the Declaration of London Germany refused to accept principle involved in said proposal.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/334

[Document 757]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 18, 1914, midnight.
[Received August 19, 7 a.m.]

[Telegram]

404. Your August 6, 1 [7] p.m.,1 and August 15, 8 p.m. Sir Edward Grey informs me that the Declaration of London forbids the sale in a neutral port of a ship belonging to a subject of a belligerent and the use of that ship under a neutral flag to escape the consequences of its original belligerent ownership. This would apparently forbid the purchase by Americans of the German liners now in American ports and their use under cover of American flag.

Sir Edward Grey saw no objection to the use under a definite understanding of these German ships for a trip across the Atlantic only to take stranded Americans home, if they can fly the American flag, be commanded by American officers, and will be guaranteed by our Government to return to the place and condition in which they now are.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) [Document 758]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Department has been informed from London that British Foreign Office sees no objection to German passenger steamers now lying in American ports being used by the American Government, under the American flag, commanded by American officers, to bring stranded Americans back from Europe. Department understands that German Government is willing that this should be done. You will present this matter informally to the Foreign Office and ascertain whether, in view of the above facts, the French Government would be disposed to agree with the British view.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/360

[Document 759]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 20, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received August 21, 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to the Department’s August 6, 1 p.m.,2 and August 19 [15], 4 [3] p.m., following is substance of French reply to Department’s proposition:

The French Government does not share the view of the American Government that ships chartered for the sole purpose of repatriating American citizens can be considered as neutral according to Article 4 of the Hague convention. By “philanthropic mission” would be understood ships of relief societies, such as the Dutch societies for the relief of fishermen, which would only be protected by the Geneva convention when used for the purpose of transporting wounded or sick soldiers. It would be impossible to consider as belonging to this category of relief societies a merchantman of the enemy, whether transportable [transformable] into a cruiser or not, chartered by a third power to repatriate its nationals. Any further [other] interpretation would provoke the gravest abuses by extending humanitarian character to all passengers asking for protection for any purpose and permitting belligerent ships blockaded in neutral ports to escape capture by the enemy by a subterfuge. The French Government is the first to recognize the need of employing all possible means for repatriating distressed American citizens remaining in Europe. To this end there is no surer or more expeditious method, at the same time conforming to the right of nations, than the employment of neutral Spanish, Italian or Dutch, or of French and English ships, the navigation of which is assured by the command of the sea. Finally the American proposition has lost all practical interest since the French Government engages to transport through France the 4,000 Americans in Switzerland whom the American government proposed to repatriate via Genoa by the German steamers Moltke and König Albert , and is disposed to aid in transporting them across the ocean under its own flag.

Note in full by mail.1

Herrick

2  Ante, p. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/374

[Document 760]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, undated.
[Received August 22, 1914, 6:50 a.m.]

[Telegram]

To-day informally presented to French Government subject of using German passenger steamers to repatriate Americans. French Government do not in principle object to utilization of German ships. They feel, however, that plan of sailing under American flag and officers impracticable. They state they could agree to give pass for definite voyage of such steamers to convey American passengers to American ports where they would again be tied up but that such pass would not be good in French ports where German officers could make observations. They think only feasible way to utilize German ships is to send them to neutral ports, Spanish or Italian, as they anticipate demonstrations in French ports which they could not control. There would also be difficulty of booking and handling passage money, etc. A report was made to-day by the transportation committee here to the effect that, with the transportation already obtained and that in sight, all demands could be met in the near future. After thorough discussion of the whole question it was unanimously agreed by the committee, of which more than 20 percent were present, to adopt the report of the transportation committee. To-day the Foreign Minister told me that he thought on Monday he could assure me of two more ships. If there should be any demonstration or general criticism on the part of the French public in case German ships were employed, I am inclined to think it would deter Americans from sailing thereon. Under all the circumstances I feel that if utilization of German ships could be avoided without very much inconvenience to our people, at least so far as France is concerned, it would be most desirable.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/410

[Document 761]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 24, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received August 25, 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

With reference to your telegram of August 15, 5 [3] p.m.,1 the Imperial German Government will recognize as neutralized within the meaning of Article 4 of the eleventh Hague convention of 1907 ships chartered during the present war by the United States for the purpose of repatriation of Americans, provided the other belligerent powers under the guaranty of the American Government also agree to such recognition. The German Government would furthermore insist on the following conditions:

(1) The consent of the German Government shall be required in order that German ships may be thus neutralized; (2) the neutrality of the ships shall extend over the period of their outward and return voyage and shall be extinguished the moment the ships reach the port of original departure; and (3) each ship shall carry an American naval or civilian officer duly accredited who shall guarantee that the ship is used exclusively for the philanthropic purpose in question.

Gerard

1  Ante, p. 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 840.48/374

[Document 762]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)2

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your undated telegram received August 22. In view of present transportation facilities the Department will not consider at present the chartering of German ships for the return of stranded Americans to the United States.

Bryan

2 The same in purport to the other ambassadors in belligerent countries.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/439

[Document 763]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 28, 1914.
[Received 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

503. Your telegram received 15th instant. Foreign Office informs me that if the United States Government will guarantee that the German steamers Moltke and König Albert will be interned for the remainder of the war and that they carry no cargo from Italy, the British Government will take pleasure in complying with your request for consent to their use for conveying American citizens from Genoa to United States. The British Government, however, stipulate that in this case internment shall mean that these ships shall not be employed or utilized in any way and shall not be allowed to leave the port in which they shall have been interned.

American Ambassador

The transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag for general commercial purposesThe transfer of merchant ships from belligerent flags to the American flag for general commercial purposes

[764] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 4, 1914. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/7

[765] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 7, 1914, noon. [Received 11:30 a.m.]

File No. 195.1/7

[766] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1914, noon.

[767] William H. Libby (for the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey) to the Secretary of State

New York, August 18, 1914.

File No. 195.1/12

[768] The Secretary of State to William H. Libby (for the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914.

[769] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 20, 1914. [Received August 22.]

File No. 195.1/13

[770] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, September 2, 1914.

[771] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 21, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received August 22, 7:25 a.m.]

File No. 195.2/238

[772] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, September 3, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 195.2/252

[773] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, September 11, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 5 p.m.]

File No. 195.2/258

[774] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)

Department of State, Washington, September 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 195.1/43

[775] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 195.1/51a

[776] The Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Rio De Janeiro, undated. [Received September 22, 1914, 2:20 a.m.]

File No. 195.1/62

[777] The Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Rio De Janeiro, September 23, 1914. [Received 4 p.m.]

File No. 195.1/68

[778] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, September 26, 1914. [Received September 28.]

File No. 195.1/84

[779] The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, October 2, 1914.

[780] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, October 2, 1914.

File No. 195.2/252

[781] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 195.1/95a

[782] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 6, 1914. [Received October 7.]

File No. 195.1/107

[783] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rio De Janeiro, September 23, 1914. [Received October 13.]

File No. 195.1/119

[784] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 17, 1914. [Received October 19.]

File No. 341.115 St 2/11

[785] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Washington, October 22, 1914.

[786] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, October 22, 1914.

File No. 195.2/274

[787] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 24, 1914. [Received October 27.]

File No. 195.1/150

[788] The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 195.2/274

[789] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 4, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received December 5, 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 195.1/209

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/7

[Document 764]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 4, 1914.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My Government having been informed of a bill now pending before Congress tending to facilitate the acquisition by foreign merchant vessels of the American nationality has asked me to draw the Federal Government’s attention to the dispositions of the London Declaration of 1909, signed by the United States, and to make all reserves concerning the transfer of flags that might be made in opposition to said declaration and which could not therefore be recognized by the French Government.

Clausse

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/7

[Document 765]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 7, 1914, noon.
[Received 11:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I am reliably informed that newspaper reports of intention of United States to introduce bill for placing American-owned but foreign-built vessels under American flag is regarded here as likely to assist Germany.

Herrick

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) [Document 766]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1914, noon.

[Telegram]

Yours, August 7, noon. The bill in question does not cover the subject of the transfer of the ships of belligerents to citizens of the United States but deals only with the subject of American registry and removes the restriction on ships over five years old and authorizes President to dispense by proclamation with regulation confining watch officers to American citizens, survey and measurement of ships.

The transfer of the ships of belligerents to neutrals during hostilities is not touched by the bill and will be governed by the principles of international law and usage as heretofore.

Bryan

William H. Libby (for the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/12

[Document 767]

William H. Libby (for the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey) to the Secretary of State

New York, August 18, 1914.

Sir: In behalf of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, I have the honor to lay before you a matter which directly affects the interests, not only of that company, but also of other American owners of vessels under foreign flags, for the registration of which as American vessels provision has just been made.

We understand it to be the English as well as the American rule that the transfer of an enemy merchant vessel to a neutral flag in time of war is internationally valid provided that the sale be made in good faith, in the sense that it is complete, final, and without reservation. The Declaration of London, according to the report of the British delegation in the conference by which the declaration was framed, incorporated this rule except that it placed upon the transferee the burden of proving good faith.

Thus, while the transfer is permitted, it seems that the good faith of the transaction is open to inquiry; but we understand that, subject to this sole contingency, the vessels transferred to the American flag would receive the same protection from the Government of the United States as has been accorded to vessels heretofore flying the American flag (for instance, the six American steamers of the International Mercantile Marine Company). This being so, the question how the inquiry is to be made naturally becomes of vital importance. If the inquiry should be made in the prize courts of belligerent powers, it would impose without regard to the question of the burden of proof a grave inconvenience, for, no matter how clear the transaction might have been, the inquiry would involve the seizure and detention of the vessel, the costs and delay of a judicial examination, perhaps in a distant place, and the loss of time and freight. In this way the transaction would in effect be most seriously penalized. Moreover, one of the objects of the law just passed, that of securing neutral American vessels for the immediate relief of the present congestion of merchandise in this country, would be defeated.

In these circumstances, it has occurred to us that our Government might, without prejudicing in any way any other class of cases, secure the assent of the powers engaged in the present conflict to the exemption from seizure and inquiry of vessels transferred to the American flag which were actually owned in this country before the war began.

It has heretofore been universally admitted that transfers made prior to war are not subject to the imputation of bad faith, and even by the Declaration of London (which has not, we believe, acquired the force of a treaty) this security exists as to transfers effected more than thirty days before the outbreak of hostilities. This would seem in principle directly to apply to transferred vessels heretofore in fact American-owned, the ownership in such cases having long been American, while the transfer would be a mere formality.

The company which I represent has a large number of vessels in the category above mentioned. Most of them fly the German flag and are registered as the property of the Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft (commonly called the D. A. P. G.). Some of them which were in German ports at the outbreak of the war have, as we are informed, been commandeered by the German Government and others may be similarly dealt with. The fleet as a whole is, however, distributed in various parts of the world according to the exigencies of the business in which the vessels are engaged. Many are in ports of the United States. A number of them are in South American waters, where they are required for the transportation of oil in the large and rapidly growing trade between San Francisco and Chilean and Peruvian ports on the west coast; and still others are plying between Gulf and Atlantic ports of the United States and Brazil and the Argentine on the east coast. Many others have also been constantly employed in bringing oil from Mexico to the United States.

In reality these vessels are all American-owned, the entire capital stock of the D. A. P. G. being owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey. The law just passed has for the first time rendered it practicable to register them as American vessels and place them under the American flag, and the transfer, if consummated, will be absolute and unconditional. The facts thus stated are clear and indisputable and constitute all the facts in the case. An inquiry in a prize court could elicit nothing more. Such an inquiry would therefore be useless except to deter the American owners from seeking the benefit of the recent law. And what is true of the vessels of this company is no doubt true of many other vessels long American-owned prior to the war, though under foreign flags.

In such cases it should seem to be entirely practicable for the belligerents on receipt of the names of the vessels and of the appropriate proof of their previous American ownership and of their transfer to the American flag, whether they have been actually registered or have been furnished with a consular certificate with a view to proceed to the United States for such registration, to instruct their cruisers to respect their neutral American character and to refrain from seizing them for the purpose of an inquiry by a prize court into the good faith of the transfer. Without such an assurance, although eventual condemnation of the vessel should not ensue, the transfer would afford to the American owner no immediate prospect of anything beyond the risk of probable capture.

I have [etc.]

Wm. H. Libby

The Secretary of State to William H. Libby (for the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey) [Document 768]

The Secretary of State to William H. Libby (for the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of the 18th instant in regard to the transfer of American-owned ships to the American flag. Your letter points out that, even if the transfer is permitted, the good faith of the transaction would be open to inquiry which may be made in the prize courts of the belligerent powers. This you state would be attended with costs and delay incident upon a judicial examination. As obviating this contingency you suggest that it might be possible to obtain the assent of the belligerent powers engaged in the present war to the exemption from seizure and inquiry of vessels which have been transferred to the American flag by registration in accordance with the recent act of August 18, 1914, but which were actually owned in this country before the war began. You further point out that the vessels to which you refer are now “flying the German flag and are registered as the property of the Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft.”

The Department presumes that the transaction would involve not only the transfer of the register from Germany to the United States, but also the transfer of the title from the Deutsch-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft to an American citizen or an American corporation in accordance with the provisions of the act of August 24, 1912 (37 Stat. L. 560).

The Department has reason to believe that its representations to the governments of the belligerents aligned against Germany in the present war, for the purpose of gaining recognition of the transfer of these vessels, would not be looked upon with general favor. Judging from the attitude of the powers represented at the naval conference at London in 1909, such a situation is very likely to result. It is well known that the powers of Europe do not agree as to whether bona fide transfers after the outbreak of war or within a fixed period before the war, are or are not permissible. Great Britain and several other powers adopt the view that, subject to certain conditions, such transfers are legitimate, but that it is, broadly speaking, for the purchaser to establish the bona fides of the transaction. The Department therefore feels that it would be futile to attempt to obtain the assent of the Allies to an arrangement involving, as your case does, German ships.

Furthermore, if any understanding of this kind is to be of value it would seem that it should be of a formal nature, but a formal arrangement with one or all of the Allies on a matter affecting, at least at present, largely if not entirely their own interest in the carrying trade, might be looked upon by their enemies as an unneutral act on the part of the United States. To avoid a charge of impartiality, if not of unneutrality, this Government is clear that it should not suggest an agreement on the matter except to all of the belligerents alike, and it believes it is too much to hope that an arrangement of the kind desired, could be arrived at to the mutual satisfaction of all of the powers at war.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/13

[Document 769]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 20, 1914.
[Received August 22.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: My Government has heard that Austro-Hungarian shipowners intend to try and get from American consuls abroad certificates of Federal nationality for vessels sold to American citizens and desires me to inform the Federal Government that such flag transfers, if made, could not be recognized by the Government of the Republic.

Be pleased [etc.]

Clausse

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) [Document 770]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State,
Washington, September 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Embassy’s note of August 20, 1914, stating that your Government has heard that Austro-Hungarian shipowners intend to make an effort to obtain from American consular officers certificates of American nationality for vessels sold to American citizens and that the Government of the Republic could not recognize such transfers, if made.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.2/238

[Document 771]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 21, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received August 22, 7:25 a.m.]

[Telegram]

442. Sir Edward has just discussed at length with me a new question of the proposed purchase of German ships now in American ports.

He has raised two points regarding our purchase of them.

First point. The money paid for them would aid the Germans to build new ships as soon as war ends. But he does not insist on this point and will not press if other objections be removed.

Second point. The British Government is unwilling that these ships should be put on the seas under any flag if they could be used during the war to supply food or aid to the Germans. But if the United States will specifically agree that they shall not so be used, the British Government will not object to the purchase of them by the United States. Can this be done without violating neutrality towards Germany? The agents must prohibit the use of these ships to any port such as Rotterdam, for example, from which the German might benefit. If satisfactory, Government see a way to make such an agreement since all British objections will be withdrawn.

Another possible plan. Grey told me in strict confidence that the British Government were maturing a plan to buy these ships themselves which they set aside when the American proposal to buy them was made. Grey did not wish to get in the President’s way but the British Government would take that plan up again and, if it can be carried out, buy them, agreeing [to] sell them to the American Government at the end of the war if this plan is agreeable to the American Government.

American Ambassador

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.2/252

[Document 772]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, September 3, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to the Embassy’s telegram of August 4 last 1 and to the conversation I had with your excellency on the 25th of the same month, I have by order of my Government the honor to repeat herein below its views on the question of the proposed purchase by the United States Government of the German vessels which in consequence of the war declared on the French Republic by the German Empire are now tied up in the ports of the United States.

In my Government’s opinion such a transaction which, unless I am mistaken, is without a precedent, could not in any aspect be regarded as legitimate on the part of a great neutral country which no outside pressure could intimidate and no temptation influence.

The views of the great maritime nations on this point have been recorded in the Declaration of London of February 26, 1909, “Declaration concerning the laws of naval warfare,” whose Article 56 reads as follows:

The transfer of an enemy vessel to a neutral flag effected after the outbreak of hostilities, is void unless it is proved that such transfer was not made in order to evade the consequences to which an enemy vessel, as such, is exposed.

There, however, is an absolute presumption that a transfer is void: (1) If the transfer has been made during a voyage, etc.

It seems clear, in the first place, that the Germans concerned want to make such a sale for the very purpose of evading the consequences to which enemy vessels as such are exposed. No one ever heard of their being ready to make it in time of peace, or even of their ever having thought of it. The state of war which is keeping these vessels idle and turning them into a source of unproductive expenses in neutral ports is the cause of their desire to dispose of them, with their Government’s approval, without which a subsidized line could not carry out such a transaction. In the second place, the transaction would occur precisely during a voyage which was interrupted by the war.

The London convention has been signed by the United States, France, England, Germany, and Austria-Hungary. While, as a matter of fact, the formality of exchanging ratifications has not yet been complied with, the Senate of the United States approved the terms of the convention on April 24, 1912, and the Upper House thereby manifested its desire that the rules set forth in the instrument be observed by the American Republic. Furthermore, the report of the American delegates (Ex. A, 61st Cong., 1st sess., pp. 74 and 75) shows that these clauses were adopted in accordance with the views of the representatives of the United States, who on this head made only the very legitimate reservation that: “it would, however, be an undue interference with commerce if all sales, or sales made a long time before the war, were liable to be regarded as invalid.”

As for France, she manifested in the same year when the Senate of the United States passed the aforesaid resolution her intention to observe for her part the rules thus laid down, and the one which we are considering forms paragraphs 112 and 113 of the Instructions pour l’application du droit international en cas de guerre published in 1912 by the French Minister of Marine. I had by order of my Government the honor to mail your excellency a copy of that official document on July 18 of last year.

The French Government is confident that the American Government will not act otherwise, proof of its respect for assumed engagements and its pledged word having been repeatedly given in memorable circumstances.

It is proper to add that, even if the Declaration of London were left entirely out of the question, the proposed transaction would still be open to the most serious objections as constituting aid extended to a belligerent to mitigate in his behalf the consequences of a condition produced by war.

In the course of the hostilities that have been declared, we are far from enjoying every advantage. There is one, however, that unquestionably belongs to England and France at the present time; namely, the command of the sea. Thanks to that mastery, a number of German vessels were compelled to take refuge in neutral ports, particularly in the United States. There they practically count for nothing. They can be of no service to their country either as carriers or as participants in military operations through conversion into cruisers. They are even worse than useless to their country; they are a source of expense for their upkeep and the pay of their crews.

The command of the sea, then, has enabled the English and ourselves to inflict this damage upon our enemy, a very slight damage when compared to the bloody ravages going on in the French and Belgian territory he occupies, but nevertheless an appreciable damage.

Now this is the very disadvantage which an unprecedented intervention of the American Government would turn into an advantage. That source of expense would be changed to a source of profit; ships that can no longer be of service to their country, that are, so to speak, non-existent, would be transformed into a large sum of money, 25 or 30 million dollars as reported, that is to say, transformed into something that is particularly valuable and sought after just now and for the benefit of persons in closest relations with the Imperial Government and of vessels subsidized by that same Government.

The President of the United States in a memorable proclamation urged upon his fellow countrymen the most absolute neutrality in deed, in speech, even in thought. He cannot possibly approve a transaction so contrary to the views legitimately expressed by himself and allow his country thus to take sides against us in the solemn hour when the fate of France and also the fate of the ideas that France personifies are at stake. Without invoking the attitude of France in the most trying hours of American history, it may be permissible to cherish the wish that the Republic of the United States will at least not abet to our detriment those who have declared and are wagering ruthless war upon us, but that she will purely and simply observe rules that are in accordance with logic, that were adopted by her delegates to the London conference, and that have since received the approval of the Senate.

Accept, [etc.]

Jusserand

1  Ante, p. 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.2/258

[Document 773]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, September 11, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

12. Reported plan of allowing Americans to purchase German vessels causing most unfavorable comment here, official and in the press. Public opinion already believes that American Government has pro-German sympathies.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) File No. 195.1/43

[Document 774]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)

Department of State,
Washington, September 14, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Steamer Robert Dollar was given provisional certificate of registration as American vessel several days since by American Consul General, Rio de Janiero, under instructions transmitted by this Department showing that vessel had regularly been transferred to American ownership and entitled to American registration under laws of United States. Reported that vessel denied clearance by Brazilian authorities.

Investigate and request release and clearance of vessel, that it may proceed at once to American port.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) File No. 195.1/51a

[Document 775]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Matter of detention of steamer Robert Dollar considered of serious consequence. Validity of transfer of ship from British to American registry and flag is to be determined by the competent authorities of Great Britain and the United States and such of the other belligerents as may, in a manner recognized as regular and proper, question the right of transfer. United States authorities have recognized transfer and given ship registry, and Department understands British authorities have closed the ship’s British register. Action of Brazilian authorities, if as reported, sets aside the action of competent American authorities and assumes in effect, though unintentionally of course, the position of a belligerent captor toward the steamer Robert Dollar .

Precise principle involved has been decided by this Government since outbreak of war in case of transfer of a ship at San Francisco from flag of one belligerent to that of another belligerent, the competent authorities holding that if the transfer papers were regular this Government would leave the interested countries to settle question of the right of the parties to make transfer and that recognition of transfer papers could not possibly affect neutrality of the United States.

Owner of Robert Dollar has already sustained considerable loss from detention of ship and unless attitude of Brazilian Government is modified so as to permit the vessel to sail, Brazilian Government must be regarded in attitude of intervening in behalf of other countries to seize and hold an American registered ship.

If position of Brazilian Government is at this time unfavorable to clearance or release of vessel, bring to the attention of the Brazilian Government in the sense of the foregoing. Report promptly.

Bryan

The Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/62

[Document 776]

The Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Rio De Janeiro, undated.
[Received September 22, 1914, 2:20 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The British Consul states that acting under instructions from the British Legation he cannot until so instructed close register of steamer Robert Dollar . British Legation is awaiting instructions in the premises from London.

Burnell

The Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/68

[Document 777]

The Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Rio De Janeiro, September 23, 1914.
[Received 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Provisional register issued and delivered to steamer Robert Dollar September 22, although vessel sailed to-day by order of owners under British register.

Burnell

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 195.1/84

[Document 778]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, September 26, 1914.
[Received September 28.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: Acting under instructions I telegraphed to British consuls not to raise any difficulties in case of transfer to the American flag of a ship already, before the war, owned by Americans, it being understood that ships transferred in this manner will not be employed to trade with Germany or to supply Germany through Scandinavian or Dutch ports. In other cases of transfer, if asked, the consuls are to reply that the British prize courts will follow the rule in Article 56 of the declaration of the International Naval Conference of 1909.

I presume that the official action of British consuls is only required when the ship is transferred from the British to the American flag or vice versa. In the former case (as in the American regulations) there are certain guarantees to be taken for the British officers and seamen on board the former British ship.

The Consul at Rio was instructed of the above view of His Majesty’s Government as to American-owned ships, but the Robert Dollar apparently had already left.

As you are aware, many such transfers have taken place, the companies concerned having made, themselves, the necessary arrangements for the officers and seamen.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 779]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, October 2, 1914.

Dear Mr. Ambassador: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 26th ultimo in which you tell me among other things that you, acting under instructions, “telegraphed to British consuls not to raise any difficulties in case of transfer to the American flag of a ship already, before the war, owned by Americans, it being understood that ships transferred in this manner will not be employed to trade with Germany or to supply Germany through Scandinavian or Dutch ports.”

I am afraid that the latter part of this instruction as to the understanding relative to the trade routes of American-owned vessels, which assume American nationality, will be the cause of very considerable criticism and justly so in my opinion. I do not see how a British official can comply with it without obtaining a written guaranty from the American owner that the vessel will not engage in the “tabooed” trade. That an American owner would give such guaranty I doubt, and, furthermore, I would not advise his doing so if my advice is asked, as it appears to be a restriction upon our neutral rights of commerce, which has no support in international law.

I am writing you thus frankly in regard to this matter as I fear that an attempt to act in accord with the instructions will compel this Government to protest formally against an attempted interference with our legitimate rights of trade, and initiate a discussion which it would be well, if possible, to avoid.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) File No. 195.2/252

[Document 780]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State,
Washington, October 2, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 3d ultimo 1 in which by order of your Government you repeat its views on the question of the proposed purchase by the United States Government of German vessels which, by reason of the pending conflict in Europe, are now immobilized in ports of the United States. You express the opinion of your Government that such a transaction is without precedent and could not in any respect be regarded as legitimate on the part of a great neutral country. You state at length the reasons upon which this opinion of your Government is based.

In response to your note I have the honor to state that this Government is giving the matter presented by your excellency its attentive consideration, and further that, while it refrains from commenting at the present moment upon the opinions of your Government, as expressed in your communication, this Government reserves for the present, the statement of its views as to the contentions of the Government of the French Republic.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

[See also the British Embassy’s memorandum of October 1, 1914,1 concerning the transfer of the German ship Alexandria (renamed Sacramento), for the statement: “the British Embassy wishes to state that there is no desire or intention to object to the transfer to the American flag.”]

1  Ante, p. 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

1  Post, p. 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 195.1/95a

[Document 781]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department is informed by interested parties that British Ambassador is cabling his Government suggesting that message be sent to British Consul at St. Lucia to place no impediment to transfer of steamship Robert Dollar from British to American registry when that vessel arrives at Lucia. Registration of the Dollar was blocked at Rio de Janeiro by some objection on part of British officials. Direct attention of proper authorities to this matter in order that suggestion of British Ambassador may be effected.

Bryan

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 195.1/107

[Document 782]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 6, 1914.
[Received October 7.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: I quite agree with you that my unofficial letter to you of the 26th ultimo relative to transfer of flags is open to misconstruction.

There can of course be no question of demanding a written guarantee of this nature from American owners.

I presume the consul’s official action only takes place where the original flag was British and the registry has to be changed. Where the original flag was that of an enemy I presume his official intervention is not called for. He can however state, if his opinion is requested, that the transfer of an American-owned ship to the American flag is prima facie a bona fide transfer and would probably be regarded as valid by a prize court unless other circumstances arise of a suspicious character.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/119

[Document 783]

The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rio De Janeiro, September 23, 1914.
[Received October 13.]

No. 461]

Sir: Referring to the subject of provisional American registration for the British registered steamer Robert Dollar , recently sold by the Dollar Steamship Line of Victoria, British Columbia, to a company of the same name of San Francisco, California, I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s telegrams of September 14, 6 p.m.,1 September 16, 6 p.m.,2 and September 19, 4 p.m.3 The two latter telegrams occupied the normal period in transmission between Washington and Rio de Janeiro but the telegram of September 14, routed by the Central and South American Telegraph Company and the Uruguayan and Brazilian land lines, was sixty-six hours in transmission and was received at the Embassy at noon on September 17, two and a half hours later than the telegram of September 16.

There appears to have been a misunderstanding at the Department regarding the closure by the British authorities of the British registration of this steamer. The Department’s telegram of September 14, 6 p.m., stated that “ S. S. Robert Dollar was given provisional certificate of registration as American vessel several days since by American Consul General, Rio de Janeiro” and the Department’s telegram of September 16, 6 p.m., informed me that “Department understands British authorities have closed ship’s British register.” But at the time these telegrams were sent the closure of the British register had not been effected, although Mr. Burnell, the American Consul General at Rio de Janeiro, was working in cooperation with Mr. O’Sullivan Beare, the British Consul General, toward that end. On September 11 the latter official had inquired by telegraph from the marine department of the Board of Trade, London, whether he was authorized to ratify the proposed transfer of the Robert Dollar , stating in his telegram that the owners of that vessel had arranged to transfer her to the United States flag. On September 12 he received the answer that “with reference to your telegram of September 11 in re British S. S. Robert Dollar the reply is in the affirmative.” It was therefore in accordance with his instructions from the Board of Trade that he was arranging to discharge the crew and to complete the necessary preliminaries incident to closing the British register.

Upon September 11 Mr. Burnell informed the captain of the port of Rio de Janeiro, as on September 7 he had already informed the inspector of customs, that he had been instructed by the Department to issue a provisional American register to the Robert Dollar which had arrived at this port under British registration and he inquired with what local regulations the master of the vessel must comply in order to procure a clearance by reason of a change of registry. After consulting the Foreign Office the captain of the port replied to this communication on September 14, in the sense of the enclosure to this despatch,1 the substance of which was telegraphed to the department by Mr. Burnell on the same day, as follows: “Brazilian authorities state that they can not assent to change of nationality of steamer Robert Dollar , being a vessel of a belligerent nation. And they are unwilling to make a precedent which might have doubtful interpretation as to neutrality decreed.” In his telegram Mr. Burnell also said that the status of the steamer under her British registry had not yet been altered. This telegram was sent after I ascertained at the Foreign Office that that Department had authorized the communication from the captain of the port to our Consulate General.

Although, in spite of Mr. Burnell’s information that the British registry had not been closed, the Department telegraphed me on September 16 that it was the “understanding of the Department” that it had been closed; immediately upon the receipt of that telegram I communicated its contents personally to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and telegraphed you that the Brazilian Government would gladly modify its attitude, as reported by Mr. Burnell, if the British Chargé d’Affaires would “intimate his acquiescence. . . in the proposed American registry.” The meaning of this phrase would undoubtedly have been clearer had I amplified it by the statement that the Brazilian Government would grant the Robert Dollar a clearance as soon as the British Charge would allow his Consul General to complete the necessary preliminaries and close British registration. This was the thought which prompted my suggestion that our Embassy in London should ask the British Government to instruct its representatives in Rio de Janeiro in that sense, the suggestion being made because the British Chargé d’Affaires on September 18—the day on which my telegram was sent, ignorant of what the attitude of his Government might be regarding the closing of the register—had asked by telegraph instructions on the point.

The Department’s telegram of September 19 was brought to the attention of Dr. Lauro Müller on the day of its receipt and in answer to it he assured me again that, as soon as he was informed that the British registration has been closed, he would authorize the captain of the port of Rio de Janeiro to issue a clearance permit. This was the situation in which the matter stood when the master of the Robert Dollar received telegraphic instructions from her owners to proceed to the United States under the ship’s existing British register, an instruction which he immediately carried out. Clearance was given him under his British registry yesterday and he sailed to-day.

I have not yet been informed by the British Chargé d’Affaires whether his Government has expressed an opinion about the closure of the British registry but as soon as I ascertain what that opinion is, I will communicate it to you by despatch. The Department will see from the correspondence between the marine Board of Trade and the British Consul General that Mr. O’Sullivan Beare was cooperating with Mr. Burnell to close the registry and that the interruption in doing so was wholly due to the interference of the British Chargé d’Affaires who was unwilling to assume the responsibility of giving an opinion upon the question of closure. Had the attitude of the British Consul General not altered on the advice of the British Chargé d’Affaires, British registration of the Robert Dollar would have been closed some days ago and she might now be on her way to the United States under provisional American registration in accordance with the Department’s desire.

I have [etc.]

Edwin V. Morgan

1  Ante, p. 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

2  Ante, p. 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775]

3 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 341.115 St 2/11

[Document 784]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State of the United States and has the honour to state that, according to information which has reached His Majesty’s Government, two German oil steamships lying at Baton Rouge, the Chatham and Standard, which belonged to the German-American Company of Hamburg, have been sold to the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and their names changed to Montano and Caloria respectively.

His Majesty’s Ambassador is instructed to say that His Majesty’s Government consider themselves entitled to seize these ships on the ground that the sale was effected only in order to escape risk of capture.

British Embassy,

Washington, October 17, 1914.
[Received October 19.]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 785]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Memorandum

The Acting Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a memorandum of the British Embassy dated the 17th instant, stating that two German oil steamers, the Chatham and Standard, belonging to the German-American Company of Hamburg, have been sold to the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and had their names changed to Montano and Caloria respectively.

His Majesty’s Ambassador states that he is instructed that His Majesty’s Government consider themselves entitled to seize these ships on the ground that the sale was effected only in order to escape risk of capture.

In reply the Acting Secretary of State desires to point out that he is advised that the vessels mentioned were really owned by American interests, the stock of the German-American Company of Hamburg, a subsidiary company of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, being owned and controlled by American capital. These vessels, therefore, are regarded as having merely changed their German registry for American registry, which entitles them to fly the American flag. In other words, this is a case of the transfer of flag only and not of ownership.

The Acting Secretary of State has the honor to point out that a transaction of this character is regarded by the Government of the United States as legitimate under the rules of international law, and that it will proceed upon this ground in case these vessels are seized by the authorities of His Majesty’s Government.1

Department of State,

Washington, October 22, 1914.

1 In the cases of two seizures of ships similarly transferred, which arose within the next few days, the British Government waived the question of their right to fly the American flag. See ante, pp. 328–9 [Pgs. 328–329 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502].

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.2/274

[Document 786]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, October 22, 1914.

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: My Government was recently informed that two German tank steamers, the Standard and the Chatham, had been lately placed under the American flag and given the names of Montano and Caloria. These vessels hailing from the port of Hamburg are said to belong to the Deutsche-Amerikanische Petroleum Gesellschaft.

In compliance with instructions received, I have the honor to remind your excellency that by my note of the third of last month in particular I made known to you the intention of the Government of the Republic to observe in cases of that class the provisions of the Declaration of London of February 26, 1909, which in Article 56 stipulate that under certain conditions which seem to inhere in the present case, a flag transfer effected by an enemy vessel during a war is to be held of no effect. The same rule is, furthermore, included, as noted in the above-mentioned communication, among the directions contained in the “Instructions for the enforcement of international law in case of war” published by the Ministry of Marine in 1912.

Be pleased [etc.]

Jusserand

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/150

[Document 787]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 24, 1914.
[Received October 27.]

No. 362]

Sir: I have the honour to transmit to you herewith in original a note addressed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to the United States Ambassador in London, which was sent to this Embassy by mistake, on the subject of the case of the S. S. Robert Dollar .

I have informed Sir Edward Grey by telegraph that I am communicating this note to you, and requesting him to furnish Mr. Page with a copy.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

No. 56807/14]
Foreign Office,
London , October 10, 1914.

Your Excellency: With reference to the memorandum which your excellency was good enough to communicate to me on the 6th instant containing a copy of a telegram from the Secretary of the State Department in regard to the transfer of the S. S. Robert Dollar from the British to the United States registry, I have the honour to state that instructions have been sent to the British authorities at St. Lucia not to oppose the transfer of this vessel when she visits the island.

I take this opportunity to inform your excellency that there has been a misapprehension as to the attitude of His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires and His Majesty’s Consul at Rio de Janeiro in connexion with the proposed change of registry at that port. Neither of these officials opposed the transfer, which was prevented, according to my information, by the Brazilian Government under Brazilian regulations; these are understood to be inspired by the desire to avoid raising of the difficult questions involved in such a transaction in time of war.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
A. Law

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) File No. 195.2/274

[Document 788]

The Acting Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 22d ultimo, in which, with reference to the question of the transfer to American registry of the German vessels Standard and Chatham, you advise the Department of the intention of your Government to observe, in cases of this class, “the provisions of the Declaration of London of February 26, 1909, which, in Article 56, stipulates that under certain conditions a flag transfer effected by an enemy vessel during a war is to be held of no effect.”

In reply I have the honor to say that a translation of your note has been referred to the Secretary of Commerce for a statement of the facts relating to the ownership and transfer to American registry of the vessels in question, and that upon receipt of a reply from the Department of Commerce, your note will receive the further attention of the Department.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/209

[Document 789]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 4, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received December 5, 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1000. In answer to an inquiry addressed to the Foreign Office as to whether any objection would be entertained by the German Government to the employment of vessels formerly of British register transferred since the outbreak of the war to the American flag, pursuant to the provisions of the American law governing the registry of foreign-built vessels, for the importation of cotton direct to German ports and the exportation of return cargoes from such ports, the following answer has been received:

According to the general principles of international law (compare also on this point Article 56 of the naval conference at London February 26, 1909) the transfer of British vessels to American register after the commencement of the war is not valid per se. The German Government, however, declares itself ready, under the proviso that its consent may be withdrawn at any time should it become necessary, to waive the invalidity of such change of flag in so far as [such] ships are employed exclusively in direct traffic between American ports on the one hand and German ports on the other hand for the importation into Germany of goods, particularly of cotton, as well as for the exportation from Germany in return of such articles as are consigned to the United States and are destined for use in the United States. It is advisable that each ship of this description be provided by the competent American authorities for each voyage with a certificate that such ship is to take a cargo destined exclusively for Germany in a direct course to a German port and on its return trip from here transport goods which are to be loaded only in Germany and are consigned to the United States and destined for use in the United States. Ship should further be furnished for each individual voyage between America and Germany with a safe conduct issued by the Imperial German Ambassador, Washington, on the strength of this certificate requesting German war vessels to allow ship to pass unmolested on this journey.

Gerard

Censorship of the cables by belligerent governmentsCensorship of the cables by belligerent governments

[790] The Consul at St. Pierre (Kemp) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, St. Pierre, August 5, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 1:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/143

[791] The Secretary of State to the Consul at St. Pierre (Kemp)

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914.

[792] The Kirby Lumber Company to the Secretary of State

Houston, Texas, August 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72/154

[793] The Secretary of State to the Kirby Lumber Company

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914.

[794] The Western Union Telegraph Company to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 11, 1914.

File No. 841.731/18

[795] The Secretary of State to the Kirby Lumber Company

Department of State, Washington, September 1, 1914.

File No. 763.72/154

[796] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 841.731/18

[797] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 23, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 841/731/a

[798] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 27, 1914. [Received 3:30 p.m.]

File No. 841.731

[799] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 2, 1914.

File No. 841.731/26a

[800] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 2, 1914. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/2

[801] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 24, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 841.731/6

[802] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 5, 1914.

File No. 841.731/33C

[803] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 19, 1914. [Received 1:15 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/14

[804] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 26, 1914.

File No. 841.731/22

[805] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 16, 1914. [Received September 28.]

[806] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1914.

File No. 841.731/32A

[807] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 2, 1914. [Received 11:30 a.m.]

File No. 841.731/32

[808] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 5, 1914. [Received 4:80 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/34

[809] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 6, 1914.

File No. 841.731/33

[810] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, undated. [Received October 13, 1914, 4 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/44

[811] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

[812] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 23, 1914. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/52

[813] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 841.731/54a

[814] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 30, 1914. [Received 8 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/55

[815] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 30, 1914. [Received 4:45 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/56

[816] The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Berne, November 5, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 8 a.m.]

File No. 841.731/58

[817] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Stovall)

Department of State, Washington, November 6, 1914.

[818] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, November 9, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received 3:10 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/154

[819] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 10, 1914.

[820] The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Berne, November 11, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 2 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/64

[821] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page )

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914.

File No. 841.731/63

[822] The President of the Swiss Confederation to the Swiss Legation in Washington

undated [Received November 12, 1914.] [Left with the Secretary of State by the Swiss Minister, November 18, 1914.]

File No. 841.731/264

[823] The Secretary of State to the Swiss Legation

Washington, November 20, 1914.

[824] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Deparment of State, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 841.731/64

[825] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Departmentf of State, Washington, November 20, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 851.731

[826] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, November 22, 1914. [Received 6 p.m.]

File No. 851.731/1

[827] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 25, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 841.731/82

[828] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, November 27, 1914. [Received 10:20 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/155

[829] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 2, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 841.731/157

[830] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/83

[831] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 2, 1914. [Received 7:20 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/92

[832] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 3, 1914.

[833] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 3, 1914.

File No. 841.731/91

[834] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 4, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received December 5, 6 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/102

[835] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 5, 1914.

File No. 841.731/97

[836] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, December 7, 1914.

File No. 851.731/3

[837] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, undated. [Received December 7, 1914, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 841.731/101

[838] The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 10, 1914. [Received 9 p.m.]

File No. 851.731/6

[839] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1914.

File No. 841.731/116

[840] The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 841.731/131

[841] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 841.731/109

[842] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 11, 1914. [Received December 12, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 841.731/130

[843] The Ambassador In Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rome, December 14, 1914, 9 p.m.

[844] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914.

File No. 841.731/123

[845] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914.

File No. 841.731/157a

[846] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 16, 1914.

File No. 841.731/142

[847] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 17, 1914. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/140

[848] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 17, 1914. [Received December 18, 8 a.m.]

File No. 841.731/139

[849] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 18, 1914. [Received 9:10 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/158

[850] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 21, 1914, 9 p.m. [Received 8:40 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/162

[851] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 841.731/151

[852] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 841.731/162

[853] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 22, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 841.781/165

[854] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 23, 1914. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/169

[855] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 21, 1914. [Received December 24]

File No. 841.731/170

[856] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, January 4, 1915. [Received 3:40 p.m.]

File No. 841.731/195

The Consul at St. Pierre (Kemp) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/143

[Document 790]

The Consul at St. Pierre (Kemp) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
St. Pierre, August 5, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 1:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Will you authorize protection as neutral property telegraph cables leased by the Western Union at this place?

Kemp

The Secretary of State to the Consul at St. Pierre (Kemp) [Document 791]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at St. Pierre (Kemp)

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 5. Under generally accepted principles international law, submarine telegraphic cable between territory of belligerent and neutral may be cut by belligerents outside of territorial waters of neutral in course of military or naval operations; but if cable is not used to furnish military information or for other unneutral purposes, Department hopes that belligerents will not undertake to do so.

Bryan

The Kirby Lumber Company to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/154

[Document 792]

The Kirby Lumber Company to the Secretary of State

Houston, Texas, August 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

Telegraph companies refuse to handle code messages for Porto Rico advising French cable New York to Porto Rico regulations demand plain language and full address. Must these revisions be complied with on messages from one part of United States to another? We, of course, considering Porto Rico United States territory and business in a sense interstate.

Kirby Lumber Company

The Secretary of State to the Kirby Lumber Company [Document 793]

The Secretary of State to the Kirby Lumber Company

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

Subject your telegram receiving attention to end that ordinary code messages between United States and Porto Rico may not be refused. Great number of questions suddenly arising out of European war require time for adjustment. You will be advised.

W. J. Bryan

The Western Union Telegraph Company to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/18

[Document 794]

The Western Union Telegraph Company to the Secretary of State 1

Washington, August 11, 1914.

Sir: Believing that the United States Government fully appreciates the desirability of removing every unnecessary bar to the development of this country’s foreign business during the present serious European situation, it occurs to us that it may be consistently possible for our Government to make such representations to the British Government as will be calculated to admit of a more reasonable attitude with respect to censorship of cable messages by the War Office at London.

By reason of unnecessary exactions in the way of full addresses and signatures to every message, no matter how innocent and innocuous its character, the capacity of the working Atlantic cables has been cut down just 50 per cent at this time when the demands upon the cables exceed their capacity, and there is the greatest public distress to learn of the whereabouts and safety of American tourists caught in Europe when the war broke out. The unusual requirement that in addition to being written in plain language, messages must bear a full address, including street and number, and be signed in the full name of the sender, has served to exactly double the number of words in the average message, which not only reduces the capacity of the cables in actual messages, as stated, but doubles the cost to the public without any possible apparent advantage to the military operations in England.

It would seem to be apparent that a street and number in the case of well-known firms, such as the Cunard Steamship Company in Liverpool, or Messrs. Morgan, Grenfell and Company in London, and hundreds of other equally prominent firms, is wholly unnecessary, and that the character of a message which on its face is of a social nature, is not affected by the circumstance that it is signed “William” instead of “William Thompson Smith.”

Similarly, messages exchanged between the United States and Porto Rico, are not only subject to censorship, but come under the same stringent restrictions as other traffic, simply because this company’s connection with Porto Rico is by means of English cables with Havana, which touch at Jamaica, and in disregard of the fact that the French Cable Company, whose cables land directly from the United States to Santiago and Porto Rico, offers an untrammeled channel for any messages hostile to British interests to be transmitted.2 Advices just received from the other side show also that the censors have forbidden this company to make any inquiries respecting the delivery of messages, insisting that such inquiries should be made in the form of private messages to be paid for by the senders and addressed to their correspondents, upon the theory presumably that inquiries made by the company might develop the fact that in certain cases the messages have been suppressed by the censors, but this fact would, of course, be equally developed by the paid inquiries referred to.

It may seem illogical for the cable companies which would benefit from this regulation appealing therefrom, but so far as this company is concerned, we do not wish to be put in the position of appearing to take advantage of the situation in order to mulct the public.

We have, of course, made our own appeal to the British authorities, through our representatives abroad, but without success. It is hoped, however, that if our Government will interest itself in the matter, some reasonable modification of the present regulations may be effected.

I would be glad to be advised of the Department’s action.

Very respectfully,

H. T. Taft
Manager

1 Communicated to the British Embassy, August 13.

2 See the telegram from Kirby Lumber Company, ante, p. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

The Secretary of State to the Kirby Lumber Company File No. 763.72/154

[Document 795]

The Secretary of State to the Kirby Lumber Company

Department of State,
Washington, September 1, 1914.

Sirs: Referring to this Department’s telegram to you of August 7, 1914, regarding the refusal of code messages for Porto Rico, the Department is informed by the Western Union cable system that arrangements have been made whereby all code and other messages for Porto Rico are now accepted at all of the company’s offices without restriction.1

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

1 On August 14 the Kirby Lumber Company wrote that, while arrangements had already been made with the American companies for sending code messages, the French company continued to refuse them (File No. 763.72/459).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/18

[Document 796]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

The Western Union Telegraph Company has requested the Department to make such representations to the British Government as will admit of a more reasonable attitude with respect to censorship of cable messages by the War Office at London.

The company claims that by reason of unnecessary exactions in the way of full addresses and signatures to every message, no matter how innocent its character, the capacity of the working Atlantic cables has been cut down just 50 per cent on account of the fact that these requirements have served to exactly double the number of words of the average message, which not only reduces the capacity of the cables at a time when the demand upon the cables exceeds their capacity, but also doubles the cost to the public without any possible apparent advantage to the military operations in England.

It is urged by the company that requiring full addresses in cases of well-known firms and full signatures is wholly unnecessary. The company also protests against the action of the British censors forbidding company to make inquiries respecting the delivery of messages. You will attempt to secure modification of reported British restrictions mentioned herein.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841/731/a

[Document 797]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 23, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Department is informed that British censors will not pass the usual service correspondence provided for in international telegraph regulations whereby errors made in transmission are corrected without expense to the public, and require that all such corrections shall be made by private messages exchanged between addressees and senders and paid for. As this restriction apparently possesses no possible military features, but bears solely upon an administrative feature of international cable service and greatly increases cost to cabling public, make representations to British Government looking to removal of present embargo on repetition requests.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731

[Document 798]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, August 27, 1914.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

493. Please inform all foreign missions concerned that British censorship regulations provide that only messages passing between diplomatic missions and the Government at Washington may go in cipher. All others must be open.

Page

1 Communicated to the American embassies and legations concerned, August 28 (File No. 841.731/33a).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/26a

[Document 799]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 2, 1914.

[Telegram]

25. Department’s August 15, 5 p.m. Western Union Telegraph Company again requests Department to endeavor secure still further modification of British censorship regulations with reference to code addresses and signatures. Company represents that since code addresses are merely condensation of plain addresses they can not be used to convey hidden meaning, but simply represent registration made at point of destination to indicate name and address of person for whom message intended. Company further represents that in view of restriction of messages to plain language, which entails great increase in cable charges, it is most important that such increase not be further augmented by inability to avail of usual condensation permitted by code addresses. Company states that other nations do not seem to have attached same importance to address feature and that it understands messages for France and Italy from United States over French cables are being passed with usual code addresses.

You will bring the company’s representations to attention of Foreign Office and endeavor secure modification desired.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/2

[Document 800]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 2, 1914.
[Received 8:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

558. Your telegram of August 23, 8 p.m. The Foreign Office now informs me that there is nothing in the censorship regulations to prevent the correction of errors made in transmission in the usual manner provided for in the international telegraph regulations. If the matter is to be taken up further the telegraph company must give particular instances in which censors are alleged to have refused to pass service messages for such correction.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/6

[Document 801]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 24, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

No. 419]

Sir: With reference to your telegram of August 15, 5 p.m., I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a note I have just received from the Foreign Office touching the censorship of telegraphic messages passing over the Atlantic cables.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

Foreign Office, August 23, 1914.

The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his compliments to the United States Ambassador and has the honour to refer to the memorandum which the United States Embassy were good enough to communicate to this office on the 17th instant, on the subject of certain representations made by the Western Union Telegraph Company to the State Department in respect of the censorship of telegraphic messages passing over the Atlantic cables.

Sir Edward Grey has the honour to point out that, in order to enable the censors to carry out their instructions without unduly delaying the delivery of telegrams, it is essential that they should be able to tell at a glance to whom a message is addressed and from whom it emanates. Subject to this condition being observed, the British censors have not been requiring full addresses or signatures in the case of really well-known firms.

As regards enquiries respecting the delivery of such messages as may have been stopped in the public interest it does not appear to be practicable to remove the prohibition on such enquiries without impairing the usefulness of the censorship.

While therefore they are anxious to inconvenience the company as little as possible, His Majesty’s Government regret that they are unable, for the reasons stated above, to modify the censorship regulations to the extent desired.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/33C

[Document 802]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

66. Represent to British Government the great hardship placed upon American importers by refusal of British Government to pass their cipher messages, and ascertain whether the restrictions would be removed provided copy of the code is deposited with British censor.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/14

[Document 803]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 19, 1914.
[Received 1:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

701. Your telegram 14th.1 Foreign Office regrets delay of telegrams between the Washburn-Crosby Company and their agent at Christiania. Instructions have been given to interfere as little as possible with genuine business telegrams between neutral countries and British Government. Trusts no further inconvenience will be experienced by the company in question.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/22

[Document 804]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 26, 1914.

[Telegram]

210. The Department has received a great many protests from commercial houses and boards of trade and transportation throughout the United States in regard to the suppression by British censors of cable communications to and from neutral countries. This considerably interferes with legitimate foreign commerce between the United States and neutral countries. You may present the matter to the British Foreign Office with the suggestion that the Department deems it very desirable to discontinue suppressing harmless commercial cables. Another great hardship has been that when suppressions have been made the senders of cables have not been informed of non-delivery. This should also be remedied. The Department is awaiting an early reply.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State [Document 805]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 16, 1914.
[Received September 28.]

No. 450]

Sir: Referring to your cablegram of September 3 [2], by which I was instructed to present to the British Foreign Office an appeal on behalf of the Western Union Telegraph Company in reference to the British censorship regulations as to addresses upon cablegrams, I have the honor to enclose here with a copy of a memorandum from His Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, in reply to my memorandum of September 3 bringing his attention to the substance of the above-mentioned cablegram from the Department.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the American Ambassador (Page)

The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his compliments to the United States Ambassador, and, with reference to the Embassy’s memorandum of the 3rd instant on the subject of the British censorship regulations, has the honour to inform his excellency that he has caused enquiries to be made in respect of the points raised by the Western Union Telegraph Company.

The question of code addresses in plain language telegrams is more complicated than at first sight would appear. Although it is true that so long as any individual or firm is only allowed to register one code address, the possibility of abuse is almost eliminated, yet when, as in the United States, there is no limit to the number of code words that may be registered for the same address, this latitude could easily be adapted to the surreptitious conveyance of information.

The matter is, however, engaging the attention of the competent British authorities with a view to the discovery of some safe means of giving the mercantile community the relief desired.

Foreign Office, London , September 15, 1914.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/32A

[Document 806]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1914.

[Telegram]

229. Are full address and signature still necessary on Department’s telegrams to London and beyond?

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/32

[Document 807]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 2, 1914.
[Received 11:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 229 first. No change in censorship regulations.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/34

[Document 808]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 5, 1914.
[Received 4:80 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your cable 26 September. Sir Edward Grey informs me that he has taken up with the chief censor the matter of the censorship of telegrams passing between the United States and neutral countries with the object of avoiding undue interference with such telegrams.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/33

[Document 809]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 6, 1914.

[Telegram]

269. Department has received telegram from American Minister in Peking stating that the colonel commanding China expedition, United States Army, reports that his official telegrams to the commanding general, Philippine Department, have been held by the Hongkong censorship. You will request the Foreign Office to give such orders to the Hongkong authorities as will avoid the repetition of such an occurrence in the future.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/44

[Document 810]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, undated.
[Received October 13, 1914, 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

826. Your telegram September 26. Sir Edward Grey informs me that some time ago instructions were given to discontinue the suppression of commercial telegrams between the United States and neutral countries. He states, however, that cases occur in which telegrams disclose what appears to be an attempt to establish trade with a country at war with Great Britain, but that even in these cases the telegrams are passed for transmission unless it appears that delivery would entail the effecting of some important transaction detrimental to British interests. He adds with regard to the question of notifying the sender of non-delivery of stopped telegrams that it seems clear that to do so in the case of telegrams above referred to would only be to defeat the object of censorship, and Sir Edward Grey hopes that the United States Government will agree with him in thinking that as only such telegrams are being suppressed no hardship is being inflicted upon legitimate trade between the United States and neutral countries.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 811]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 14, 1914.

[Telegram]

313. Your 826. Department is confident that Sir Edward Grey will appreciate the hardship inflicted upon American interests in failing to notify the sender of the non-delivery of stopped telegrams sent in good faith; that is, the sender may proceed with his part of the contract on the supposition that his message has been delivered and thereby incur considerable expense. It would appear to the Department that notification of non-delivery would be more courteous and just. Please take up this matter personally with Sir Edward Grey and endeavor to obtain the desired relief.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/52

[Document 812]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 23, 1914.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

892. Your telegram October 6. Sir Edward Grey informs me that inquiries develop the fact that two code telegrams dated August 4 and 22, signed respectively Tilson and Rowell, and addressed to a code address in the Philippines were detained at Hongkong. This detention appears to have been due to the fact that it was not contemplated that such messages would pass through hands of British censors since there is a direct American cable from Shanghai to the Philippines. Messages in question were probably sent via Hongkong during a temporary interruption of direct route of which Hongkong censor may have been unaware and there was nothing in the signature or address of the messages to indicate that they were of an official nature. British Government express regret at delay and will do everything possible to facilitate transmission of such messages, and in order to accomplish this suggest that signatures and addresses be given in full to indicate official character.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/54a

[Document 813]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

[Telegram]

405. Please confirm advices cable companies that cable addresses and short signatures may now be used.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/55

[Document 814]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 30, 1914.
[Received 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

945. Your telegram 405, 27th. Foreign Office informs me that private individuals telegraphing to this country are allowed to use registered cable addresses and that signatures may be abbreviated but must indicate the source unmistakably.1

American Ambassador

1 Following the receipt of this telegram, the Department resumed the use of its own abbreviated forms of addresses and signatures.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/56

[Document 815]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 30, 1914.
[Received 4:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

944. Your 313, fourteenth instant. Sir Edward Grey has made further inquiries regarding censoring of commercial cables and informs me that as a general rule the senders are not informed of the stoppage of such messages and that exactly same rules are applied in this respect to British and American senders.

American Ambassador

The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/58

[Document 816]

The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Berne, November 5, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The director of the Swiss People’s Bank claims that all his recent telegrams to New York banks relating to money transfers have not reached their destination. He stated also that telegrams from Swiss banks to the United States ordering grain to be furnished Swiss Government had been stopped somewhere and never reached the United States. It is believed that England and France are censoring such telegrams. Swiss bankers protest as this interferes materially with the business between Switzerland and America.

Stovall

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) [Document 817]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Stovall)

Department of State,
Washington, November 6, 1914.

[Telegram]

50. Your November 5, 10 a.m. The Department regrets that it can do nothing in this case, as commercial cables are censored by belligerents and not by American authorities. This seems to be a matter that should be taken up by the Swiss ministers in London and Paris and not by this Government.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/154

[Document 818]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, November 9, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received 3:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Harry S. Cavanaugh, an American citizen representing American Trade Agency, Rome, protests cannot effect cable communication with American firms, that cables regarding important commercial transactions unrelated to contraband articles undelivered. Asks an investigation.

Nelson Page

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page) [Document 819]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

81. Your November 9. The American Ambassador, London, has taken up the question of censorship of cables with the Foreign Office. Sir Edward Grey has promised to facilitate in every manner possible the transmission of commercial messages sent in plain language, and has also agreed that code addresses may be used where they have been registered. Since this arrangement has gone into effect, Department has received practically no complaint. There seems to be no reason why an investigation should be made.

Bryan

The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/64

[Document 820]

The Minister in Switzerland (Stovall) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Berne, November 11, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your No. 50. Swiss President nevertheless asked me to inform you that Swiss Minister at Washington instructed to confer with you for the purpose of making joint representation in London and Paris. Business telegrams between Switzerland and the United States still held up. Banks say impossible to transact financial or commercial negotiations with the United States.

Stovall

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page ) File No. 841.731/63

[Document 821]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain ( Page )

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

523. From Copenhagen, 11th. Danish firms conducting business with American houses protest against English censorship of open commercial cables, which is ruining business between America and Denmark. Please present this matter to Foreign Office with a view to ameliorating the hardships described.

Bryan

The President of the Swiss Confederation to the Swiss Legation in Washington File No. 841.731/264

[Document 822]

The President of the Swiss Confederation to the Swiss Legation in Washington

undated
[Received November 12, 1914.]
[Left with the Secretary of State by the Swiss Minister, November 18, 1914.]

[Telegram—Translation]

Since beginning of war and especially lately our business world is being heavily damaged on account of English and French censure simply suppressing hundreds of telegrams from Switzerland to North America and vice versa, although being purely commercial communications. Refunding of telegram costs does not take place. Attitude of censure apparently explains itself through general although unfounded presumption that Swiss firms transmit telegrams of German houses. As damage affects America as well as Switzerland, you will propose American Government common steps in London and Bordeaux. Upon our desire Minister Stovall also cables his government. The latter perhaps has received complaints concerning telegram service between America and other neutral countries. As soon as your answer arrives our Ministers in Paris and London will receive instructions.

Hoffman
President, Confederation

The Secretary of State to the Swiss Legation [Document 823]

The Secretary of State to the Swiss Legation

memorandum

Referring to the copy of cable message from the Government of Switzerland, dated November 12, submitted to the Department of State by the Swiss Legation, the Department begs to inform the Legation that it has instructed the American ambassadors at London and Paris to cooperate in every way possible with the Swiss ministers at those capitals in the matter of the censorship of commercial cable messages exchanged between the United States and Switzerland.

Department of State,

Washington, November 20, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/64

[Document 824]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Deparment of State,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

582. In your telegram 826 received by Department October 13,1 you stated that Sir Edward Grey informed you that instructions had been given to discontinue the suppression of commercial telegrams between the United States and neutral countries. He further stated that cases occur in which telegrams disclose what appears to be an attempt to establish trade with a country at war with Great Britain, but that even in these cases the telegrams are passed for transmission unless it appears that delivery would promote some important transaction detrimental to British interests.

The Department calls attention to the fact that there is a daily increase in the number of protests from reliable and substantial business firms in the United States against the manner in which the British Government is now exercising its censorship over strictly commercial telegrams. Besides these protests Department is receiving protests from Danish firms conducting business with American commercial houses, and this Government has also been approached by the Government of Switzerland with a view to presenting a joint protest to the British Government on account of the unreasonable regulations pertaining to the censorship of commercial cable messages between the United States and Switzerland. The Department is informed that the Swiss Minister in London is receiving instructions also to protest against the rigors of the censorship as at present enforced. The Swiss Minister will probably confer with you upon this subject, and you should cooperate with him ill every way possible. The Department prefers, however, to have you present a separate protest with the view of reaching some arrangement by which the present regulations concerning the censorship may be so amended as to lessen the hardships and inconvenience and loss of money which is now entailed upon the commercial houses of the United States. Department is sending instructions to Paris.

Please keep the Department fully informed as to the action of the British Government.

Lansing

1  Ante,p. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 851.731

[Document 825]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Departmentf of State,
Washington, November 20, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

286. The Department wishes to call your attention to the fact that there is a daily increase in the number of protests from reliable and substantial business firms in the United States against the manner in which the censorship over strictly commercial telegrams is now being exercised. This Government has also been approached by the Government of Switzerland with a view to presenting a joint note to the French Government on account of the unreasonable regulations pertaining to the censorship of commercial messages between the United States and Switzerland. Department is informed that the Swiss Minister in Paris is receiving instructions also to protest against the rigors of the censorship as at present enforced. The Swiss Minister will probably confer with you upon this subject and you should cooperate with him in every way possible. Department prefers, however, to have you present a separate protest with the view of reaching some arrangement by which the present regulations concerning the censorship may be so amended as to lessen the hardships and inconvenience and loss of money which is now entailed upon the commercial houses of the United States. Department is sending similar instructions to London.

Please keep the Department fully informed as to the action of the French Government.

Lansing

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 851.731/1

[Document 826]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, November 22, 1914.
[Received 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

299. Your 286, November 20, 6 p.m. I will make representations as directed. I report, however, that French Government yesterday authorized telegrams from France, Algeria, and Tunisia sent over French cable lines to West Africa; United States, etc., to be in the following codes: ABC, 5th edition, Scott’s 10th edition, Western Union, Lieber’s, and code AZ. The use of supplementary codes on words is not allowed. Name of code to be written on the telegram sent must be accompanied by translation into French or English. This translation will be charged five centimes per word except at Paris, Marseilles, and Brest, where the control will be exercised. While telegraph administration will assume no responsibility for delay it will endeavor to expedite despatch of messages [consistent] with necessary examination.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/82

[Document 827]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 25, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

1138. Your 582, November 20. The Swiss Minister and I have [made] joint protest to Sir Edward Grey regarding censor’s suppression private commercial telegrams between the United States and Switzerland and I repeated separate notice regarding suppressed private commercial telegrams between the United States and Denmark. Grey regretted we could not show him particular telegrams of which complaint is made. He implied that each suppressed telegram would indicate the reason for its suppression.

I reminded him of my previous complaints and of the lack of satisfaction, and in a general conversation about censorship I informed him of the American newspaper dissatisfaction and criticism as well as commercial complaints and losses.

He confessed personal ignorance of censorship, explained that censors have been changed and that the war office conduct it. He knows also the widespread British commercial dissatisfaction. The most definite hope I got was from his assertion that he had put our protest in the hands of the Prime Minister and would inform me what Mr. Asquith reports to him.

Unless some understanding has been reached of which I have not been advised, British Government as a war measure has the [power] to suppress what messages it chooses that come over cables here; but criticism from many quarters is becoming so insistent that I hope some relaxing of rules will come. I am convinced that no commercial considerations play any part in their suppression but only the autocratic methods of the War Department.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/155

[Document 828]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, November 27, 1914.
[Received 10:20 p.m.]

My telegram November 9.1 Your telegram No. 81, November 10,1 Continued complaints commercial telegrams to American companies undelivered, including important messages Curtiss Aeroplane Company. Interference apparently outside of Italy. Business much disturbed.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

1  Ante, p. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/157

[Document 829]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 2, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

95. Referring to my cable of November 9,1 your 81, 10th,1 my 78, 17th.2 British Ambassador here confirms the report American Embassy, London, that British Government investigating detention of commercial telegrams, stating has no desire to delay such. Replying to my inquiry whether that detention occurs in Italy, Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs reports complaints of Bank of Naples, Chamber of Commerce, Naples, and private firms, whose purely commercial telegrams are intercepted by English, French censors adding that matter taken up with these Governments. He asks that as matter of common interest we cooperate to have practice stopped.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

1  Ante, p. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/83

[Document 830]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

664. From Madrid Embassy, November 27:

Consul General Barcelona informs me importation of cotton to Spain from the United States seriously interfered with owing to British censorship of cable messages intelligibly worded and in clear English referring to transaction in purchase of cotton. He requests relief on behalf of Spanish importers from censorship interference with such messages.

You may inform Foreign Office.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/92

[Document 831]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 2, 1914.
[Received 7:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1183. Your 582 and my 1138. I have just received the following statement from Sir Edward Grey:

In connection with complaints about both press and commercial cables, I can make no progress without specific instances of difficulties. The censorship ask that the names of the addressees and senders of stopped telegrams should be given in order that inquiry may be made. The chief censor is willing to make most searching inquiry, and if it is found that any message has been stopped without sufficient prima facie grounds, all the necessary steps will be taken to prevent the occurrence of similar cases in future. The chief censor would indeed welcome specific instances, as they would possibly be accompanied by evidence of the innocence of messages that have appearance of being suspicious and this might give a clue to the nature of a whole class of messages. The chief censor is confident that American and Swiss telegrams are not being stopped wantonly, but only when there appears on the face of them good reasons for supposing that they may be improper messages. About 50,000 commercial telegrams between neutral countries pass through the hands of the censorship every day, and I imagine that comparatively few are delayed.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 832]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

678. Your 1138, November 25 and 1183, December 2. The question of complaints concerning press and commercial cables seems one that can be relieved only by amendment of censorship regulations. It appears to Department that the demand for specific instances and names of addressees and senders of stopped telegrams would be useless in settling the general question of censorship. As is probably well known by the British censors, it would be almost impossible for Department to obtain any considerable number of instances where names and dates could be given. It appears from British statement that more than 50,000 commercial cables pass through censorship daily and therefore where isolated cases arise it must be because of the arbitrary methods adopted.

To be as specific as possible, however, Department is forwarding a protest received to-day from the Western Union Telegraph Company, which is in part as follows:

It states that, beginning November 20, French Telegraph Cable Company will accept messages for France, Algiers and Tunis, in code, provided the ABC, 5th edition; Scott’s, 10th edition; Lieber’s; Western Union; or AZ codes are used. About the same date it was learned through company’s representative at Havana that the French company had agreed to transmit plain Spanish messages for Spain. Both matters were immediately referred to company’s London officials and were presented view to obtaining the same privileges, and company is now advised that censors have declined its request. This action appears to company to discriminate against American cablers who desire to use American cables instead of those of the French company, which is a foreign concern. In view of this protest, please make further representations to Foreign Office to the end of having censorship restrictions removed as far as possible. This matter becomes more urgent daily, and the Department feels that something should be done immediately to relieve situation.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/91

[Document 833]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

679. Galveston Cotton Exchange and Board of Trade are urging Department to bring to notice British Government that business in cotton and cottonseed products is being hampered and restricted by the suppression of and delay of cables to neutral countries by British censor.

Protests and complaints against censorship of cables increasing. You will therefore bring this matter again to attention Foreign Office and urge that some action be taken as soon as possible to relieve situation.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/102

[Document 834]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 4, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received December 5, 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

995. Commenting on necessity for untrammeled telegraphic communication between the United States and Germany for cotton matters, the Foreign Office states that it appears from reliable sources that cablegrams sent even from neutral countries via commercial line and Western Union to New Orleans and Memphis containing references to cotton such as giving or confirming orders or repetition unanswered cable messages have not been answered. It is therefore assumed by interested parties that England has censored such messages so as to endeavor to render illusory her agreement to permit cotton to come as non-contraband to any European countries. It is urged that the American Government take steps to secure unhampered transmission of cotton messages.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/97

[Document 835]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

688. Your 1192.1 Galveston Cotton Exchange requests immediate assistance in following instance.

Received a cable 11.30 night December 3 dated Amsterdam, signed Basler, numbered by sender as 15, referring to two cables numbers 12 and 13. These cables not received.

Please bring this as specific instance to attention of British authorities.

Bryan

1 Not Printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 851.731/3

[Document 836]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, December 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

356. Please bring attention French Foreign Office to following from American Ambassador Rome:

Receiving complaints commercial and official telegrams being delayed or intercepted by French, among them several from Consul General Genoa and one to Commander Jason about coaling. Italians making similar complaints.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/101

[Document 837]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, undated.
[Received December 7, 1914, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 664, December 2, 678, December 3, and 679, December 3, presented and in the discussion Sir Edward Grey promised to arrange an early conference between him and chief censor and me. He informed me that certain telegrams were stopped because an unnatural number and arrangement of Christian names in them suggested that they concealed a cipher. I shall immediately take up your telegram just come citing welcome specific cablegrams.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 851.731/6

[Document 838]

The Ambassador in Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 10, 1914.
[Received 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to my cable No. 97, December 5.1 Continued complaints have been made of delays and suppression of important commercial cables. Just received from Cavanaugh complaint about failure to get through cable sent at suggestion, of Royal Servian Commission asking quotation from leading business interests New York on supplies amounting to approximately $5,000,000.

Also of another cable signed by American Vice Consul, Rome, sent to Hager Meyer [Hagermeyer?] and Company, New York, at suggestion of Foreign Department Bank of Italy, December 4, asking quotation 10,000 tons wheat; success in obtaining quotation not later than December 10 to be followed by other tenders for foodstuffs and fabrics amounting to approximately $4,000,000. Unless reply received to-day, these proposals will be withdrawn.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 841.731/116

[Document 839]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

361. Please bring attention Foreign Office that telegrams addressed Milan and other points in Italy, via French cable, have been censored and not delivered. Department has received numerous protests from cotton merchants and feels something should be done by French Government immediately to relieve situation.

Bryan

The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/131

[Document 840]

The Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 11, 1914.

Sir: A degree of certainty in the treatment of cable messages sent abroad by American business men is of immediate importance to members of this chamber and to all business men who are endeavoring to maintain a normal course of business with regular customers in neutral countries.

Although difficulties of American business men are now somewhat mitigated by the action of England in permitting the use of several codes, very great embarrassment continues for the reason that when a message is interrupted by the British censorship neither the sender nor the addressee is afforded any opportunity to explain ambiguous terms, and in fact no notice whatever of the interruption is given.

We have before us copies of uncoded messages, in English and in French, addressed to firms in London, Sweden, Greece, Norway, Denmark, Italy, and Holland, which we are informed are now known to have been undelivered, although the American senders were not given information of any kind concerning the treatment these messages received.

Changes which have been made in the personnel of the staff enforcing the censorship on cablegrams may indicate some dissatisfaction on the part of British authorities themselves over the manner in which the censorship has been exercised. Nevertheless, so far as we can inform ourselves, we can learn of no definite arrangement for such regulation of the censorship as will permit American business men, endeavoring to carry on ordinary business negotiations with firms in neutral countries, to have reasonable knowledge about the disposal of their cable messages.

Under these circumstances we venture to suggest that the State Department, if consistent in other ways with the public interest, take up with the British Government some such proposal as that if the censors incline to interrupt a message proceeding from an American firm to a business house in a neutral country the censors afford the American business house in question an opportunity to make explanation, at their own cost for cabling, of ambiguous or suspicious terms, and that if a message is interrupted immediate notice by cable be sent to the sender or the addressee, as will better suit the purposes of the censorship, conveying only such insignificant information as will permit identification of the message which has been interrupted.

Very respectfully yours,

Elliot H. Goodwin
Secretary

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/109

[Document 841]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

[Telegram]

739. New Orleans Cotton Exchange has received numerous complaints against action British and French censors in holding up cablegrams to and from United States regarding purchase and sale cotton. Complaints deal chiefly with cablegrams between United States, Italy, Spain and state at present no cable codes allowed to neutral countries and cables are charged in full by cable companies, delivered or not delivered. Great trouble and confusion arises when one of a series of cables is missing and means endless expense in sending various cables trying to get one of them to destination explaining all that has been done in the past.

Exchange earnestly recommends that permission be granted for the use of Meyer’s or Shepperson’s cotton codes, Liverpool Cotton Gazette of November 21. Exchange States that action: of British and French censors is having a disastrous influence on financial conditions in cotton States of South. Despatch follows.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/130

[Document 842]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 11, 1914.
[Received December 12, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1245. I have had a long conference with Sir Edward Grey and the head censor of commercial despatches and the head censor of press despatches. They strongly protest that they do not aim to impede neutral commerce.

I replied, “If you do impede it, what difference does it make what your aim is?”

They disclaimed any knowledge of [interference alleged] in your 664, December 2,1 and they thought that this must be the work of the Spanish censor. Not all telegrams to and from Europe come through London.

Your 678, December 3.2 They are making arrangements to put into effect about January 1 the same codes as are allowed by the French Cable Company. They say that Western Union’s information that the French company transmits plain Spanish messages for Spain is incorrect. They deny the alleged discrimination.

Your 679, December 3.1 I insisted that such a commercial body as the Galveston Cotton Exchange surely would not send improperly concealed telegrams. They granted this but declared that they had no memory of stopping telegrams from any such body. They could not find without endless labor the cables referred to in your 688, December 5, unless they knew the telegraphic route they come by; their files are kept by routes. Any specific complaint made giving date, places, sender’s and receiver’s names and telegraphic route would be promptly and gladly taken up.

I insisted that a daily list senders, dates, places, and addresses of all stopped telegrams to or from the United States should be sent to me. They promise to comply unless their [suspicions?] forbid. In fact I asked them if they would send me all stopped American telegrams. They replied that this would be illegal.

Please request future complainants to give data they request.

They confess there was ground for press complaints which they claim is now removed.

They say that certain German banks and institutions in the. United States have devised most ingenious codes which they use in most innocent looking telegrams.

I think the chief trouble is they have not [learned the] job.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

2  Ante, p. 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]

1  Ante, p. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

The Ambassador In Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State [Document 843]

The Ambassador In Italy (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rome, December 14, 1914, 9 p.m.

[Telegram]

114. Cannot assurances be obtained from England and France that purely commercial cables to America will not be held up? Italy has asked our aid regarding this matter. Complaints are made from a good source. American trade greatly suffering.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page) File No. 841.731/123

[Document 844]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

116. Members New Orleans Cotton Exchange complain non-delivery commercial cable messages sent correspondents in Italy. Messages via French cable traced by cable company to point where delivered to Italian lines. Thereafter trace lost.

Investigate. If Italian censors detain such messages, represent Foreign Office great injury done neutral commerce thereby, expressing hope Italian Government will arrange to allow all commercial messages of neutral nature from United States to pass over its lines.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/157a

[Document 845]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

763. We are still receiving numerous protests against the action of censors in holding up business cables, also additional complaints about ships detained. With a view to hastening action I have brought to the attention of the Ambassador here the fact that the business men interested in the cables and shipping are presenting their protests to senators and members of Congress. We learn from other neutrals also that the burdens borne by the nations not at war are being more and more felt. Please bring the matter urgently to the attention of the Foreign Office with a view to reducing to a minimum interference with communication and shipping. Cable company should be required to notify sender immediately if transmission is refused giving objections so that corrections may be made.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/142

[Document 846]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 16, 1914.

[Telegram]

771. Department has received following telegram through Senator John Sharp Williams, which you will bring attention Foreign Office:

Sold cotton to agent Milan to be shipped Genoa. Cotton is now on board ship New Orleans and we need advice from Milan giving reimbursement. We cabled Philippo Ferrario at Milan 45-word message on December 4, also 48-word message on 5th, 38-word message on the 7th with a paid service for report of delivery. We have had no answer to these messages but service from Milan saying confirmation of delivery inaccessible. Our message is purely commercial and our cotton has sailed and we are losing interest on about $30,000 already a week and no prospect of getting necessary information. Threefoot Brothers And Company, Meridian, Mississippi.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/140

[Document 847]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 17, 1914.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 614, November 24, censorship of commercial cables.1 British Government informs me that arrangements are being made to allow the use of Meyer’s Atlantic cotton code, 39th edition, in foreign telegrams and that a public announcement on the subject will be made as soon as the date of the admission of the code is settled. It is not at present practicable to allow the use of more than one cotton code and British Government are informed that the 39th edition of Meyer’s code is the one most generally used.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/139

[Document 848]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 17, 1914.
[Received December 18, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your 771, December 16, and 773, December 16,1 and my 1245, December 11. In that conference I asked the censor, as I had previously asked Sir Edward Grey, if he would not inform sender when his telegram was stopped. He replied that this would prevent him from finding out whether a suspected man was working a concealed cable and defeat the whole purpose of the censorship. I asked him next if he would not show me the stopped cablegrams; he replied that that would be illegal. I asked next if he would not inform me of the stopped telegrams; this he has not promised to do. As I receive this I will make the best use of it possible to straighten out difficulties. As previously reported I have taken the subject up also with the Danish and Swiss ministers and Italian and Spanish ambassadors. The Swiss Minister and I [at] once made joint complaint.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/158

[Document 849]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 18, 1914.
[Received 9:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1291. Your telegram 369, November 20.1 I have just received the following memorandum from the British Government showing the present regulations regarding the use of codes in foreign telegrams. You will notice that Bentley’s complete phrase code is included in this list, which I presume is the code which Mr. E. P. Thomas, president of the United States Steel Products Company, wishes to have added to the list of codes: (1) The use of code will be permitted in telegrams passing between the United Kingdom on the one hand and countries outside the European telegraph system on the other, with the following exceptions: Abyssinia, Annam, Argentine Republic, Brazil, British Honduras, British New Guinea, Cochin China, Comoro Islands, Dutch East Indies, French Somali Coast and Italian possessions in East Africa, Falkland Islands, Flinders Islands, French India, Guinea (Dutch and French), Hedjaz, Liberia, Madagascar, New Caledonia, Paraguay, Pulo Condore, Réunion, St. Pierre and Miquelon, Tongking, Uruguay, Yemen. The following places in West Africa, namely: French possessions, Angola and Fernando Po, and the following islands in the West Indies, namely: Aruba, Bonaire, Guadeloupe, Les Saintes, Marie-Galante, Martinique, St. Croix, St. Thomas and Tobago.

(2) The following codes selected in consultation with the board of trade are authorized: ABC, 5th edition; Bentley’s complete phrase code, not including the separate mining and oil supplements; Broomhall’s imperial combination code, not including the special rubber edition; Lieber’s code; Meyer’s Atlantic cotton code, 39th edition; Scott’s code, 10th edition; Western Union code.

(3) Messages in private code or in any unrecognized code are stopped before reaching the censors.

(4) Neither private supplements nor the numerical equivalents of the phrases in published codes are admissible. It should be especially remembered that groups or series of numbers and similar expressions (e. g., prices of stocks) are not necessarily admissible because they appear in code, if the decode would not have passed the censors; neither will the coded messages be passed.

(5) All messages in code are decoded under arrangements made by the Post Office for submission to the censors. Every effort is made to avoid delay in this operation. It tends however to expedite the transmission of telegrams if persons handing in coded telegrams deposit at the same time translations of the messages.

(6) In all cases the name of the code used must be indicated on the form.

(7) No charge is made for the transmission of the name of the code but a fee of sixpence is charged for each outward telegram in code.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/162

[Document 850]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 21, 1914, 9 p.m.
[Received 8:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1309. According to an understanding the chief censor has now begun to send me confidentially a daily report of stopped telegrams. He asks me not to make this known to any other Government. His first report is that during the twenty-four hours ending December 20, 6 p.m., no telegram to the United States was stopped.

Your despatches about previously stopped messages are all under investigation and inquiry, which I am doing my best to hurry.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/151

[Document 851]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

[Telegram]

804. Governor General Philippines informs War Department Chamber of Commerce Manila report business firms suffering serious loss due delay transmission purely commercial cablegrams, by censorship. In another message Governor General states Compañia General Tabacos Filipinos complains loss cablegrams exchanged with head office Barcelona. Company asks permission be obtained for transmission purely business messages in English signed Tabacalera Company via London.

Urgently represent to Foreign Office. Inform Department result.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.731/162

[Document 852]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

[Telegram]

808. Your 1309. Department glad to learn of your understanding with chief censor, and hopes that there will be good results from it. There is still much complaint of stopped telegrams from the United States; censor’s report refers only to messages to this country.

Inasmuch as there are also complaints against action of French censors, Department wishes to teach understanding with France, and therefore hopes that the chief censor will not object to our mentioning in Paris the arrangements with him in order that a similar agreement may be reached between the American Embassy in Paris and the French censors; or the British Government might take the matter up with the French Government.

W. J. Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.781/165

[Document 853]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 22, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1318. The censor informs me that on December 21 no cables to the United States were stopped but that two from the United States were stopped because they said that a British ship had been sunk which was untrue.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/169

[Document 854]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 23, 1914.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1330. Your 808, December 22. A confidential mention to French censor of English censor’s reports to me will cause no trouble British Government and French Ambassador here have both shown an indisposition to British Government’s taking up subjects with French Government for a third Government. They prefer regular method of the third Government’s acting through its regular channels.

Your 814, December 22,1 and 688, December 5.2 Since censor’s files are kept by telegraphic routes, he informs me he cannot find telegram unless route is given.

Censor stopped yesterday three cables to New York. One alleged a damage to British destroyer and the others stated a rumor that a German cruiser has been sunk off Scotland.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/170

[Document 855]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

PRO MEMORIA

The question of the stoppage and detention of commercial telegrams between the United States and Europe has been brought before the British Government by the United States Ambassador.

About 50,000 commercial telegrams a day pass through the commercial cables censorship. Of these a small number have been delayed or stopped owing to the fact that there has been reason to suspect that political and military news has been conveyed to belligerent countries by means of concealed codes.

The following arrangement has been communicated to the United States Ambassador:

Whenever the date of the despatch and addresses of sender and destined receiver are given, the censor will inform the United States Ambassador in London whether the cable has been stopped and the reason for stopping it.

It is, however, to be observed that not all cables between Europe and the United States pass through the British censor.

Cecil Spring Rice

British Embassy,
Washington, December 21, 1914.
[Received December 24]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.731/195

[Document 856]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, January 4, 1915.
[Received 3:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1394. Your 804, December 22. British Government replies that telegrams from the Philippine Islands to the United States do not normally travel over British lines, and that unless particulars are furnished of the telegrams referred to it is not possible to make any effective inquiry into the matter. With regard to request of Compañia General de Tabacos Filipinos for permission to use a code word in signing telegrams exchanged with head office at Barcelona, Grey informs me that he has consulted; with the departments concerned and that the British Government cannot see their way to granting the desired privilege in view of the question of principle involved.

American Ambassador

Censorship of the mails by belligerent governments: ordinary mailCensorship of the mails by belligerent governments: ordinary mail

[857] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Washington, August 7, 1914.

File No. 811.712/17

[858] The Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914.

[859] The Postmaster General (Burleson) to the Secretary of State

Office Of The Postmaster General, Washington, August 14, 1914.

File No. 811.712/18

[860] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 21, 1914.

File No. 841.711/196

[861] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, September 25, 1914.

[862] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Acting Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, September 28, 1914. [Received September 30, 1914.]

File No. 841.711/201

[863] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

October 4, 1914. [Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, October 5, 1914.]

File No. 811.712/27

[864] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 12, 1914. [Received 3:45 p.m.]

File No. 841.711/200

[865] The Secretary of State to the Editor of “The Fatherland” (George S. Viereck)

Department of State, Washington, December 5, 1914.

File No. 841.711/198

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.712/17

[Document 857]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary of State: I beg to call your earnest attention to the great inconvenience, nay, heavy losses and trouble, resulting from the fact that, owing to the war, no cabling nor direct mail shipping is now possible between the United States on the one side and Austria-Hungary and Germany on the other. The mail addressed to these countries, if given to English liners, remains in England and never reaches its destination. At the same time all American citizens left in Germany and my country are unable to communicate with their relations or friends here even by letter. You know yourself what deplorable hardship follows from this predicament.

Therefore, I believe that it is only fair that all letters going to Germany and Austria-Hungary and addressed “via Rotterdam” ought to be intrusted to the Dutch liners, now that Holland neutrality is officially proclaimed.

Trusting that the postmaster will at once give such instructions, I remain [etc.]

C. Dumba

The Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) [Document 858]

The Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to your recent note relative to the despatch of mail from the United States intended for Austria-Hungary, I beg to say that the Postmaster General has heretofore given orders that all mail going to your country and Germany addressed via Rotterdam is to be despatched by Dutch liners, unless it can be more expeditiously sent by other steamers and routes. The Postmaster General informs the Department that he has taken every measure to see that mail originating in the United States for all countries be despatched by the steamship line which will most expeditiously deliver the mail at its destination. He also informs the Department that yesterday afternoon there was no foreign mail originating in this country left on hand in New York, as it had all been despatched.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Postmaster General (Burleson) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.712/18

[Document 859]

The Postmaster General (Burleson) to the Secretary of State

Office Of The Postmaster General,
Washington, August 14, 1914.

Sir: With reference to your personal inquiry you are informed that since the breaking out of the war in Europe the mails for the various European countries have been going forward at every opportunity and by the most expeditious steamers and routes available. Mails for all countries, including Germany and Austria-Hungary, are being despatched three or four times a week. After the despatches have been made by the steamers sailing from New York to-morrow no mail for any European country will be left on hand at New York.

The mails for the different countries are forwarded by the routes which will not require them to pass through intervening countries with which the countries of destination of the mails are at war. Letters and other articles contained in said mails should reach the addressees in due course.

Respectfully,

A. S. Burleson

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.711/196

[Document 860]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

162. Investigate and report on press reports that United States mail on S. S. Noordam has been examined by British and either seized or held up.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 861]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

1 Department of State,
Washington, September 25, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The Department has received several communications from American citizens claiming that letters addressed by them to relatives or friends in Germany have not reached their destination. In a letter dated September 18 2 Mr. George S. Viereck advises the Department that he sends letters by practically every steamer to Europe and that no letter of his which has been forwarded since the 29th of July has been received in Germany. He states that the letters in question were written to various people but that most of them were addressed to his father and mother, who are American citizens, Mr. and Mrs. Louis Viereck, Südwestkorso 8, Friedenau, Berlin.

I am bringing this matter informally and unofficially to your attention in the hope that you may be able to suggest some course which would tend to eliminate complaints of this character in future. I am writing also to the French Ambassador on this same subject.

Sincerely yours,

Robert Lansing

1 The same to the French Ambassador.

2 Not printed.

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 841.711/201

[Document 862]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Acting Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, September 28, 1914.
[Received September 30, 1914.]

My dear Mr. Counsellor: I am sorry to hear that Mr. George S. Viereck’s letters have not been received in Germany, but I do not see in what way I can usefully interfere in order to secure for him a better postal service in the present circumstances.

All postal communication is, of course, suppressed between belligerent countries. If Mr. Viereck sends his letters by way of England or of France, they are sure not to reach Germany any more than the letters of any Englishman or any Frenchman. His only chance, as I take it, is for him to use neutral ships, such as the Dutch ones or any other.

Believe me [etc.]

Jusserand

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 811.712/27

[Document 863]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

October 4, 1914.
[Left at the Department of State by the British Ambassador, October 5, 1914.]

[Telegram]

No mails whatever have reached this country from United States for Germany since August 8. Mail received on that date was returned as undeliverable, postal communication between Great Britain and Germany having been suspended.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711/200

[Document 864]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 12, 1914.
[Received 3:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

821. Your telegram 162, September 21. Sir Edward Grey now informs me after investigation that the United States mail on board S. S. Noordam was not interfered with by British officials. He asks me to say that if the report of interference with it has arisen from the fact that any of the letters in question were found to be opened when they reached their destination, he would be glad if a specimen of such envelopes could be submitted for further investigation.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Editor of “The Fatherland” (George S. Viereck) File No. 841.711/198

[Document 865]

The Secretary of State to the Editor of “The Fatherland” (George S. Viereck)

Department of State,
Washington, December 5, 1914.

Sir: Referring to your letters of September 10 and 18 last, and the Department’s replies thereto,1 with reference to the censorship of mail from the United States destined to points in Germany, by the British authorities, the Department has delayed communicating with you further in hope of having more definite information to give you. It is now understood that mail sent on neutral vessels, unsealed, will not be held up and should reach its destination safely. Mail sent to Germany via England or France, however, is very liable to delay and possible confiscation.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

1 None printed.

Censorship of the mails by belligerent governments: diplomatic and consular mailCensorship of the mails by belligerent governments: diplomatic and consular mail

[866] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 19, 1914. [Received October 5.]

File No. 841.711/1

[867] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 24, 1914. [Received October 5.]

File No. 841.711

[868] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 20, 1914. [Received 4:35 p.m.]

File No. 841.711/3

[869] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 22, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 841.711/1

[870] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe)

Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1914.

File No. 841.711/3

[871] The Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Rotterdam, undated. [Received October 24, 1914.]

File No. 841.711/6

[872] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe)

Department of State, Washington, October 29, 1914.

[873] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 30, 1914. [Received 2:48 p.m.]

File No. 841.711/9

[874] The Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) to the Secretary of State

Department of State, Washington, November 1, 1914. [Received 11:25 a.m.]

File No. 841.711/10

[875] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe)

Department of State, Washington, November 2, 1914.

[876] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 10, 1914.

File No. 867.711

[877] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 12, 1914. [Received November 16, 9:30 a.m.]

File No. 867.711/2

[878] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 13, 1914. [Received November 15, 6 p.m.]

File No. 862.711/1

[879] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, November 14, 1914. [Received November 15, 5 p.m.]

File No. 863.711

[880] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, November 17, 1914.

File No. 862.711/1

[881] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 124.0665/a

[882] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, December 8, 1914. [Received December 9, 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 124.0665/1

[883] The Ambassador in Russia (Marye) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, December 11, 1914. [Received 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 124.0665/2

[884] The Minister in Servia (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Nish, December 24, 1914. [Received 8:50 p.m.]

File No. 124.0665/9

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711/1

[Document 866]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 19, 1914.
[Received October 5.]

No. 467]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith an inquiry, with accompanying enclosures, received from the American Legation at The Hague, with reference to the regulations and authorization under which the British censor is opening mail of the American Consular Service.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

American Legation,
The Hague , September 4, 1914.

The American Legation at The Hague requests information in regard to regulations and authorization under which the British officials are opening mail of the American Consular Service, some of which, as is evident from the enclosed envelopes,2 is under official seal.

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711

[Document 867]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 24, 1914.
[Received October 5.]

No. 470]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of a communication dated September 18 from the American Minister at The Hague, together with the accompanying enclosures, relating to the British censorship of the American consular mail between Great Britain and Holland. A despatch on the same subject was addressed to you on the 19th instant.

This complaint has not been brought to the attention of the British Government by this Embassy, and is submitted to the Department for instructions in connection with the following considerations: (1) Some weeks ago, the exact date was not recorded, a sealed letter was received from Germany for forwarding to an address which appeared to be Seymour Nebenthal (?), Hull, England. Under the rule adopted that sealed communications from Germany could not be forwarded, this letter was opened and was found to contain a direction in German indicating a way by which communications could be sent between Great Britain and Germany through the United States consular mail, in order to avoid British censorship. The plan, as described, was to enclose a series of inner enclosures in an envelope addressed to the American Consul at Hull, who on opening it would find an enclosure to be forwarded by him to the American Consul at Copenhagen, who in turn would find an enclosure addressed to an American consul in Germany, by whom the innermost enclosure would be forwarded to its final destination. This communication was sent to the office of the censor.

(2) On August 23, the following telegram was received from the American Minister at The Hague: Please publish immediately in English papers that Germany requires all letters to private persons via Hague Legation to be written in German and unsealed.

This request was not complied with because it seemed to suggest that letters sent by persons in England to persons in Germany could have safe passage through the American Legation to the German Legation at The Hague; and unless this was strictly limited to correspondence between American citizens, it would have been regarded as inconsistent with our neutrality rights and obligations.

Moreover, on inquiry, I ascertained that it would not be agreeable to the British Government to have this Embassy use government pouches or other means of despatch for private correspondence with any enemy of Great Britain.

Subsequently, and without consulting me, the following announcement was inserted in the American Bulletin, published here daily in the aid of the American relief work:

LETTERS FOR THE CONTINENT

Letters for Germany and Austria which are handed to travelers going to either of these countries, or which are sent from England under cover to our consular representatives for forwarding to destination, must be written in German and left unsealed. It is hardly necessary to add that it is useless to put English stamps on the envelopes, and that any and all reference to the war and to political matters in general should be most carefully avoided.

Letters conforming to the above conditions may be posted, under cover, at sender’s risk, to the American Legation at The Hague, Holland, for forwarding both to Germany and Austria.

This announcement has since been discontinued at my request, but undoubtedly the suggestion therein that letters for Germany and Austria could be sent from England “under cover to our consular representatives for forwarding to destination” came to the attention of the censor. It is only fair to state that this announcement was intended to apply only to communications between American citizens.

The British Government does not countenance the forwarding of mail through this Embassy, even to British subjects in Germany, as appears from the following official announcement issued by the Foreign Office:

The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs desires to inform the public that letters addressed to British subjects in Germany cannot be sent by post through the medium of the Foreign Office or through the United States Embassy in London. Postal or telegraphic communication with British subjects in Germany has absolutely ceased.

Under these circumstances, I do not feel called upon to make any representations to the British Government on the action of the censor in opening the American consular mail, unless specifically directed to do so by the Department.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure 1]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

American Legation,
The Hague , September 18, 1914.

My dear Colleague: I regret that I am obliged to ask you to call the attention of the British authorities once more to the practice of opening and censoring communications between officers of the United States as shown by the enclosed envelopes. That this should occur once can be understood, but as the number of official communications which have been opened seems to be multiplying I feel obliged to record the matter.

I remain [etc.]

Henry Van Dyke

[Enclosure 2]

The Consul at Sheffield (Savage) to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

American Consulate,
Sheffield , September 19, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform you that my mail this morning contained an official communication from the American Consul General at Rotterdam, and also an official communication from the Minister at The Hague. Herewith I enclose the envelopes in which these communications came, and I wish to call your attention to the fact that the envelope from the Consulate General at Rotterdam had been opened by the censor, as you will see by the paster attached, and that the other communication, although having nothing on the envelope to indicate its official character, was delivered to me uncensored.

I have [etc.]

John M. Savage

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711/3

[Document 868]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 20, 1914.
[Received 4:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

866. Sir Edward Grey has learned through commercial correspondence passing through censor that arrangements appear to be in progress by which general correspondence with Germany shall pass through American Consulate General at Rotterdam. He asks me to bring this to your notice with a view to adequate steps being taken to prevent the confidence of our consular officers being abused. Despatch follows.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 841.711/1

[Document 869]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 22, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

378. Your despatches No. 467, September 19, and No. 470, September 24. Department is of opinion that correspondence in time of war between diplomatic and consular officers in different countries sent by ordinary mail may be subject to censorship in the same manner as other private letters. But pouches under seal passing between diplomatic missions of the United States by mail or courier ought not in the opinion of this Government to be opened or molested by censors or other officials of foreign governments. The same may be said of any official correspondence under seal between diplomatic or consular officers and the Department of State. Please report any instances of opening mails contrary to these rules.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) File No. 841.711/3

[Document 870]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe)

Department of State,
Washington, October 23, 1914.

[Telegram]

Telegraph fully whether your office is transmitting commercial correspondence to and from Germany or other country or whether arrangements being made to that end. If so explain nature and number of telegrams, whether from Americans or foreigners and authority for transmitting. Answer.

Lansing

The Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711/6

[Document 871]

The Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Rotterdam, undated.
[Received October 24, 1914.]

[Telegram]

Have not knowingly transmitted commercial correspondence between belligerent countries. Positive instructions on subject much desired.

Listoe

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) [Document 872]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe)

Department of State,
Washington, October 29, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your October 24. You should not permit consulate be used as medium for transmission private commercial telegrams or correspondence destined for belligerent countries.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711/9

[Document 873]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, October 30, 1914.
[Received 2:48 p.m.]

[Telegram]

938. Sir Edward Grey informs me that numerous private letters are being forwarded to the British Minister at The Hague by American representatives in Germany through our Legation at The Hague for transmission to the United Kingdom and expresses his opinion that in view of the facilities which now exist for the transmission of letters between enemy countries through neutral states there is no longer any occasion for sending private correspondence through official channels. He therefore requests me to suggest that the Ambassadors at Berlin and Vienna be asked to issue instructions to the consular officers under their supervision no longer to accept letters for forwarding to the United Kingdom.

American Ambassador

1 Repeated to the Ambassadors in Germany and Austria-Hungary, October 81, with direction to “instruct all consular officers as requested” (File No. 841.711/9)

The Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) to the Secretary of State File No. 841.711/10

[Document 874]

The Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) to the Secretary of State

Department of State,
Washington, November 1, 1914.
[Received 11:25 a.m.]

[Telegram]

May commercial correspondence from belligerent countries to America be transmitted?

Listoe

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe) [Document 875]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Rotterdam (Listoe)

Department of State,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your November 1. The consulate should not undertake to forward any commercial correspondence, as such mail should go by ordinary channels.

Lansing

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 867.711

[Document 876]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

15. Following telegram from Legation, Athens.

Messenger from Consul Horton, Smyrna, asks me to telegraph Department that United States official mail under seal refused by Turkish post office who demand that it be posted open for their inspection.

Please enter proper protest to Turkish authorities.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.711/2

[Document 877]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 12, 1914.
[Received November 16, 9:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

22. Your telegram 15, 10th. Have made arrangements with Minister of War that he will forward our correspondence in sealed envelopes to all consuls and will also arrange for consuls to send sealed envelopes to us.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 862.711/1

[Document 878]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 13, 1914.
[Received November 15, 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

837. Present regulations in Germany require consular officers of neutral States to leave unsealed their correspondence to foreign countries, including communications to their Governments. Have called attention of American consular officers in Germany to Department’s pouch service regulations providing that official correspondence may be sent in Embassy pouches.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 863.711

[Document 879]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, November 14, 1914.
[Received November 15, 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

281. Austro-Hungarian Government desires no unofficial correspondence to leave Monarchy without passing censor and request that no letters from private persons be transmitted through diplomatic or consular channels; otherwise difficulties might arise relative to inviolable character of former.

Consul General at Budapest telegraphs protesting against censors opening letters addressed by him to diplomatic and consular officers in other countries. Respectfully urge issuance of instructions to diplomatic and consular officers defining limitations in detail, particularly relation consulates with Embassy, correspondence between diplomatic and consular officers within and without country to which accredited, and the transmission of money and letters.

Tendency now to attempt too much, frequently endangering our relations with authorities. Danger of breach of correct neutrality cannot be overaccentuated. Confident that receipt of such instructions would be welcomed by majority diplomatic and consular officers. Have impressed on those in Austria-Hungary that we are here primarily to further American interests and must avoid giving just grounds for complaint.

Penfield

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 862.711/1

[Document 880]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, November 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

656. Your 837. Your action approved.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) File No. 124.0665/a

[Document 881]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)1

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

[Telegram]

305. This Government is desirous of establishing uniform regulations for transmission of correspondence of American diplomatic and consular officers in belligerent territory.

Inquire of the Austro-Hungarian Government whether it would agree to the following regulations for American diplomatic and consular officers in Austria-Hungary: 1. All correspondence between American diplomatic and consular officers within Austrian territory to be inviolable if under seal of office.

2. No correspondence of private individuals to be forwarded by diplomatic and consular officers under official cover or seal.

3. Official correspondence between American diplomatic officers residing in different countries is not to be opened or molested if under seal of office.

4. Official correspondence under seal of office between the Department of State and American diplomatic and consular officers is not to be opened or molested.

5. Pouches under seal passing between American diplomatic missions by mail or courier not to be opened or molested.

6. Correspondence other than that described in [the] foregoing sent by ordinary mail to be subject to usual censorship.

Similar inquiries being made of other belligerent governments in respect to correspondence of American officers in their dominions.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, Germany, France, Japan, Turkey, and the Minister in Servia (Nos. 620, 709, 310, unnumbered, 71, and 12, respectively); on December 4, to the Ambassador in Russia (No. 91).

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 124.0665/1

[Document 882]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, December 8, 1914.
[Received December 9, 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

334. Your 305, 25th. Austro-Hungarian Government agrees to proposal for inviolability of all diplomatic and consular correspondence on conditions specified. Have instructed consuls.

Penfield

The Ambassador in Russia (Marye) to the Secretary of State File No. 124.0665/2

[Document 883]

The Ambassador in Russia (Marye) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, December 11, 1914.
[Received 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

146. Department’s 91, 4th.1 Foreign Office states exemption from censure or correspondence of diplomatic and consular officers guaranteed by decree of August 2 concerning temporary military censorship, according to which censorship does not apply to letters, telegrams, and despatches of diplomatic and consular officials but [all] such must be presented to postal and telegraph officials clearly marked as belonging to such diplomatic or consular officials.

Marye

1 Not printed.

The Minister in Servia (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State File No. 124.0665/9

[Document 884]

The Minister in Servia (Vopicka) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Nish, December 24, 1914.
[Received 8:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Servian Government just notified me that it agrees to the proposed postal regulations respecting seals submitted by American government.

Vopicka

Part III: Neutral DutiesPart III: Neutral Duties

Contents

Proclamations of neutrality—The President’s appeal to the people of the United StatesProclamations of neutrality—The President’s appeal to the people of the United States

No. 1271]

[885] Proclamation of August 4, 1914, with regard to the war between Austria-Hungary and Servia

August 4, 1914

[886] An appeal by the President of the United States to the citizens of the Republic, requesting their assistance in maintaining a state of neutrality during the present European war; presented in the Senate, August 19, 1914, and ordered to be printed

August 19, 1914

[887] Protocol of an agreement concluded between Honorable Robert Lansing, Acting Secretary of State of the United States, and Don Eusebio A. Morales, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama, signed the tenth day of October, 1914

October 10, 1914

Proclamation of August 4, 1914, with regard to the war between Austria-Hungary and Servia [Document 885]

Proclamation of August 4, 1914, with regard to the war between Austria-Hungary and Servia 1

August 4, 1914

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

A PROCLAMATION

Whereas a state of war unhappily exists between Austria-Hungary and Servia and between Germany and Russia and between Germany and France;

And Whereas the United States is on terms of friendship and amity with the contending powers, and with the persons inhabiting their several dominions;

And Whereas there are citizens of the United States residing within the territories or dominions of each of the said belligerents and carrying on commerce, trade, or other business or pursuits therein; And Whereas there are subjects of each of the said belligerents residing within the territory or jurisdiction of the United States, and carrying on commerce, trade, or other business or pursuits therein;

And Whereas the laws and treaties of the United States, without interfering with the free expression of opinion and sympathy, or with the commercial manufacture or sale of arms or munitions of war, nevertheless impose upon all persons who may be within their territory and jurisdiction the duty of an impartial neutrality during the existence of the contest;

And Whereas it is the duty of a neutral government not to permit or suffer the making of its waters subservient to the purposes of war;

Now, therefore, I, Woodrow Wilson , President of the United States of America, in order to preserve the neutrality of the United States and of its citizens and of persons within its territory and jurisdiction, and to enforce its laws and treaties, and in order that all persons, being warned of the general tenor of the laws and treaties of the United States in this behalf, and of the law of nations, may thus be prevented from any violation of the same, do hereby declare and proclaim that by certain provisions of the act approved on the 4th day of March, A. D. 1909, commonly known as the” Penal Code of the United states,” the following acts are forbidden to be done, under severe penalties, within the territory and jurisdiction of the United States, to wit: 1. Accepting and exercising a commission to serve either of the said belligerents by land or by sea against the other belligerent.

2. Enlisting or entering into the service of either of the said belligerants as a soldier, or as a marine, or seaman on board of any vessel of war, letter of marque, or privateer.

3. Hiring or retaining another person to enlist or enter himself in the service of either of the said belligerents as a soldier, or as a marine, or seaman on board of any vessel of war, letter of marque, or private.

4. Hiring another person to go beyond the limits or jurisdiction of the United States with intent to be enlisted as aforesaid.

5. Hiring another person to go beyond the limits of the United States with intent to be entered into service as aforesaid.

6. Retaining another person t go beyond the limits of the United States with intent to be enlisted as aforesaid.

7. Retaining another person to go beyond the limits of the United States with intent to be entered into service as aforesaid. (But the said act is not to be construed to extend to a citizen or subject of either belligerent who, being transiently within the United States, shall, on board of any vessel of war, which, at the time of its arrival within the United States, was fitted and equipped as such vessel of war, enlist or enter himself or hire or retain another subject or citizen of the same belligerent, who is transiently within the United States, to enlist or enter himself to serve such belligerent on board such vessel of war, if the United States shall then be at peace with such belligerent.)

8. Fitting out and arming, or attempting to fit out and arm, or procuring to be fitted out and armed, or knowingly being concerned in the furnishing, fitting out, or arming of any ship or vessel with intent that such ship or vessel shall be employed in the service of either of the said belligerents.

9. Issuing or delivering a commission within the territory or jurisdiction of the United States for any ship or vessel to the intent that she may be employed as aforesaid.

10. Increasing or augmenting, or procuring to be increased or augmented, or knowingly being concerned in increasing or augmenting, the force of any ship of war, cruiser, or other armed vessel, which at the time of her arrival within the United States was a ship of war, cruiser, or armed vessel in the service of either of the said belligerents, or belonging to the subjects of either, by adding to the number of guns of such vessels, or by changing those on board of her for guns of a larger calibre, or by the addition thereto of any equipment solely applicable to war.

11. Beginning or setting on foot or providing or preparing the means for any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from the territory or jurisdiction of the United States against the territories or dominions of either of the said belligerents.

And I do hereby further declare and proclaim that any frequenting and use of the waters within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States by the armed vessels of a belligerent, whether public ships or privateers, for the purpose of preparing for hostile operations, or as posts of observation upon the ships of war or privateers or merchant vessels of a belligerent lying within or being about to enter the jurisdiction of the United States, must be regarded as unfriendly and offensive, and in violation of that neutrality which it is the determination of this Government to observe; and to the end that the hazard and inconvenience of such apprehended practices may be avoided, I further proclaim and declare that from and after the fifth day of August instant, and during the continuance of the present hostilities between Austria-Hungary and Servia, and Germany and Russia and Germany and France, no ship of war or privateer of any belligerent shall be permitted to make use of any port, harbor, roadstead, or waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United. States from which a vessel of an opposing belligerent (whether the same shall be a ship of war, a privateer, or a merchant ship) shall have previously departed, until after the expiration of at least twenty-four hours from the departure of such last-mentioned vessel beyond the jurisdiction of the United States. If any ship of war or privateer of a belligerent shall, after the time this notification takes effect, enter any port, harbor, roadstead, or waters of the United States, such vessel shall be required to depart and to put to sea within twenty-four hours after her entrance into such port, harbor, roadstead, or waters, except in case of stress of weather or of her requiring provisions or things necessary for the subsistence of her crew, or for repairs; in any of which cases the authorities of the port or of the nearest port (as the case may be) shall require her to put to sea as soon as possible after the expiration of such period of twenty-four hours, without permitting her to take in supplies beyond what may be necessary for her immediate use; and no such vessel which may have been permitted to remain within the waters of the United States for the purpose of repair shall continue within such port, harbor, roadstead, or waters for a longer period than twenty-four hours after her necessary repairs shall have been completed, unless within such twenty-four hours a vessel, whether a ship of war, privateer, or merchant ship of an opposing belligerent, shall have departed therefrom, in which case the time limited for the departure of such ship of war or privateer shall be extended so far as may be necessary to secure an interval of not less than twenty-four hours between such departure and that of any ship of war, privateer, or merchant ship of an opposing belligerent which may have previously quit the same port, harbor, roadstead, or waters. No ship of war or privateer of a belligerent shall be detained in any port, harbor, roadstead, or waters of the United States more than twenty-four hours, by reason of the successive departures from such port, harbor, roadstead, or waters of more than one vessel of an opposing belligerent. But if there be several vessels of opposing belligerents in the same port, harbor, roadstead, or waters, the order of their departure therefrom shall be so arranged as to afford the opportunity of leaving alternately to the vessels of the opposing belligerents, and to cause the least detention consistent with the objects of this proclamation. No ship of war or privateer of a belligerent shall be permitted while in any port, harbor, roadstead, or waters within the jurisdiction of the United States, to take in any supplies except provisions and such other things as may be requisite for the subsistence of her crew, and except so much coal only as may be sufficient to carry such vessel, if without any sail power, to the nearest port of her own country; or in case the vessel is rigged to go under sail, and may also be propelled by steam power, then with half the quantity of coal which she would be entitled to receive, if dependent upon steam alone, and no coal shall be again supplied to any such ship of war or privateer in the same or any other port, harbor, roadstead, or waters of the United States, without special permission, until after the expiration of three months from the time when such coal may have been last supplied to her within the waters of the United States, unless such ship of war or privateer shall, since last thus supplied, have entered a port of the government to which she belongs.

And I do further declare and proclaim that the statutes and the treaties of the United States and the law of nations alike require that no person, within the territory and jurisdiction of the United States, shall take part, directly or indirectly, in the said wars, but shall remain at peace with all of the said belligerents, and shall maintain a strict and impartial neutrality.

And I do hereby enjoin all citizens of the United States, and all persons residing or being within the territory or jurisdiction of the United States, to observe the laws thereof, and to commit no act contrary to the provisions of the said statutes or treaties or in violation of the law of nations in that behalf.

And I do hereby warn all citizens of the United States, and all persons residing or being within its territory or jurisdiction that, while the free and full expression of sympathies in public and private is not restricted by the laws of the. United States military forces in aid of a belligerent cannot lawfully be originated or organized within its jurisdiction; and that, while all persons may lawfully and without restriction by reason of the aforesaid state of war manufacture and sell within the United States arms and munitions of war, and other articles ordinarily known as “contraband of war,” yet they cannot carry such articles upon the high seas for the use or service of a belligerent, nor can they transport soldiers and officers of a belligerent, or attempt to break any blockade which may be lawfully established and maintained during the said wars without incurring the risk of hostile capture and the penalties denounced by the law of nations in that behalf.

And I do hereby give notice that all citizens of the United States and others who may claim the protection of this Government, who may misconduct themselves in the premises, will do so at their peril, and that they can in no wise obtain any protection from the Government of the United States against the consequences of their misconduct.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed. Done at the City of Washington this fourth day of August in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and four-[Seal]teen and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
William Jennings Bryan
Secretary of State

1 The following proclamations of neutrality were issued during the year 1914: August 4 {Austria-Hungary and Servia
Germany and Russia}
Germany and France J No. 1271

“ 5 Germany and Great Britain “ 1272

“ 7 Austria-Hungary and Russia “ 1273

“ 13 Great Britain and Austria-Hungary “ 1274

“ 14 France and Austria-Hungary “ 1275

“ 18 Belgium and Germany “ 1276

“ 24 Japan and Germany “ 1277

“ 27 Japan and Austria-Hungary “ 1278

September 1 Belgium and Austria-Hungary “ 1280

November 6 Great Britain and Turkey “ 1286

The texts are identical, with the exception of the dates and the first sentence of the proclamation in regard to Belgium and Germany, which begins: “Whereas the United States is in fact aware of the existence of a state of war between,” etc. Only the first of the proclamations, therefore, is printed.

An appeal by the President of the United States to the citizens of the Republic, requesting their assistance in maintaining a state of neutrality during the present European war; presented in the Senate, August 19, 1914, and ordered to be printed [Document 886]

An appeal by the President of the United States to the citizens of the Republic, requesting their assistance in maintaining a state of neutrality during the present European war; presented in the Senate, August 19, 1914, and ordered to be printed

August 19, 1914

My Fellow Countrymen: I suppose that every thoughtful man in America has asked himself, during these last troubled weeks, what influence the European war may exert upon the United States, and I take the liberty of addressing a few words to you in order to point out that it is entirely within our own choice what its effects upon us will be and to urge very earnestly upon you the sort of speech and conduct which will best safeguard the nation against distress and disaster.

The effect of the war upon the United States will depend upon what American citizens say and do. Every man who really loves America will act and speak in the true spirit of neutrality, which is the spirit of impartiality and fairness and friendliness to all concerned. The spirit of the nation in this critical matter will be determined largely by what individuals and society and those gathered in public meetings do and say, upon what newspapers and magazines contain, upon what ministers utter in their pulpits, and men proclaim as their opinions on the street.

The people of the United States are drawn from many nations, and chiefly from the nations now at war. It is natural and inevitable that there should be the utmost variety of sympathy and desire among them with regard to the issues and circumstances of the conflict. Some will wish one nation, others another, to succeed in the momentous struggle. It will be easy to excite passion and difficult to allay it. Those responsible for exciting it will assume a heavy responsibility, responsibility for no less a thing than that the people of the United States, whose love of their country and whose loyalty to its Government should unite them as Americans all, bound in honor and affection to think first of her and her interests, may be divided in camps of hostile opinion, hot against each other, involved in the war itself in impulse and opinion if not in action.

Such divisions among us would be fatal to our peace of mind and might seriously stand in the way of the proper performance of our duty as the one great nation at peace, the one people holding itself ready to play a part of impartial mediation and speak the counsels of peace and accommodation, not as a partisan, but as a friend.

I venture, therefore, my fellow countrymen, to speak a solemn word of warning to you against that deepest, most subtle, most essential breach of neutrality which may spring out of partisanship, out of passionately taking sides. The United States must be neutral in fact as well as in name during these days that are to try men’s souls. We must be impartial in thought as well as in action, must put a curb upon our sentiments as well as upon every transaction that might be construed as a preference of one party to the struggle before another.

My thought is of America. I am speaking, I feel sure, the earnest wish and purpose of every thoughtful American that this great country of ours, which is, of course, the first in our thoughts and in our hearts, should show herself in this time of peculiar trial a nation fit beyond others to exhibit the fine poise of undisturbed judgment, the dignity of self-control, the efficiency of dispassionate action; a nation that neither sits in judgment upon others nor is disturbed in her own counsels and which keeps herself fit and free to do what is honest and disinterested and truly serviceable for the peace of the world.

Shall we not resolve to put upon ourselves the restraints which will bring to our people the happiness and the great and lasting influence for peace we covet for them?

Woodrow Wilson

No. 1287]

Proclamation of November 13, 1914: Rules and regulations governing the use of the Panama Canal and neutrality in the Canal Zone

By The President Of The United States Of America

A PROCLAMATION

Whereas the United States is neutral in the present war and whereas the United States exercises sovereignty in the land and waters of the Canal Zone and is authorized by its treaty with Panama of February twenty-six, nineteen hundred and four, to maintain neutrality in the cities of Panama and Colon, and the harbors adjacent to the said cities:

Now, therefore, I, Woodrow Wilson , President of the United States of America, do hereby declare and proclaim the following Rules and Regulations governing the Use of the Panama Canal by Vessels of Belligerents and the Maintenance of Neutrality by the United States in the Canal Zone, which are in addition to the general “Rules and Regulations for the Operation and Navigation of the Panama Canal and Approaches Thereto, including all Waters under its jurisdiction” put into force by Executive Order of July 9, 1914, and I do bring to the attention of all concerned the Protocol of an Agreement between the United States and the Republic of Panama, signed at Washington, October 10, 1914, which protocol is hereunto annexed.

Rule 1. A vessel of war, for the purposes of these rules, is defined as follows: a. public armed vessel, under the command of an officer duly commissioned by the government, whose name appears on the list of officers of the military fleet, and the crew of which are under regular naval discipline, which vessel is qualified by its armament and the character of its personnel to take offensive action against the public or private ships of the enemy.

Rule 2. In order to maintain both the neutrality of the Canal and that of the United States owning and operating it as a government enterprise, the same treatment, except as hereinafter noted, as that given to vessels of war of the belligerents shall be given to every vessel, belligerent or neutral, whether armed or not, that does not fall under the definition of Rule 1, which vessel is employed by a belligerent power as a transport or fleet auxiliary or in any other way for the direct purpose of prosecuting or aiding hostilities, whether by land or sea; but such treatment shall not be given to a vessel fitted up and used exclusively as a hospital ship.

Rule 3. A vessel of war of a belligerent, or a vessel falling under Rule 2 which is commanded by an officer of the military fleet, shall only be permitted to pass through the Canal after her commanding officer has given written assurance to the authorities of the Panama Canal that the rules and regulations will be faithfully observed.

The authorities of the Panama Canal shall take such steps as may be requisite to insure the observance of the rules and regulations by vessels falling under Rule 2 which are not commanded by an officer of the military fleet.

Rule 4. Vessels of war of a belligerent and vessels falling under Rule 2 shall not revictual nor take any stores in the Canal except so far as may be strictly necessary; and the transit of such vessels through the Canal shall be effected with the least possible delay in accordance with the Canal regulations in force, and with only such intermission as may result from the necessities of the service.

Prizes shall be in all respects subject to the same rules as vessels of war of the belligerents.

Rule 5. No vessel of war of a belligerent or vessel falling under Rule 2 shall receive fuel or lubricants while within the territorial waters of the Canal Zone, except on the written authorization of the Canal authorities, specifying the amount of fuel and lubricants which may be received.

Rule 6. Before issuing any authorization for the receipt of fuel and lubricants by any vessel of war of a belligerent or vessel falling under Rule 2, the Canal authorities shall obtain a written declaration, duly signed by the officer commanding such vessel, stating the amount of fuel and lubricants already on board.

Rule 7. Supplies will not be furnished by the Government of the United States, either directly, or indirectly through the intervention of a corporation, or otherwise, to vessels of war of a belligerent or vessels falling under Rule 2. If furnished by private contractors, or if taken from vessels under the control of a belligerent, fuel and lubricants may be taken on board vessels of war of a belligerent or vessels falling under Rule 2 only upon permission of the Canal authorities, and then only in such amounts as will enable them, with the fuel and lubricants already on board, to reach the nearest accessible port, not an enemy port, at which they can obtain supplies necessary for the continuation of the voyage. The amounts of fuel and lubricants so received will be deducted from the amounts otherwise allowed in the ports under the jurisdiction of the United States during any time within a period of three months thereafter. Provisions furnished by contractors may be supplied only upon permission of the Canal authorities, and then only in amount sufficient to bring up their supplies to the peace standard.

Rule 8. No belligerent shall embark or disembark troops, munitions of war, or warlike materials in the Canal, except in case of necessity due to accidental hindrance of the transit. In such cases the Canal authorities shall be the judge of the necessity, and the transit shall be resumed with all possible dispatch.

Rule 9. Vessels of war of a belligerent and vessels falling under Rule 2 shall not remain in the territorial waters of the Canal Zone under the jurisdiction of the United States longer than twenty-four hours at any one time, except in case of distress; and in such case, shall depart as soon as possible; but a vessel of war of one belligerent shall not depart within twenty-four hours from the departure of a vessel of an opposing belligerent. The twenty-four hours of this rule shall be construed to be twenty-four hours in addition to the time necessarily occupied in passing through the Canal.

Rule 10. In the exercise of the exclusive right of the United States to provide for the regulation and management of the Canal, and in order to ensure that the Canal shall be kept free and open on terms of entire equality to vessels of commerce and of war, there shall not be, except by special arrangement, at any one time a greater number of vessels of war of any one nation, including those of the allies of a belligerent nation, than three in either terminal port and its adjacent terminal waters, or than three in transit through the Canal; nor shall the total number of such vessels, at any one time, exceed six in all the territorial waters of the Canal Zone under the jurisdiction of the United States.

Rule 11. When vessels of war or vessels falling under Rule 2, belonging to or employed by opposing belligerents, are present simultaneously in the waters of the Canal Zone, a period of not less than twenty-four hours must elapse between the departure of the vessel belonging to or employed by one belligerent and the departure of the vessel belonging to or employed by his adversary.

The order of departure is determined by order of arrival, unless the vessel which arrived first is so circumstanced that an extension of her stay is permissible. A vessel of war of a belligerent or vessel falling under Rule 2 may not leave the waters of the Canal Zone until twenty-four hours after the departure of a private vessel flying the flag of the adversary.

Rule 12. A vessel of war of a belligerent or vessel falling under Rule 2 which has left the waters of the Canal Zone, whether she has passed through the Canal or not, shall, if she returns within a period of one week after her departure, lose all privileges of precedence in departure from the Canal Zone, or in passage through the Canal, over vessels flying the flag of her adversaries which may enter those waters after her return and before the expiration of one week subsequent to her previous departure. In any such case the time of departure of a vessel which has so returned shall be fixed by the Canal authorities, who may in so doing consider the wishes of the commander of a public vessel or of the master of a private vessel of the adversary of the returned vessel, which adversary’s vessel is then present within the waters of the Canal Zone.

Rule 13. The repair facilities and docks belonging to the United States and administered by the Canal authorities shall not be used by a vessel of war of a belligerent, or vessels falling under Rule 2, except when necessary in case of actual distress, and then only upon the order of the Canal authorities and only to the degree necessary to render the vessel seaworthy. Any work authorized shall be done with the least possible delay.

Rule 14. The radio installation of any vessel of a belligerent power, public or private, or of any vessel falling under Rule 2, shall be used only in connection with Canal business to the exclusion of all other business while within the waters of the Canal Zone, including the waters of Colon and Panama Harbors.

Rule 15. Aircraft of a belligerent power, public or private, are forbidden to descend or arise within the jurisdiction of the United States at the Canal Zone or to pass through the air spaces above the lands and waters within said jurisdiction,

Rule 16. For the purpose of these rules the Canal Zone includes the cities of Panama and Colon and the harbors adjacent to the said cities.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and [Seal] fourteen and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and thirty-ninth.

Woodrow Wilson

By the President:
W. J. Bryan
Secretary of State

[Annex]

Protocol of an agreement concluded between Honorable Robert Lansing, Acting Secretary of State of the United States, and Don Eusebio A. Morales, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama, signed the tenth day of October, 1914 [Document 887]

Protocol of an agreement concluded between Honorable Robert Lansing, Acting Secretary of State of the United States, and Don Eusebio A. Morales, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama, signed the tenth day of October, 1914

October 10, 1914

The undersigned, the Acting Secretary of State of the United States of America and the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama, in view of the close association of the interests of their respective Governments on the Isthmus of Panama, and to the end that these interests may be conserved and that, when a state of war exists, the neutral obligations of both Governments as neutrals may be maintained, after having conferred on the subject and being duly empowered by their respective Governments, have agreed:

That hospitality extended in the waters of the Republic of Panama to a belligerent vessel of war or a vessel belligerent or neutral, whether armed or not, which is employed by a belligerent power as a transport or fleet auxiliary or in any other way for the direct purpose of prosecuting or aiding hostilities, whether by land or sea, shall serve to deprive such vessel of like hospitality in the Panama Canal Zone for a period of three months, and vice versa.

In testimony whereof, the undersigned have signed and sealed the present protocol in the city of Washington, this tenth day of October, 1914.

Robert Lansing [L. S.]

Eusebio A. Morales [L. S.]

Enlistments in belligerent forces—The problem of reservistsEnlistments in belligerent forces—The problem of reservists

[888] The Acting Secretary of Commerce (Sweet) to the Secretary of State

Department of Commerce, Washington, August 7, 1914. [Received August 8.]

File No. 763.72111/297

[889] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, August 8, 1914. [Received August 11.]

File No. 763.72111/301

[890] The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse)

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1914.

[891] The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 27, 1914. [Received September 23.]

File No. 763.72/938

[892] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1914.

[893] Tice German, Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, New York, September 23, 1914. [Received September 25.]

File No. 763.72111/212

[894] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, September 28, 1914. [Received September 30.]

File No. 763.72111/259

[895] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, October 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/212

[896] The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (Bundy), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Kingston, Jamaica, undated. [Received October 5, 1914, 1 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1047

[897] The Secretary of State to the Vice Consult Kingston Jamaica (Bundy)

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of Commerce (Sweet) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/297

[Document 888]

The Acting Secretary of Commerce 1 (Sweet) to the Secretary of State

Department of Commerce,
Washington, August 7, 1914.
[Received August 8.]

Sir: I enclose herewith for your information a copy of a telegram last night sent to the collector of customs, New York, New York, in regard to clearance of vessels carrying supposed reservists.

Respectfully,

E. F. Sweet

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The Acting Secretary of Commerce (Sweet) to the Collector of Customs New York

Department of Commerce, Washington , August 6, 1914 ,

We think Clearance must be granted when supposed reservists go AS individuals and not as organized military unless there are other grounds for withholding.

E. F. Sweet

1 See the letter of the Acting Secretary of Commerce to the Secretary of State, August 6, 1914, post, p. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], for instructions of August 5 to the collector of customs at New York regarding the clearance of foreign merchant vessels, containing the following directions: It must be clear that she is not to be used for transportation recruits or reserves for a foreign army or navy. . . . If her passengers are nearly all men and practically all of the same nationality, clearance cannot be granted.

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/301

[Document 889]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, August 8, 1914.
[Received August 11.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: I hear that the collector of customs at New York has sent to our Consul General a communication according to which all that could be utilized for the army, either men or supplies,” will be considered as contraband.

If in accord with a decision of the Federal Government, that communication seems to me to can for the most express reservations: 1. The law of nations cannot stand in the way of the citizens of a country at war discharging their most sacred duty. Besides, at the time of the Balkan wars, large numbers of reservists returned to their country by groups without any objection being raised.

2. To forbid the exportation of cereals to the countries now engaged in war would be an unusual extension of neutral obligations, the result of which would weigh likewise on the civilian population of the belligerent countries.

Such a prohibition, based on neutrality, would, on the contrary, be a violation of neutrality, for it would be wholly to the advantage of one belligerent and the disadvantage of the other. Its effect, indeed, would be to deprive the belligerent who should happen to win the mastery of the seas from the benefit of that legitimate superiority.

It is not for me to point out the economic dangers of such a proposition to the state that should order it.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Clausse

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) [Document 890]

The Secretary of State to the French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse)

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914.

No. 1367]

Sir: I have your note of August 8, 1914, in which you state that the French Consul General has received a communication from the collector of customs at New York according to which” all that could be utilized for the army, either men or supplies, will be considered as contraband,” and in which you state that, if that communication is in accord with the decision of the Federal Government, it seems to call for your most express exceptions.

Replying, I beg to say that this situation must have resulted from mistake somewhere, or must have been the result of extra precautions at the beginning of European hostilities to prevent the outfitting of ships for use in war or military expeditions or enterprises from the United States in violation of her neutrality. I hardly think that the collector of customs was acting under instructions, if he made such a declaration as that attributed to him. That declaration is not the decision of the Federal Government, which is neither interested nor inclined in having supplies considered contraband of war on the ground that they could be utilized for the army or military forces of the belligerents. On the contrary, it is and has been the hope of this Department that the governments unhappily at war in Europe will make liberal declarations respecting contraband, to the end that international commerce may suffer the least possible hardships during the existence of hostilities. This Department has advised the trade in this country that cereals, and foodstuffs generally, will constitute contraband of war only when destined to the army or navy, or some department of government of one of the belligerents. This Government will not, of course, seek to unnecessarily restrict the commerce of its citizens with those of the nations at war, or to extend contraband so as to include foodstuffs or supplies, merely on the ground that they are adaptable to the uses of war.

I hand you herewith instructions to the collectors of customs, issued by the Secretary of the Treasury on August 8 [10], 1914,1 and call your attention to their provisions, which, as you will observe, are not in accord with the communication which the Consul General says he has received from the collector of customs at New York.

Replying to the other grounds of your exceptions, no resistance, within the knowledge of this Department, has been offered to reservists in the army of any of the belligerents wishing to leave this country for military service in their native lands, whether such reservists leave singly or in numbers. It is believed that the only restriction upon the departure of citizens of any of the countries of war for service in the army is to be found in the neutrality laws of the United States, embodied in the proclamation of the President, prohibiting the “beginning or setting on foot or providing or preparing the means for any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from the territory or jurisdiction of the United States against the territories or dominions of either of the said belligerents.” What constitutes a military expedition or enterprise either begun or set on foot in this country has been the subject of some judicial determination by the courts of the United States; and, while it is not deemed necessary to point to these decisions at this time, it may be said generally that return from the United States to their native lands by citizens of foreign countries, though to enter military service there, whether their departure is singly or in numbers, is not illegal or in violation of the neutrality of the United States, unless accompanied by other circumstances evidencing the beginning or setting on foot, or providing or preparing the means for a military expedition or enterprise from the territory or jurisdiction of the United States against the territories or dominions of one of the belligerents. It is the purpose of this Government to observe complete neutrality in the war now being waged by European countries; but it is not deemed necessary to adopt means or to apply regulations which are not demanded by the neutrality laws of the United States or the rules of international law.

I am enclosing herewith copy of the proclamation issued by the President to preserve the neutrality of the United States in the present war between Austria-Hungary and Servia, Germany and Russia, and Germany and France, the terms of which are believed to be of plain import and to set forth the attitude assumed by this Government.1

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Post, p. 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958]

1  Ante, p. 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885].

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/938

[Document 891]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Tokyo, August 27, 1914. [Received September 23.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith, as of possible interest to the Department, copies of correspondence passing between this Embassy and the Great Northern and Pacific Mail Steamship. Companies, with regard to the carriage on ships of these companies, of Austrian and German reservists and of possible contraband of war.

I have [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

[Enclosure 1]

The General Agent of the Great Northern Steamship Company (C. F. McWilliams) to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Yokohama , August 12, 1914.

Sir: I enclose a copy of my letter of even date addressed to the president, Nippon Yusen Kaisha, Tokyo, on the subject of our ship, the Minnesota, carrying Austrian reservists from Shanghai to the United States.2

As the Minnesota does not call at Shanghai, these people would be obliged to find their own way from Shanghai to either Nagasaki, Kobe or Yokohama in order to join the Minnesota.

I should like to learn from you how the United States Government as a neutral power would view our action.

I am also just in receipt of a cable from Thomas Cook & Son, asking for the entire accommodation of first, second, and third class on the Minnesota for this particular voyage. It is possible that some of their prospective passengers may be Germans; if so, it presents another feature to be considered vis-à-vis the Japanese in the event of matters becoming more complicated in the Oriental question, when we might place ourselves in danger of being seized for violation of the neutrality law.

My idea would be to let such passengers who may be described as “reservists” find their own way to Japan, when we might be able, with the consent of the Japanese authorities, to take them in the ordinary way booked from Japan to United States points only, not selling them any tickets reading through to Europe.

Awaiting the pleasure of your reply, I have [etc.]

C. F. McWilliams

[Enclosure 2]

The Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) to the General Agent of the Great Northern Steamship Company (C. F. McWilliams)

American Embassy,
Tokyo , August 14, 1914.

Sir: In reply to your communication of August 12 re your ship Minnesota carrying Austrian reservists from Shanghai to the United States, your attention is called to the fact that in international law the carriage of persons in the service of a belligerent is analogous to the carrying of contraband and the penalty for same may be confiscation of the ship.

Hall’s International Law says: “A neutral vessel becomes liable to the penalty appropriate to the carriage of persons in the service of a belligerent. . . when the persons on board are such in number, importance or distinction, and at the same time the circumstances of their reception are such, as to create a reasonable presumption that the owner or his agent intend to aid the belligerent in his war.”

The essence of the offense consists in the intent to help the belligerent, and the degree of the help is immaterial.

With the prior knowledge that you have concerning the matter under consideration, the number of reservists in question, the fact that the entire passenger accommodations are desired, that even certain changes in the ship may be required, would seem to place the act in the category of “unneutral service,” the penalty for which is confiscation.

As to the contention that tickets would be sold only to America, that does not change the status of the action since the United States courts have repeatedly held that it is the destination of the cargo, (persons) that determines and not the destination of the ship.

Your attention is called to the possibility that the United States may refuse to allow a body of belligerent reservists to land in her territory, and the attendant possibility that in such a case your company might be forced to transport these reservists elsewhere.

While the Embassy cannot give you any instructions in the matter, in view of what has been said you are, advised that you must act entirely on your own responsibility.

I am [etc.]

George W. Guthrie

2 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie) [Document 892]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Guthrie)

Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1914.

Sir: Receipt is acknowledged of your despatch of August 27, 1914, enclosing copies of correspondence passing between the Embassy and the Great Northern and Pacific Mail Steamship Companies, with reference to the transportation on ships of those companies of Austrian and German reservists from Japan to the United States. The Department approves your course in this matter.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Tice German, Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/212

[Document 893]

Tice German, Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
New York, September 23, 1914.
[Received September 25.]

My dear Mr. Secretary: I am in possession of thee following facts:

Mr. Riley E. Scott, an ex-Lieutenant of the United States Army, until very recently engaged in instructing the Aviation Corps of the United States Army near San Diego in the practice of dropping bombs from aeroplanes, has offered his services for that purpose to France or her allies.

Mr. Scott expects to arrive in New York within the next few days from California, and to proceed to Europe as soon as may be, for the purpose just described.

The above information was given to me voluntarily by an American metallurgical engineer, Mr. Howard F. Wierum, by whom Mr. Scott was at one time employed. Mr. Wierum personally saw the cable from Mr. Scott offering his services to France, and also the cable reply of the French War Office. This was in London, about August 8. Mr. Wierum is now in New York, and though glad to state under oath all that he knows concerning Mr. Scott’s activities in the past and intentions in the future, yet is very anxious not to be publicly known in the transaction, as Mr. Scott’s backers in Europe are close business associates with Mr. Wierum.

I should greatly appreciate an expression from you as to whether the strict neutrality of the United States Government would permit of its exercising any restraining or warning influence upon Mr. Scott’s plans. We think that at least the shipment of his bomb-dropping apparatus (which he has patented and with which quite remarkable accuracy was obtained during certain international contests held in Paris three years ago) should be prevented, though I understand that his backers in Europe (also Americans—Messrs. Hart O. Berg of Paris and William A. Hall of New York, both resident in London) are in possession of duplicate apparatus.

If, with thorough proof, the hostile activities of Mr. Scott are thus laid before you, I think the nature of the hostility displayed is sufficiently unique and different from an enlistment of a mere ex-United States Army officer to call for a special action by the United States Government.

Believe me [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/259

[Document 894]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State 1

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, September 28, 1914.
[Received September 30.]

[Translation]

No. 17–X]

Excellency: As your excellency will most kindly see from the enclosed item from the Cleveland Plain Dealer’s issue of the 21st instant,2 the honorary Royal Servian Consul General Pupin has issued a call to all the Servian Sokols, in which he invites them to join the Servian Army as volunteers.

It being well known that there are very few Servian subjects in the United States and that the Sokols are almost exclusively composed of Servians from the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, Mr. Pupin’s action constitutes a plain violation of neutrality and is liable to criminal prosecution under the neutrality proclamation issued by the President at the beginning of the present war.

I have therefore the honor most respectfully to ask that your excellency will most kindly take such steps as may be deemed appropriate to prevent Servian volunteers of Austro-Hungarian origin from leaving the territory of the United States and to call Mr. Pupin to account for his recruiting.

Looking forward, with thanks, to your excellency’s favorable answer as to the action taken in the matter, I renew [etc.]

C. Dumba

1 Related correspondence is printed in the section on loans to belligerent governments, post, p. 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111/212

[Document 895]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, October 6, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I have received your letter of the 23d ultimo, calling attention to certain facts relating to Mr. Riley E. Scott, an ex-Lieutenant of the United States Army, who, you state, has offered his services as aviator, familiar with the practice of dropping bombs from aeroplanes, to France or her allies. You state that Mr. Howard F. Wierum “personally saw the cable from Mr. Scott offering his services to France, and also the cable reply of the French War Office,” and suggest that the nature of the case is sufficiently unique and different from an enlistment of a mere ex-United States Army officer to call for special action by this Government. You request, therefore, an expression of opinion as to whether “the strict neutrality” of the United States Government would permit of its exercising any restraining or warning influence upon Mr. Scott’s plans.

Assuming that Mr. Scott is an ex-officer of the United States Army; that he is an expert at bomb-dropping from aircraft and has designed an efficient apparatus therefor; that he has tendered his services to France, cabling from the United States; that the French War Office has accepted his tender; and that he is about to sail for Europe with his apparatus in pursuance of his accepted tender, I beg to advise you that the Department is of the opinion that, while Mr. Scott may be acting contrary to the wishes of the President contained in his address to the American people enjoining neutrality, he is not offending against the neutrality laws of this country or the treaties on that subject between the United States and other powers. The Department understands that the circumstances of Mr. Scott’s case do not constitute an “enlistment or entry” as a soldier or as a marine or seaman in the service of a foreign state, in violation of the neutrality statutes of the United States. In this situation the Government would hardly feel authorized to take any steps on the facts stated to, and understood by, the Department, to prevent the contemplated action of Mr. Scott.

In this relation it may be pointed out that, as under the generally accepted principles of international law citizens or subjects of a neutral nation are not prohibited from entering the military service of a belligerent, it has been a common practice in the past for aliens to engage in foreign military service without compromising the neutrality of their government. For example, many aliens served in the United States Army during the Spanish War of 1898; and the same is true of the American Civil War, the distinguished foreigner, the Comte de Paris, serving in the Union Army. In earlier days, Baron von Steuben and General Lafayette served in the American armies during the War for Independence.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing

The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (Bundy), to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1047

[Document 896]

The Vice Consul at Kingston, Jamaica (Bundy), to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Kingston, Jamaica, undated.
[Received October 5, 1914, 1 p.m.]

[Telegram]

British authorities Jamaica ask boats under American flag carry no Germans or Austrians, either crew or passengers, liable military duty avoiding requirement search.

Bundy

The Secretary of State to the Vice Consult Kingston Jamaica (Bundy) [Document 897]

The Secretary of State to the Vice Consult Kingston Jamaica (Bundy)

Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

Reference Section 2174, Revised Statutes. American vessels are under no duty to refuse to ship belligerent seamen or to transport citizens or subjects of belligerent countries. It is not understood that right to arrest and remove such seamen or passengers on high seas was asserted by British authorities.

Bryan

The transit of reservists from Canada across United States territoryThe transit of reservists from Canada across United States territory

[898] The Consul General at Vancouver (Mansfield) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Vancouver, undated. [Received August 12, 1914, 9 a.m.]

File No. 150.07/41

[899] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Vancouver (Mansfield)

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1914.

[900] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 14, 1914. [Received August 17.]

File No. 150.07/17

[901] The Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith)

Department of State, Washington, August 18, 1914.

File No. 150.07/45a

[902] The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Russian Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, August 27, 1914. [Received 3:30 p.m.]

File No. 150.07/21

[903] The Secretary of State to the Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914.

[904] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 150.07/17

[905] The Acting Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith)

Department of State, Washington, September 18, 1914.

File No. 150.07/61b

[906] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, September 25, 1914. [Received September 26.]

File No. 150.07/37

[907] The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States

Department of State, Washington, October 3, 1914.

File No. 150.07/47b

[908] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, October 10, 1914. [Received October 12.]

File No. 150.07/47

[909] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, October 12, 1914. [Received October 15.]

File No. 150.07/46

[910] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 27, 1914. [Received October 28.]

File No. 150.07/50

[911] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, November 17, 1914. [Received November 18.]

File No. 150.07/56

[912] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1914.

File No. 150.07/53

[913] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, December 4, 1914.

File No. 150.07/57

The Consul General at Vancouver (Mansfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/41

[Document 898]

The Consul General at Vancouver (Mansfield) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Vancouver, undated.
[Received August 12, 1914, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I have the honor to request instructions whether military reservists are permitted transit through the United States. Am informed that the United States immigration officers, Canada, have been instructed to pass number French reservists whose transportation France provided for from one Canadian point to another through the United States.

Mansfield

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Vancouver (Mansfield) [Document 899]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Vancouver (Mansfield)

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1914.

[Telegram]

Neither the neutrality laws of the United States nor proclamation of the President prohibit passage through the United States of reservists who are returning to their respective countries for the purpose of military service, when the circumstances of their transit do not amount to the beginning or setting on foot or providing or preparing the means for any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from the territory or jurisdiction of the United States. If such reservists are organized and armed and so manifest the existence of a military expedition or enterprise, they are not entitled to transit through the United States. Report the occasion of your inquiry.

Bryan

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/17

[Document 900]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 14, 1914.
[Received August 17.]

Mr. Secretary of State: The United States Commissioner of Immigration at Montreal has told the Consul of France at that city that he needed authorization to let into American territory such French reservists as should have to proceed individually and at their expense from Montreal to New York there to take ship.

I should be obliged to your excellency if you would kindly have the agent of the Federal Government at Montreal instructed accordingly as soon as possible. Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Clausse

The Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith) File No. 150.07/45a

[Document 901]

The Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith)

Department of State,
Washington, August 18, 1914.

[Telegram]

Urgent. American Consul General at Montreal reports that large number of Belgian reservists desire to return to their country by way of United States. Is it your desire that the Department take the necessary steps to secure permission for these subjects to enter this country?

W. J. Bryan

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/21

[Document 902]

The Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) to the Secretary of State

Russian Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, August 27, 1914.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I would be much obliged to you if you would give immediate instructions to immigration authorities on Canadian border to allow admission of Russians to New York in transit to Archangel by steamer sailing Saturday.

Bakhméteff

The Secretary of State to the Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff) [Document 903]

The Secretary of State to the Russian Ambassador (Bakhméteff)

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of yesterday was not received until after the office was closed last evening. The Department of Labor has to-day sent the necessary instructions to the immigration authorities on the Canadian border in accordance with your request.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) File No. 150.07/17

[Document 904]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

No 1376]

Excellency: Having reference to Mr. Clausse’s note of August 14 asking that suitable instructions be issued to the proper immigration officials at Montreal with a view to the removal of any restrictions there in force preventing French reservists in Canada from coming to this country for the purpose of returning to their mother country, I have the honor to inform your excellency that the request of Mr. Clausse was promptly complied with.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Acting Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith) File No. 150.07/61b

[Document 905]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Belgian Minister (Havenith)

Department of State,
Washington, September 18, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: In compliance with your oral request of this morning, the Department has telegraphed to the Department of Commerce, suggesting that it make all proper arrangements for the passage of ten Belgian reservists through the United States from Montreal to New York, where they will take a steamer. The same information has been telegraphed to the American Consul. General at Montreal.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/37

[Document 906]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, September 25, 1914.
[Received September 26.]

No 334]

Sir: With reference to Article 6 of the Hague convention respecting the rights and duties of neutral powers ratified by the President February 23, 1909, I have the honour to inform you that certain British Army reservists in Canada, who cannot proceed to England direct owing to the irregularity of the present Canadian service, are anxious to pass through United States territory in order to fulfil their military duties and that the United States immigration agents at Montreal have refused permission to a number of such persons.

I have the honour to request that, should there be no objection, the proper authorities may be instructed to allow such persons to cross the United States frontier in order to embark for Great Britain at a United States port. I understand that no objection has been raised to reservists of other nationalities crossing United States territory for a similar purpose.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States File No. 150.07/47b

[Document 907]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States

Department of State,
Washington, October 3, 1914.

[Circular note]

Excellency: A number of requests in specific cases have been made of the Department for permission for nationals of belligerent countries to come to the United States from Canada for the purpose of embarking to the countries of which they are citizens or subjects. The requests were granted, as neither the neutrality laws of the United States nor the proclamations of the President prohibit passage through the United States of reservists who are returning to their respective countries for the purpose of engaging in military service, provided their transit does not amount to the beginning or setting on foot, or providing or preparing the means for, any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from the territory or jurisdiction of the United States.

The Department of State and the Department of Labor, after consideration of the subject, have reached the conclusion that embarrassment and criticism would be obviated by the issuance of general instructions to the United States immigration officials to permit the transit of reservists of belligerent nationalities who desire to take ship for their countries at ports in the United States, rather than to require each case to be presented separately through diplomatic channels. But, as this course will involve further relaxation of the administration of the immigration laws of the United States, its adoption will depend on the willingness of each of the Governments concerned to give to the Government of the United States an assurance that its male citizens or subjects of military age whenever permitted to enter the United States during the present war will not be allowed to become public charges in this country.

I shall be glad to receive from you such an assurance on the part of your Government.

Robert Lansing

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/47

[Document 908]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, October 10, 1914.
[Received October 12.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: I did not fail to forward to my Government the suggestion your excellency was pleased to make in your note of October 3 last in regard to the conditions under which reservists coming from Canada to New York for embarkation might be admitted with increased facilities into the territory of the United States.

In answer to the telegram I had sent him, the Minister of Foreign Affairs authorizes me to give your excellency the assurance you desired, namely, that the French authorities concerned, would, if required, take the necessary measures to prevent any of the French citizens concerned becoming a public charge in the United States.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Jusserand

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/46

[Document 909]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, October 12, 1914.
[Received October 15.]

Sir: In reply to your note dated October 3 concerning the permission for nationals of belligerent countries to come to the United States from Canada for the purpose of embarking to the countries of which they are citizens or subjects, I beg state, that this permission will hardly concern Austrian or Hungarian citizens, as Austrian and Hungarian reservists are practically debarred from the possibility to reach the Monarchy. To facilitate their passage to the United States would practically mean to increase the number of unemployed in this country liable to become a public burden.

Moreover the Embassy is informed that the Canadian Government takes all possible precautions to prevent Austrian and Hungarian reservists from leaving the country.

Accept [etc.]

C. Dumba

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/50

[Document 910]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 27, 1914.
[Received October 28.]

Sir: Referring to your notes of October 3 and October 221 relative to the passage of British reservists through United States territory, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada desire me to give an assurance to the United States Government that, so far as British reservists are concerned, any who may enter the United States from Canada en route to the United Kingdom will be permitted to return to Canada without difficulty if they should become public charges in this country, regardless of whether or not they have acquired Canadian domicile by three years residence in Canada.

I have the honour to request that I may be informed whether the United States Government regard this assurance as satisfactory and whether as a result they will issue general instructions to the immigration officer at Montreal to permit the transit of British reservists from Canada through United States territory to a United States port.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Note of October 22 not printed.

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 150.07/56

[Document 911]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, November 17, 1914.
[Received November 18.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to my note of October 6 last1 regarding the transit of reservists over the territory of the United States, I have the honor, in compliance with instructions, to inform your excellency that the Imperial German Government to its regret will not be in position to avail itself of the American Government’s offer, as Great Britain has withdrawn its promise not to take persons liable to military service off neutral vessels.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 150.07/53

[Document 912]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 19, 1914.

No. 551]

Excellency: Referring to your excellency’s note of October 27 regarding the passage of British reservists from Canada through United States territory to ports of embarkation en route to the United Kingdom, and the Department’s reply thereto of November 17,1 I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Department is now in receipt of a communication from the Department of Labor stating that it is of the opinion that the assurance which your excellency has transmitted to this Government for the Government of Canada, that “so far as British reservists are concerned, any who may enter the United States from Canada en route to the United Kingdom will be permitted to return to Canada without difficulty if they should become public charges in this country, regardless of whether or not they have acquired Canadian domicile by three years residence in Canada,” is not broad enough to meet the situation or to correspond with similar assurances which other governments have extended in the matter. The Department of Labor suggests that, in lieu of the above assurance, which your excellency has already forwarded to this Government for the Government of Canada, a guarantee be furnished that the reservists would depart from and out of the United States, or return to Canada without expense to the United States, or any community therein.

As soon as your excellency’s reply to this communication is received the Department will again take the matter up with the Department of Labor.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 150.07/57

[Document 913]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, December 4, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to your note of October 27 last, relative to the issuance of general instructions to the immigration officials at Montreal to allow the reservists of Great Britain to pass through the United States en route to the United Kingdom, I beg to advise you of the receipt of a letter from the Acting Secretary of labor, stating that such instructions have been sent to the Commissioner of Immigration at Montreal.1

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1 They were sent November 19 in response to a request of November 17 from the Department of State, without regard to the further question raised in the note printed, ante, p. 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910].

The sale and transportation of contraband goodsThe sale and transportation of contraband goods

[914] The Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, August 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/38

[915] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914.

[916] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, September 3, 1914.

File No. 811.113/21

[917] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, September 5, 1914.

[918] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State

New York, September 15, 1914. [Received September 16.]

File No. 768.72111/252

[919] The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1914.

[920] Public circular issued by the Secretary of State October 15, 1924, regarding neutrality and trade in contraband

October 15, 1914.

[921] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, New York, October 31, 1914. [Received November 2.]

File No. 763.72111/561

[922] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, November 11, 1914. [Received November 12.]

File No. 763.72111/643

[923] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/600

[924] The General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System (O. S. Cockey) to the Secretary of State

New York, November 13, 1914. [Received November 14.]

File No. 763.72111/649

[925] The Secretary of State to the General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System (O. S. Cockey)

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914.

[926] The Counselor for the Department of State to James H. Hayden

Department of State, Washington, December 1, 1914.

File No. 768.72111/1183a

[927] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December, 4 1914, 11 p.m. [Received December 5, 5 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111Em1

[928] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 7, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1072

[929] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 11, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 7:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/1113

[930] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, December 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

[931] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, January 15, 1915.

File No. 763.72111/1140

The Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/38

[Document 914]

The Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, August 6, 1914.

[Telegram]

Please advise whether any duties devolve upon collectors of customs and other officers of this department to prevent the exportation of so-called contraband of war in the ordinary course of commerce; if so, please give list of articles recognized as contraband.2

B. R. Newton

2 See the letter of the Acting Secretary of Commerce to the Secretary of State, August 6, 1914, post, p. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], for instructions of August 5 to the collector of customs at New York regarding the clearance of foreign merchant vessels, containing the following directions: It must be unquestionable that she has no arms or munitions of war aboard.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 915]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 6. Neither the neutrality laws of the United States nor proclamation of the President make it unlawful to export contraband of war in the ordinary course of commerce.1 No situation has yet arisen wherein our general neutrality relations might require the prevention of the exportation of contraband. Whether any duty rests upon collectors of customs in the premises, in view of the legality of the exportation of contraband in due course of commerce, is a, matter falling within the regulations of your department.

This answers yours August 6 quoting telegram from collector, Port Arthur, Texas, respecting clearance of vessels with cargo of fuel oil and petroleum products.2 In view of the character of the inquiry, it might be well to advise collector at Port Arthur that shippers take risk of seizure on high seas of contraband of war to belligerent governments.

W. J. Bryan

1 See the Department’s printed circular of August 15, 1914, regarding neutrality, contraband, and the seizure of ships and cargo, ante, p. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], for the statement The sale or shipment of contraband of war by citizens of the United States to citizens or subjects of any of the belligerent powers, in the course of commerce, is not prohibited by the neutrality laws or the President’s proclamation. See the note of the French Chargé d’Affaires, of August 8, and reply of the Secretary of State of August 13, 1914, ante, pp. 557–9 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], for a discussion in part of the question of the exportation of contraband of war. See the instructions to collectors of customs, August 10, 1914, post, p. 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958], for the following statement: You will not refuse clearance to merchant vessels, whether of the United States or other neutral power, or whether of a belligerent power, solely on the ground that the cargo contains contraband of war.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.113/21

[Document 916]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, September 3, 1914.

Sir: Confirming a telephone message to your department, I have the honor to state that this department has received from the collector of customs at Juneau, Alaska, the following telegram dated the 31st ultimo:

May shipment of war ammunition and equipment belonging to Canadian Government pass in transit through Alaska from Dawson to Vancouver?

To which telegram this department replied, at your suggestion, as follows:

Wire what shipment Canadian war ammunition and equipment consists of, what route it would take, whether it belongs to troops in motion, and any other particulars of importance.

The collector has replied in the following telegram dated the 2d instant:

Shipment consists of one mounted Maxim gun complete with 2,500 rounds ammunition destined Mounted Police, Regina, routed Canadian Pacific to Vancouver unaccompanied by troops.

I will thank you to advise me as soon as possible whether or not your department perceives any objection to permitting this shipment to pass through Alaska.

By direction of the Secretary,
Respectfully,

A. J. Peters
Assistant Secretary

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 917]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, September 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

Referring to telephone communication from your department regarding shipment of war munitions and equipment through Alaska and your letter of the third instant giving further information in this case, Department advises that transit of these materials through the Territory of Alaska be refused.

W. J. Bryan

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 768.72111/252

[Document 918]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State

New York, September 15, 1914. [Received September 16.]

My dear Mr. Lansing : Although you told me, when I last had the pleasure of seeing you, that according to the neutrality laws of the United States nothing could be done in the following matter, I beg to draw your attention to the facts mentioned below:

Purchase of horses for the English Army: 31,000 in St. Paul, Minnesota; 12,000 in Chicago, Illinois; 5,000 in Cincinnati; 1,000 in Evansville, Indiana; 500 in Lexington Kentucky.

Japan purchases field guns, ammunition, etc., through Mitsui and Company.

Winchester Arms Manufacturing Company, New Haven, has delivered 500,000 rifles to the London Armory since August 5. Japan orders dynamite from the Hercules and the Giant Powder Company, all available quantities.

Russia purchases from powder trust (Du Pont Company) 1,000 tons powder for cannon, 1,000 tons powder for rifles, shipment via San Francisco.

I know t that I cannot make any complaint in this matter but I only wished to draw your attention to it, because every cargo of arms and ammunition, etc., which is sent to Europe must necessarily prolong the war, and this does not seem to be the wish either of the American Government or the American people.

Yours very sincerely,

J. Bernstorff

P. S. I further hear that a French general and a French senator are staying at the Bethlehem. Club, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, where they are ordering arms, etc., at the Bethlehem Steel Works.

The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) [Document 919]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I have received your informal note of the 15th instant calling my attention to the purchase of certain military supplies in this country by the belligerents now engaged in the European wars. I am glad to have this information, but, as I recently told you, there appears to be nothing that can be done to prevent traffic in contraband of war under the neutrality laws or the treaties of the United States so long as such traffic is limited to ordinary commercial transactions by citizens of the United States.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Public circular issued by the Secretary of State October 15, 1924, regarding neutrality and trade in contraband [Document 920]

Public circular issued by the Secretary of State October 15, 1924, regarding neutrality and trade in contraband 1

The Department of State has received numerous inquiries from American merchants and other persons as to whether they could sell to governments or nations at war contraband articles without violating the neutrality of the United States, and the Department has also received complaints that sales of contraband were being made on the apparent supposition that they were unneutral acts which this Government should prevent.

In view of the number of communications of this sort which have been received it is evident that there is a widespread misapprehension among the people of this country as to the obligations of the United States as a neutral nation in relation to trade in contraband and as to the powers of the Executive branch of the Government over persons who engage in it. For this reason it seems advisable to make an explanatory statement on the subject for the information of the public.

In the first place it should be understood that, generally speaking, a citizen of the United States can sell to a belligerent government or its agent any article of commerce which he pleases. He is not prohibited from doing this by any rule of international law, by any treaty provisions, or by any statute of the United States. It makes no difference whether the articles sold are exclusively for war purposes, such as firearms, explosives, etc., or are foodstuffs, clothing, horses, etc., for the use of the army or navy of the belligerent.

Furthermore, a neutral government is not compelled by international law, by treaty, or by statute to prevent these sales to a belligerent. Such sales, therefore, by American citizens do not in the least affect the neutrality of the United States.

It is true that such articles as those mentioned are considered contraband and are, outside the territorial jurisdiction of a neutral nation, subject to seizure by an enemy of the purchasing government, but it is the enemy’s duty to prevent the articles reaching their destination, not the duty of the nation whose citizens have sold them. If the enemy of the purchasing nation happens for the time to be unable to do this that is for him one of the misfortunes of war; the inability, however, imposes on the neutral government no obligation to prevent the sale.

Neither the President nor any executive department of the Government possesses the legal authority to interfere in any way with trade between the people of this country and the territory of a belligerent. There is no act of Congress conferring such authority or prohibiting traffic of this sort with European nations, although in the case of neighboring American Republics Congress has given the President power to proclaim an embargo on arms and ammunition when in his judgment it would tend to prevent civil strife.

For the Government of the United States itself to sell to a belligerent nation would be an unneutral act, but for a private individual to sell to a belligerent any product of the United States is neither unlawful nor unneutral, nor within the power of the Executive to prevent or control.

The foregoing remarks, however, do not apply to the outfitting or furnishing of vessels in American ports or of military expeditions on American soil in aid of a belligerent. These acts are prohibited by the neutrality laws of the United States.

Department of State,
October 15, 1914.

1 This circular was printed by the Department for public information and was enclosed, together with copies of the proclamations of the belligerent governments on contraband, in letters replying to inquiries by American business men concerning their rights, duties, and risks in foreign trade. (See the section on correspondence with American citizens, ante, p. 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/561

[Document 921]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
New York, October 31, 1914.
[Received November 2.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: The French commission for the purchase of war material now in New York will, I am told, try to buy in a roundabout way, through purchasers for Mexico and South America, a large quantity (three to four hundred thousand) of Krag-Jörgensen rifles for the French or Russian army.

According to a declaration earlier made by the War Department, no arms of any kind should be let out of the possession of the Government as long as the European war lasts. I should therefore be obliged to your excellency if you would most kindly intervene to see that the American Government may also prevent purchases by neutral countries which would be merely employed as channels of transit.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/643

[Document 922]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, November 11, 1914.
[Received November 12.]

[Translation]

J. No. A 2116]

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to draw your excellency’s attention to the announcement made in No. 260 of the Daily Consular and Trade Reports, published by the Department of Commerce, under No. 14333 of “Foreign Trade Opportunities,” page 607, of the opportunity to deliver war material to the English Government.1

Since the offices of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Trade are, as I have come to learn, at the disposal of the agents of foreign governments to help the transaction of business between them and American manufacturers, I beg your excellency kindly to let me know whether their activities as go-betweens also include delivery of war material.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

1 For the substance of the item referred to, see the Secretary’s answer of January 15, 1915, post, p. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931].

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111/600

[Document 923]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

No. 1121]

Excellency: Referring to your note of October 31, 1914, with reference to the report that certain belligerent governments are arranging to purchase, in a roundabout way, a large number of the Krag-Jörgensen rifles owned by this Government, I have the honor to inform you that the Secretary of War has advised this Department that these rifles, which were replaced by the present Army rifle, were up to a recent period salable under certain circumstances. He adds, however, that in view of the situation in Mexico and later in view of the European wars he has absolutely discontinued the sale of any of these rifles to any one.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System (O. S. Cockey) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/649

[Document 924]

The General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System (O. S. Cockey) to the Secretary of State

New York, November 13, 1914.
[Received November 14.]

My dear Sir:

Transportation of contraband goods

Would like very much to know whether our road would be permitted to handle contraband from Dominion of Canada across United States territory into Canadian territory, and whether United States contraband goods can be moved into Canada, then through Canada, into the United States, and again into Canada for export via Canadian ports. For instance, from New York to Vancouver via Niagara Falls, across Canadian territory via our road to Chicago and into Canada north of Minneapolis.

Any information you can give me on the subject will be greatly appreciated.

Yours very truly,

O. S. Cockey

The Secretary of State to the General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System (O. S. Cockey) [Document 925]

The Secretary of State to the General Agent of the Grand Trunk Railway System (O. S. Cockey)

Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of the 13th instant, wherein you inquire whether the Grand Trunk Railway System would be permitted to handle contraband from the Dominion of Canada across United States territory into Canadian territory, and whether United States contraband goods can be moved into Canada, then through Canada, into the United States, and again into Canada for export via Canadian ports.

In reply you are advised that if the goods in question are transported in the ordinary course of trade and not under military or other Government escort, so that the train does not take on the character of a convoy indicated in Article 2 of the Hague convention No. 5, there would appear to be no objection to such shipments passing through United States territory. If, however, complaint is made to this Government that transportation of this sort is in violation of the neutrality of the United States, this Government will feel that it is necessary to examine into the facts of each case and render an independent decision in accordance therewith.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

The Counselor for the Department of State to James H. Hayden File No. 768.72111/1183a

[Document 926]

The Counselor for the Department of State to James H. Hayden

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1914.

Dear Mr. Hayden : About two weeks ago you called upon me, as an attorney for manufacturers of Submarines, and asked my views as to whether the sale of submarines to a belligerent government would be in violation of the neutrality of the United States. I told you that, while I had not studied the question, my personal opinion was that the sale of component parts of submarines treated in bulk was not illegal, but I expressly said that I could not speak for the Government in the matter until I had studied the question and consulted the Secretary of State. At a later interview I told you that the President and Secretary of State considered that sales of manufactured parts of submarines would be unneutral, and you agreed, as I understood, to submit the matter in writing before any sales were made.

It has been brought to the attention of the Department that certain American companies are supposed to have entered into contracts with one of the belligerent governments for the manufacture of submarines or of their component parts, and that work thereon has already commenced. In view of your statement that you would submit the matter in writing to the Department before sales were made, I would like to be advised as to whether or not any manufacturer, whom you represented when you interviewed me on the subject, has made or is executing any contract of this kind.

Since you consulted me on the subject I think that I am entitled to know this, because it would be improper for your clients to have acted upon an unofficial opinion of mine in view of the reservation made as to the possible attitude of the Government.

I feel it my duty to inform you, in order that there may be no uncertainty in the matter, that this Government is opposed to the sale of submarines or of their component parts by American manufacturers to belligerents, as being contrary to the strict neutrality which this Government seeks to preserve in the present war, and that it will take all legal means to prevent the exportation of such craft and manufactured parts.

You will oblige me by communicating the views of this Government to the persons or concern whom you may represent.

Very sincerely yours,

Robert Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111Em1

[Document 927]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December, 4 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received December 5, 5 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1005. Universal, very bitter, and increasing feeling in Germany because of reported sale by. Americans of munitions of war, etc., to Allies. Boycotting of American goods already beginning.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72111/1072

[Document 928]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

708. The Secretary of State gave the following to the press this afternoon.

When information reached the State Department that the Fore River Company was planning to build a number of submarines for one of the Allies, inquiry was made to ascertain the facts. As a result of this inquiry Mr. Schwab called at the State Department last week with his attorney and laid before the Department what his company had planned to do, stating that before undertaking the work he had secured the opinion of a number of international lawyers and was keeping within the requirements of neutrality as outlined by them. I stated to him that the President, basing his opinion upon information already obtained, regarded the work as contemplated a violation of the spirit of neutrality, but told him I would lay his statement before the President and then give him a final answer. On Friday I had a conference with the President, and he instructed me to inform Mr. Schwab that his statement only confirmed him in the opinion previously formed that the submarines should not be built. Within a few minutes after my return from the White House Mr. Schwab called me by long-distance telephone and told me that he submitted to the President’s views of the subject and that I could announce that his firm would not build submarines for any belligerent country for delivery during the war. This closes the submarine incident.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1113

[Document 929]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 11, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 7:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1247. Sir Edward Grey unofficially expressed the hope to me that the bill introduced by Mr. Hitchcock in the Senate will not pass, aimed to prohibit the exportation by private firms of munitions of war to any belligerent. He calls attention to the fact that this would be special legislation passed while war is in progress making a radical departure from a long-established custom and that for this reason [it would appear?] an unneutral act towards the belligerents that can profit by it.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 930]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, December 14, 1914, 4 p.m.

[Telegram]

I have explained to Ambassador Spring Rice that Mr. Hitchcock did not consult the President or State Department in regard to his resolution. Though from Nebraska he is not personally friendly to me.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111/1140

[Document 931]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, January 15, 1915.

No. 1184]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 11th ultimo [sic]1 in which you draw attention to an announcement made in No. 260 of the Daily Consular and Trade Reports of November 5, 1914, of an opportunity to deliver war material to the British Government. The item in question, being No. 14333, is to the effect that the British War Department desires supplies of intrenching implements (from manufacturers only) and that pattern and specifications may be inspected on application to the Chief Inspector of Equipment and Stores, Royal Dockyard, Woolwich. In your note you request, “since the offices of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Trade are, as I [you] have come to learn, at the disposal of the agents of foreign governments to help the transaction of business between them and American manufacturers,” to be informed “whether their activities as go-betweens also include delivery of war materials.”

In reply I have the honor to inform you of what you are probably already aware that the object of the publication of the Daily Consular and Trade Reports is to acquaint American manufacturers and merchants of trade opportunities in foreign countries. It is much to be regretted that your excellency is not also cognizant of the fact that the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, under whose supervision the publication is issued, is not at the disposal of agents of foreign governments; and your statement to that effect can have been based only on misinformation.

The item to which you call attention came through an officer of the United States and the report was made by him in conformity with his duties. The Government of the United States is endeavoring to maintain a strict neutrality. No part of it has any intention of assisting in the sale of contraband of war, absolute or conditional, to any belligerent engaged in the present war, and the item should have been so censored by the officers of the Government as to have prevented its publication, which I have ascertained was wholly due to an inadvertence during the absence of the officer in charge. In order that there may not be a recurrence of an oversight of this character, specific instructions have been given to the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce by the Secretary of Commerce not to publish under the head of trade opportunities items covering goods of a contraband character, and, doubly to insure this, directions have been given to officers of the State Department to detect and remove any matters covering contraband goods which may be communicated through the Department of State.

While I beg your excellency to believe that I profoundly regret, as does the Secretary of Commerce, the inadvertent publication of the item, at the same time I cannot pass unnoticed and without exception the reflection which the tone and tenor of your note would seem to cast upon the good faith of an office of the Government of the United States in the observance of a strict neutrality in the pending conflict. Your inquiry whether the activities of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce as a go-between also include the delivery of war materials would seem to require no answer in view of the neutrality proclamations of the President of the United States of which your excellency is not ignorant.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Ante, p. 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923].

Loans to belligerent governmentsLoans to belligerent governments

[932] The Secretary of State to J. P. Morgan and Company

Department of State, Washington, August 15, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/484a

[933] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, September 9, 1914. [Received 9 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/146

[934] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, September 25, 1914. [Received September 29.]

File No. 763.72111/248

[935] The Acting Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)

Department of State, Washington, October 13, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/263

[936] The Acting Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)

Department of State, Washington, November 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/551

The Secretary of State to J. P. Morgan and Company File No. 763.72111/484a

[Document 932]

The Secretary of State to J. P. Morgan and Company

Department of State,
Washington, August 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

Inquiry having been made as to the attitude of this Government in case American bankers are asked to make loans to foreign governments during the war in Europe, the following announcement is made:

There is no reason why loans should not be made to the governments of neutral nations, but in the judgment of this Government, loans by American bankers to any foreign nation which is at war are inconsistent with the true spirit of neutrality.

W. J. Bryan

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/146

[Document 933]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, September 9, 1914.
[Received 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I hear that Servian Sokol in Chicago, 1638 Diversey Parkway, publicly invites to collections for Servian war funds. I beg to call your attention to this breach of neutrality and to ask you to kindly invite state authorities to stop collection.

Dumba

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/248

[Document 934]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, September 25, 1914.
[Received September 29.]

[Translation]

No. X–13/xiv]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge your excellency’s note No. 104 of September 10,1 in which your excellency answered my telegram of the 9th about the collections of the Servian Sokols with headquarters at 1638 Diversey Parkway, Chicago, Illinois, for the Servian war fund.

It appears from a report of the Imperial and Royal Consulate General at Chicago that the United States District Attorney there has not yet received any instructions and therefore has taken no action in the matter. The aforesaid Consulate General is informed that the State authorities have no authority to interfere, and that in neutrality cases the United States District Attorney acts only upon instructions from Washington.

I beg leave to forward to you herewith the original, together with an English translation, of one of the appeals published in the various Slavic newspapers, by which the above-named headquarters of the Servian Sokols solicits contributions to the Servian War Fund.1 As your excellency will see, this appeal is directed not only to the Servians of the Kingdom but to Slays of all nationalities, that is to say, the same Servian agitation, which through its operation in the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy brought on the present war, is now being carried on here in the United States.

Renewing my request that these collections, which plainly constitute a breach of neutrality, be stopped and that the money already collected be attached, I avail myself of this opportunity to renew [etc.]

C. Dumba

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) File No. 763.72111/263

[Document 935]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)

Department of State,
Washington, October 13, 1914.

No. 118]

Excellency: Referring to your telegram of the 9th ultimo, in regard to the public appeal made by a Servian in Chicago for contributions to the Servian war fund, I have now the honor to inform you of the receipt of a letter from the Department of Justice, to which the contents of your telegram were communicated on September 10 last, stating that, after careful consideration by that department, nothing is found in the facts which constitutes any violation of the neutrality laws of the United States or any other penal law.

The letter from the Department of Justice appears to have reference solely to the contents of your telegram of September 9, and not to the subsequent notes on the subject which you addressed to the department and which were communicated by it to the Attorney General.1 Upon receipt of the Attorney General’s reply as to the statements made in those notes, you will at once be informed thereof.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Note of September 25, printed ante, p. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934]; note of September 28, involving charges of illegal recruiting, printed in the section dealing with enlistments in belligerent forces, ante, p. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) File No. 763.72111/551

[Document 936]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)

Department of State,
Washington, November 5, 1914.

No. 124]

Excellency: Referring to your notes of the 25th and 28th ultimo,1 in regard to the activities of certain Servians in Chicago alleged to be in contravention of the neutrality laws of the United States, I have now the honor to advise you of the receipt of a letter on the subject from the Attorney General, who states that he finds no evidence in the papers submitted, so far as they contain an appeal for subscriptions, which would constitute any violation of the penal laws of the United States in general, or of those sections of the Federal penal code constituting the so-called neutrality laws.

It is added that if a case should arise in which there was any evidence that the subscriptions raised by the Slavic gymnastic societies were to be made and used for the purposes of any military expedition or enterprise to be carried on from the territory of the United States, it is possible that a person making such a subscription would be criminally liable under section 13 of the said Federal penal code, on the ground that he does thus “provide or prepare the means for any military expedition or enterprise.” The Attorney General points out that there appears to be no such evidence in the papers submitted nor in the facts as stated by your excellency’s notes.

Accept, [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Note of September 25, printed ante, p. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934]; note of September 28, involving charges of illegal recruiting, printed in the section dealing with enlistments in belligerent forces, ante, p. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895].

Treatment of belligerent warships, their crews and tenders, in American ports—Internment of the “Geier” and “Locksun”Treatment of belligerent warships, their crews and tenders, in American ports—Internment of the “Geier” and “Locksun”

[937] The Japanese AmbassadorChindato the Acting Secretary of State

Japanese Embassy, Washington, October 28, 1914. [Received October 29.]

File No. 763.72111G27/3

[938] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 28, 1914. [Received October 30.]

File No. 763.72111G27/2

[939] The Acting Secretary of State to the German AmbassadorBernstorff

Department of State, Washington, October 30, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/4

[940] The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

Department of State, Washington, October 30, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/3

[941] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, October 30, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/4

[942] The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Embassy at Washington

undated [Received October 30, 1914. ] [Left at the Department of State by the Japanese Ambassador October 31, 4:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111G27/6

[943] The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/8

[944] The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

Department of State, Washington, November 11, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/16

[945] The Secretary of State to the German, British, and Japanese Ambassadors

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/19

[946] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State

German Embassy, Washington, November 11, 1914. [Received November 12.]

File No. 763.72111G27/20

[947] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, November 11, 1914. [Received November 12.]

File No. 763.72111G27/21

[948] The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/20

[949] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, November 21, 1914.. [Received November 23.]

File No. 763.72111G27/24

[950] The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, November 27, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/21

[951] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, December 11, 1914.

File No. 763.72111G27/24

The Japanese AmbassadorChindato the Acting Secretary of State [Document 937]

File No. 763.72111G27/3

The Japanese Ambassador (Chinda) to the Acting Secretary of State

Japanese Embassy,
Washington, October 28, 1914.
[Received October 29.]

My dear Mr. Lansing : Adverting to our conversation on October 26 and to your unofficial letter of October 271 relating to the German man-of-war Geier and the Japanese battleship Hizen, I wish to inform you that the purport of our conversation as well as the contents of your letter has been referred to the home Government.

In the meantime, Baron Kato has sent me telegraphic instructions, which apparently crossed my cables, the substance of which I beg to enclose herewith. With regard to it, I should be greatly obliged if you would give me further information concerning your intention as regards the disposition of the Geier.

I am [etc.]

S. Chinda

[Enclosure—Substance of telegram]

The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Ambassador at Washington (Chinda)

[Received October 27, 1914.]

I am advised that the German man-of-war Geier entered the port of Honolulu on the forenoon of October 15 and commenced repairs on the forenoon of the 17th and that there is as yet no prospect of her leaving the port.

The Imperial Government, while implicitly relying on the strict maintenance of neutrality on the part of the United States Government, are constrained to view with some uneasiness the fact that the above man-of-war is apparently showing little sign of progress on repairs and of leaving the port, even after the elapse of two weeks.

On the one hand, the Imperial Government are inclined to question whether such a state of things could fairly be reconciled with the spirit of Article 17 of the Hague convention concerning the rights and duties of neutral powers in naval war, and, on the other, are compelled to point out the circumstance that the Raid man-of-war, while having not the slightest apprehension of danger so long as she stays in the port of Honolulu, is a constant source of uneasiness and danger to the Japanese merchant vessels on the trade routes between Japan and the United States.

In the circumstances, you will approach the United States Government informally, and ascertain and report as to their intention as regards the disposition of the Geier.

1  Post, p. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059].

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111G27/2

[Document 938]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 28, 1914.
[Received October 30.]

No. 369]

Sir: According to information which has reached my Government, the German war vessel Geier has been undergoing repairs at Honolulu since October 17, and should be now ready to take the sea. In view of Article 17 of No. 13 of the Hague convention of 1907 I have the honour to protest against the continued presence of the Geier in a United States harbour and to request that she may be interned.

My Government has also been informed that the German ship Locksun is now in Honolulu with 1,000 tons of coal on board. As the Department was informed in the memorandum from this Embassy of the 19th instant,1 she is one of the ships which have been despatched by Messrs. Behnmeyer from Philippine ports for the purpose of conveying supplies of coal to German cruisers. She sailed from Manila ostensibly for Menado (Celebes), but did not call there, and arrived at Honolulu on October 15 in company with the German cruiser Geier.

As she obviously made a false declaration of destination, there appears to be circumstantial evidence that she has already been engaged in furnishing supplies to a belligerent warship, and that under the general rules of international law and the United States regulations of September 19, 1914, there is ground for detaining her for the purpose of enquiry.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the German AmbassadorBernstorff [Document 939]

File No. 763.72111G27/4

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, October 30, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The Department has been advised that the German gunboat Geier put into the port of Honolulu, and one October 15 the captain requested permission to make repairs to render the vessel seaworthy, and estimated the time for this work to be one week. The naval constructor of the United States at the port of Honolulu examined the vessel on October 20, and recommended that the time be extended eight days from October 20, in order to place the boilers in a seaworthy condition. On October 27, the German consul at that port requested from eight to ten days additional time in which to make repairs to steam and feed piping and boilers that have been found to be in a leaking condition. Upon a further examination, the United States naval constructor reports that he is unable to state how long repairs should take, as conditions requiring remedy may be found as work progresses. It is also reported that, on account of the generally bad condition of the piping and boilers, further time may be required to complete all repairs.

The circumstances in this case point to the gunboat Geier as a ship that at the outbreak of war finds itself in a more or less broken-down condition and on the point of undergoing general repairs, but still able to keep the sea. In this situation the Government believes that it does not comport with a strict neutrality or a fair interpretation of the Hague conventions, to allow such a vessel to complete unlimited repairs in a United States port. The Government therefore has instructed the authorities to notify the captain of the Geier that three weeks from October 15 will be allowed the Geier for repairs, and that if she is not able to leave American waters by November 6, the United States will feel obliged to insist that she be interned until the expiration of the war.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda) File No. 763.72111G27/3

[Document 940]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

Department of State,
Washington, October 30, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: In reply to your note of the 28th instant in regard to the German gunboat Geier, now undergoing repairs at Honolulu, I would advise you that the Imperial German Ambassador in this capital has been informed of this Government’s intention to fix a definite period within which repairs to this vessel should be completed, and that if it is found impossible to complete the repairs within the period set, the United States will be obliged to insist that the gunboat be interned during the present war. Instructions have been issued to the United States officers to inform the captain of the Geier in this same sense.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72111G27/4

[Document 941]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, October 30, 1914.

Excellency: The Department has received your note of the 28th instant protesting against the continued presence of the Geier in a United States harbor and requesting that she may be interned. In reply I have the honor to inform you that the Imperial German Ambassador in this capital has been advised of this Government’s intention to fix a definite period within which repairs to this vessel should be completed, and that if she is unable to leave American waters within the period set, the United States Government will feel obliged to insist that she be interned. The appropriate authorities of the United States have been instructed to inform the captain of the Geier in this sense.

You also call attention in your note to the German ship Locksun now in Honolulu with 1,000 tons of coal on board, and state that she sailed from Manila, ostensibly for Menado, in the Celebes, but did not call there and arrived at Honolulu on October 15 in company with the German cruiser Geier. You further state that as she obviously made a false declaration of destination, there appears to be circumstantial evidence that she has already been engaged in furnishing supplies to a belligerent warship and that, under the general rules of international law and the United States regulations of September 19, there is ground for detaining her for the purpose of inquiry. In reply I have the honor to advise you that instructions have been issued to detain this vessel, pending an investigation as to whether she has been furnishing supplies to belligerent warships. This matter will be made the subject of a further communication to you when the examination has been completed.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Embassy at Washington File No. 763.72111G27/6

[Document 942]

The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs (Kato) to the Japanese Embassy at Washington

undated [Received October 30, 1914.
] [Left at the Department of State
by the Japanese Ambassador
October 31, 4:15 p.m.]

[Substance of telegram]

I am advised that several members of the complement of the Geier are under suspicion of having left Honolulu for San Francisco on October 27 by the S. S. Korea .

In the above connection, it must be noted that there is nothing to prevent them from conveying intelligence relating to the military matters of Japan, which would be irreconcilable with the principle of the United States Government, actually prescribing limitations on communication between the Hizen and the land as well as on use of the wireless, etc.1

Moreover, in case the Geier will have eventually been interned, the question concerning the disposition of the complement of the vessel naturally arises. Having this eventuality in view, it is deemed to be an obligation on the part of the United States, as a neutral, to prevent, in the meantime, any member of the complement from leaving the vessel for any distant point.

Consequently, should the above advice prove to be correct, it is considered proper that steps should be taken to cause these persons to return immediately to their vessel.

[Enclosure]

Members of the complement of the Geier who are under suspicion of having left Honolulu for San Francisco on October 27: As first-class passengers As second-class passengers

Egon Pretzel Fred Pahrish

Walter Sourbeck Paul Streibel

1 See the note of the Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador, October 27, post, p. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059].

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111G27/8

[Document 943]

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to my previous communication to you of October 30 regarding the internment of the German cruiser Geier, the Department is now in possession of information that the German steamship Locksun, belonging to the Norddeutscher Lloyd Company, cleared August 16, 1914, from Manila with 3,215 tons of coal for Menado, in the Celebes; that she coaled the German warship Geier in the course of her voyage toward Honolulu, where she arrived soon after the Geier; that the Locksun received coal by transfer from another vessel somewhere between Manila and Honolulu; and that the captain stated that he had on board 245 or 250 tons of coal when he entered Honolulu, whereas investigation showed that he had on board approximately 1,600 tons.

From these facts the Department is of the opinion that the operations of the Locksun constitute her a tender to the Geier, and that she may be reasonably so considered at the present time. This Government is, therefore, under the necessity of according the Locksun the same treatment as the Geier, and has taken steps to have the vessel interned at Honolulu if she does not leave immediately.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda) File No. 763.72111G27/16

[Document 944]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

Department of State,
Washington, November 11, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to the Department’s informal note to you of October 30 regarding the internment of the German cruiser Geier at Honolulu, I would advise you that the four members of the Geier’s complement which sailed for San Francisco have been paroled not to leave that city and on condition that they do not perform any work which would call in question the good faith of the United States in the maintenance of its neutrality during the present war.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Secretary of State to the German, British, and Japanese Ambassadors File No. 763.72111G27/19

[Document 945]

The Secretary of State to the German, British, and Japanese Ambassadors

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to advise you of the receipt of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, stating that a telegram has been received from the collector of customs at Honolulu, reporting that, on November 8, 1914, the German naval vessels Geier and Locksun were interned there.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72111G27/20

[Document 946]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State

German Embassy,
Washington, November 11, 1914.
[Received November 12.]

J. No. A 2171]

My dear Mr. Lansing : I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 7th instant informing me that the German steamer Locksun, belonging to the Norddeutscher Lloyd, now at Honolulu, is considered by the United States Government as being a tender to H. M. S. Geier and would therefore be interned at Honolulu if she did not leave immediately.

In reply to this communication I beg you to kindly let me know on which rule or regulation the detention of the Locksun is to be based.

The Locksun can not be considered as a man-of-war, not even an auxiliary ship, but is a simple merchant ship. As to the alleged coaling of H. M. S. Geier from the Locksun, the neutrality regulations of the United States only provide that a vessel can be prevented from taking coal to a warship for a period of three months after having left an American port. As the Locksun left the last American port (Manila) on August 16 she ought to be free on November 16.

I am [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111G27/21

[Document 947]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, November 11, 1914.
[Received November 12.]

No. A 2190]

Mr. Secretary of State: Two officers of H. M. S. Geier who had been granted sick leave have been interned with their orderlies in the United States. It seems that the United States Government took that measure on the ground that they belonged to the company of a ship whose crew faced internment and which was in fact dismantled later. This position would undoubtedly be correct if the officers had not left the ship until after internment, as in that case the whole crew should be treated exactly like troops that cross the border of a neutral country. As a matter of fact, however, H. M. S. Geier was not dismantled until the 7th of this month and the official communication of Acting Secretary of State Lansing which spoke of the disarmament of H. M. S. Geier under certain conditions is dated October 30.1 As to this I have the honor to inform your excellency that the interned officers and their orderlies had already left Honolulu on the 28th of October, that is, before the question of interning the crew of H. M. S. Geier had come up. It is therefore not a fact that those officers and men belonged to the company of a ship on the point of being interned.

In this connection I would draw your excellency’s attention to the treatment accorded to the British Major Robertson. That officer was allowed by the like American authorities to proceed on his journey, although it was shown that he had taken an active part in the war against Germany by fighting in the battle before Tsingtao. As this discrimination in the treatment of German and English officers appears to me to be difficult to explain, I have the honor to beg your excellency to cause this question to be again examined in the light of the neutrality of the United States and kindly to procure for the officers of H. M. S. Geier and their orderlies permission to travel freely.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

1  Ante, p. 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, and Doc. 941].

The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111G27/20

[Document 948]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: In reply to your note of the 11th instant, inquiring on which rule or regulation the internment of the German ship Locksun is based, I would advise you that the Locksun has been interned on the principle that she has been acting as a tender to the German warship Geier, as the facts set forth in my note of the 7th instant substantiate. If, under the circumstances, the Locksun has been in fact a tender to the Geier, the question involved does not relate to the amount of coal which either the Locksun or the Geier has taken on within three months, but rather relates to the association and cooperation of the two vessels in belligerent operations. The Locksun, having been shown to have taken the part of a supply ship for the Geier, is, in the opinion of this Government, stamped with the belligerent character of that vessel, and has really become a part of her equipment. In this situation it is difficult to understand on what basis it would have been possible to distinguish between the two vessels, so as to intern the one and not the other. This Government, therefore, has taken what appears to it to be the only reasonable course, under the circumstances, and directed that both vessels be interned.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111G27/24

[Document 949]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, November 21, 1914..
[Received November 23.]

[Translation]

No. A 2453]

Mr. Secretary of State: In reply to your excellency’s kind note of the 12th instant and with reference to Acting Secretary of State Lansing’s letter of the 16th instant, both about the internment of the German S. S. Locksun at Honolulu, I have the honor to say the following:

Acting Secretary of State Lansing informed me in his above-mentioned letter of the 16th instant that the S. S. Locksun had been interned because she had served as a tender to H. M. S. Geier, had thereby assumed the character of a belligerent, and was to be considered as part of the equipment of a war vessel. To this I wish to say that there is, so far as I know, no international law or stipulation in existence which imparts the character of a warcraft, i. e., of a “part of a warship” to a tender on account of her accompanying a warship. The situation in times of peace also proves this. Where there is a likelihood of the warship being unable safely to get along on her own resources, there is the necessity of sending tenders along. This is rather often done in times of peace without causing such tenders to be considered and treated on that account as “parts of the warship concerned,” or in the light of international law even as warships.

Granting, however, that such vessel could actually be considered as a “part of a warship,” then there could be no doubt that its part as a coaling and supply ship would come to an end at the very moment the warship is interned and she would then cease to be “part of a warship.”

Besides, if it be enough, as stated in the above-referred-to note of the 16th instant, to stamp a steamer as a warcraft that she did supply a war vessel with coal or provisions, then the S. S. Locksun’s case in no wise differs from that of the tug F. B. Dalzell, which, as I had the honor to inform your excellency by my note of the 21st ultimo, carried victuals and information to the English warship Essex from the port of New York.1

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

1  Post, p. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053].

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111G27/21

[Document 950]

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, November 27, 1914.

Excellency: The Department has received your note of the 11th instant in regard to the two officers of H. M. S. Geier and their orderlies, who left that vessel before it was interned, but who have with the remainder of its complement been interned within United States jurisdiction. You ask that, as the actual internment of the vessel took place on the 7th instant, and as the officers and their orderlies left Honolulu on the 28th ultimo, the case be reexamined and the officers and their orderlies be released.

In reply I have the honor to advise you that case has been carefully reexamined and that this Government, in its observance of a strict neutrality, is under obligation to retain these gentlemen in custody as a part of the Geier’s company when she entered American jurisdiction. It appears that these men were not only duly incorporated in the armed forces of Germany, a belligerent power, but were also in a sense a part of an organized body of such forces entering a neutral port. In such a case the laws of maritime warfare permit a limited hospitality to be extended to them, dependent upon their observing certain conditions. In the case of the Geier, these conditions were, it is believed, very generous. After a delay of several days within the hospitality of the United States, instead of the conventional twenty-four hours, these officers and their orderlies appear to have been granted sick leave by the captain of the Geier . This fact, however, can not, it is believed, properly be urged as separating them from the Geier in relation to its subsequent treatment. They arrived within United States jurisdiction as a part of an organized armed force of the German Empire, and this fact, in the opinion of this Government, appears to be the crux of the whole matter. Were a distinction to be made on the grounds set forth in your note a ship in danger from her enemy might enter a neutral port, and before the twenty-four hour period had elapsed, and before there was any danger of internment, her officers and crew might leave her and afterwards claim the right to return to their country as individuals. This course would manifestly not comport with the principles of neutrality as they are understood by the Department.

Your excellency compares the case of these officers and men of H. M. S. Geier with that of Major Robertson of the British Army, who appears to have been taken into custody by American officers and shortly thereafter released. The Department is of the opinion that the two incidents have no essential resemblance. Major Robertson arrived in the United States as an individual and not as a part of an organized military body traveling together. The United States, therefore, in its governmental capacity as a neutral, was not bound under the principles of international law to intern him or to interfere with his freedom of movement so long as his conduct did not infringe the proprieties of international or municipal law.

The Department regrets, therefore, to advise you that this Government, after having carefully reexamined the case, does not see its way to release the officers and their orderlies in question, or to consider them other than as a part of the complement of H. M. S. Geier , which the United States Government has been under the necessity of having interned during the continuance of the present war.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111G27/24

[Document 951]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, December 11, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 21st ultimo in regard to the internment of the German S. S. Locksun at Honolulu.

In reply I have the honor to call your attention to the expression “part of a warship,” which occurs throughout your note. I do not understand from what source this expression is derived, as I do not find it in the correspondence of the Department to you on this subject. In my note to you of the 16th ultimo it was stated that the Locksun, having been shown to have taken the part of a supply ship for the Geier, is, in the opinion of this Government, stamped with the belligerent character of that vessel, and has really become part of her equipment. This of course does not state that she is a “part of a warship.” A tender is a part of the equipment of a vessel of war in the sense of acting as an auxiliary to such a vessel in the matter of carrying supplies and possibly giving other assistance. In a very real sense a vessel of war so attended may be considered as a belligerent expedition of which the tender is a part of the equipment, but to put a tender in the category of “part of a warship” is to suggest that the treatment to be accorded the tender shall be governed by the rules of contraband.

In the circumstances of this case, as known by the Department, it is obliged to state that it still adheres to its previous position that the status of the Locksun as a tender to the ship of war Geier was sufficiently proved to justify her treatment as such. In this connection the Department has the honor to call to your attention the following quotation from the award of the Alabama Claims Commission, which seems to establish this principle regarding the treatment of tenders, although the application of this statement was not made to the exact circumstances of the Locksun case:

And so far as relates to the vessels called the Tuscaloosa (tender to the Alabama), the Clarence, the Tacony, and the Archer (tenders to the Florida), the tribunal is unanimously of opinion that such tenders or auxiliary vessels, being properly regarded as accessories, must necessarily follow the lot of their principals and be submitted to the same decision which applies to them respectively.

The entire practice of the internment of vessels appears to be of recent origin. The doctrine of internment was apparently first applied to any great extent during the Russo-Japanese war, and it is believed that the treatment of the Locksun is in keeping with the high standard of neutrality upon which the doctrine of internment is based. The Department is not aware that measures to preserve neutrality are entirely dictated by precedent and international law, and it believes that belligerents hardly have proper cause to question an attitude on neutrality justly in advance of precedent and international law, if it is applied by the neutral impartially to all belligerents. As to the advisability of assuming such an attitude, the Department is impressed with the proposition that the neutral and not the belligerent is the proper judge in the circumstances.

You refer to the case of the tug F. B. Dalzell, which you state carried supplies and information to the English warship Essex from the port of New York, and suggest that this case in no wise differs from that of the steamship Locksun. In reply I have the honor to inform you that the result of this Government’s investigation is to the effect that the tug Dalzell did not as a fact carry supplies and information to any British warship from the port of New York. If, however, your excellency is in possession of facts showing the contrary, the Government will be glad to be furnished with such data in order that it may renew its investigation and establish the truth in regard to the tug Dalzell, whether or not it agrees with the present finding of the Government. It will be recalled, however, that the tug Dalzell is an American vessel and therefore is not subject to internment as that term is understood in international law. This circumstance is not regarded, however, as relieving the Government from the duty of preventing the use of American ports as bases of naval operations as required by the provisions of Hague Convention XIII of 1907.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

Treatment of armed merchant ships—The problem of conversionTreatment of armed merchant ships—The problem of conversion

[952] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 4, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/85

[953] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 4, 1914. .

File No. 763.72111/86

[954] The Acting Secretary of Commerce (Sweet) to the Secretary of State

Department of Commerce, Washington, August 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/281

[955] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 6, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/280

[956] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 7 p.m.

[957] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 8, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/287

[958] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) and the Secretary of Commerce (Redfield) to Collectors of Customs

Treasury Department, August 10, 1914.

T. D. 34693

[959] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 9, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/87

[960] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 12, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/543

[961] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 12, 1914. [Received August 13.]

File No. 763.72/481

[962] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/85

[963] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/86

[964] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/87

[965] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 25, 1914. [Received August 26.]

File No. 763.72111/88

[966] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1914.

[967] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the (Secretary of State

New York, August 31, 1914. [Received 12:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/96

[968] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

New York, September 1, 1914. [Received 8:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/113

[969] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office, September 2, 1914.[Left at the Department of State, 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/185

[970] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, September 3, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/96

[971] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/113

[972] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, September 4, 1914.[Received September 5.]

File No. 763.72111/144

[973] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 7, 1914

File No. 763.72111/156

[974] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 9, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/410

[975] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 9, 1914.

File No. 768.72111/411

[976] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, September 16, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/174

[977] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, September 17, 1914.

[978] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 17, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/191

[979] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Washington, September 17, 1914.

[980] The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States

Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/226a

[981] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, September 26, 1911

File No. 763.72111/156

[982] The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) to Collectors of Customs

Treasury Department, Washington, October 8, 1914 ,

T D. 34811

[983] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 15, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received October 16, 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/473

[984] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

[985] The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 11, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/681

[986] The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

Washington, November 16, 1914.

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/85

[Document 952]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 4, 1914. 1

No. 252]

Sir: In view of the state of war now existing between Great Britain and Germany, I have the honour, under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to make the following communication to you in respect to the arming of any merchant vessels in neutral waters:

As you are aware, it is recognized that a neutral Government is bound to use due diligence to prohibit its subjects or citizens from the building and fitting out to order of belligerents, vessels intended for warlike purposes and also to prevent the departure of any such vessel from its jurisdiction. The starting point for the universal recognition of this principle was the three rules formulated in Article 6 of the treaty between Great Britain and the United States of America for the amicable settlement of all causes of difference between the two countries, signed at Washington on May 8, 1871. These rules, which His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government agreed to observe as between themselves in future, are as follows:

A neutral government is bound—

First. To use due diligence to prevent the fitting out, arming, or equipping, within its jurisdiction, of any vessel which it has reasonable ground to believe is intended to cruise or to carry on war against a power with which it is at peace; and also to use like diligence to prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel intended to cruise or carry on war as above, such vessel having been specially adapted, in whole or in part, within such jurisdiction to warlike use.

Secondly. Not to permit or suffer either belligerent to make use of its ports or waters as the base of naval operations against the other, or for the purpose of the renewal or augmentation of military supplies or arms, or the recruitment of men.

Thirdly. To exercise due diligence in its own ports and waters, and as to all persons within its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the foregoing obligations and duties.

The above rules may be said to have acquired the force of generally recognized rules of international law, and the first of them is reproduced almost textually in Article 8 of the Hague convention No. XIII of 1907 concerning the rights and duties of neutral powers in case of maritime warfare, the principles of which have been agreed to by practically every maritime state.

It is known, however, that Germany, with whom Great Britain is at war, favours the policy of converting her merchant vessels into armed ships on the high seas, and it is probable, therefore, that attempts will be made to equip and despatch merchantmen for such conversion from the ports of the United States.

It is probable that, even if the final completion of the measures to fit out merchantmen to act as cruisers may have to be effected on the high seas, most of the preliminary arrangements will have been made before the vessels leave port, so that the warlike purpose to which they are to be put after leaving neutral waters must be more or less manifest before their departure.

In calling your attention to the above-mentioned rules of the treaty of Washington and the Hague convention, I have the honour to state that His Majesty’s Government will accordingly hold the United States Government responsible for any damages to British trade or shipping, or injury to British interests generally, which may be caused by such vessels having been equipped at, or departing from, United States ports.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay

1 No date of receipt is indicated on this or the following note (No. 254), also of August 4. The reply to No. 254 states that it was presented “on the following day” (August 5). As both notes bear the same date of preparation, including the notation in ink, “11 p.m.”, it is to be presumed that they were presented at the same time.

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/86

[Document 953]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 4, 1914. 1 .

No. 254]

Sir: His Majesty’s Government have been informed that the German vessel Kronprinz Wilhelm sailed from New York on the night of the 3d of August, without passengers, but with a heavy load of coal, 7,000 tons, and fitted with two long-range guns. Her superstructure had also been painted gray. All these preparations were made before the vessel left United States waters.

It is a matter of common knowledge that similar preparations are being made on board other German vessels, notably the Vaterland and the Barbarossa, in United States ports, and they will no doubt attempt to adopt the same tactics as the Kronprinz Wilhelm .

In view of the state of war now existing between Great Britain and Germany I have the honour, under instructions from Sir Edward Grey, to call your most serious attention to the action taken in regard to these vessels and to urge the United States Government to take immediate steps to prevent these and other such vessels leaving United States waters without passengers and after carrying out such obviously warlike preparations as described above, which, when carried out in neutral waters, constitute a distinct breach of the laws of neutrality.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay

1 See footnote to No. 252, ante, p.593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952]

The Acting Secretary of Commerce (Sweet) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/281

[Document 954]

The Acting Secretary of Commerce (Sweet) to the Secretary of State

Department of Commerce,
Washington, August 6, 1914.

Sir: The following telegram was sent on the 5th instant to all of the principal collectors of customs:

In pursuance my telegram of this day you are hereby instructed as follows: You will permit foreign vessels to clear only after they have filed with you their full manifests and you will at the same time notify master of each vessel that all outgoing foreign vessels will be subject to inspection of their papers and cargo by United States authorities within the territorial waters of the United States.

The following telegrams were sent to the Collector of Customs at New York:

Have representative of each foreign vessel in your port certify to this Department whether she is a merchant vessel intended solely for the carriage of passengers and freight, excluding munitions of war, or whether she is a part of the armed force of her nation. This information is for purpose of maintaining the neutrality of the United States under recent proclamation President. Clearance will be refused in absence of this certificate.

Wire Department before issuing clearance papers to foreign vessels unless you are satisfied after careful inspection that ship has not made any preparations while in port tending in any way to her conversion into a vessel of war. Taking on abnormal amount of coal, except in case of colliers, would indicate such conversion. Unpacking of guns already on board would be conclusive. Painting of vessel a war color would indicate conversion. It must be clear that she is not to be used for transportation recruits or reserves for a foreign army or navy. This does not prevent transportation of passengers in usual sense, as where there are women and children and men of different nationalities even though among them there were a few reserves without your knowledge. If her passengers are nearly all men and practically all of same nationality, clearance cannot be granted. It must be unquestionable that she has no arms or munitions of war aboard.

Respectfully,

E. F. Sweet
Acting Secretary

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/280

[Document 955]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 6, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

287. The British Admiralty state to naval attaché that German ships are leaving American ports constantly, provisioned and armed to prey on British commerce, and that British Government will undoubtedly claim full value for vessels destroyed or captured by such German ships. Such a claim may run into enormous sums.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 956]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 6, 6 p.m., 287. Department is surprised at the statement of British Admiralty which is not in accord with the facts. The United States is fulfilling and will fulfil its whole duty as a neutral. For the information of the British Government you may state that so far as this Government is now able to ascertain, no German vessels have left American ports since the declaration of war.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/287

[Document 957]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 8, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

304. Your August 7, 7 p.m., just received. My telegram of an hour ago answered this.1 My explanation to Sir Edward Grey this morning was full and satisfactory. He is informed by British Embassy at Washington and by me of our efficient and complete observance of neutrality in every respect and he has never doubted or questioned it. The whole matter is now perfectly understood here. Now inform him immediately that so far as our Government is able to ascertain no German ships have left American ports since the declaration of war.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) and the Secretary of Commerce (Redfield) to Collectors of Customs T. D. 34693

[Document 958]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) and the Secretary of Commerce (Redfield) to Collectors of Customs

Treasury Department,
August 10, 1914.

To Collectors of Customs: 1. You will permit foreign-bound vessels to clear only after they have filed with you their full and final manifests.

2. You will notify all merchant vessels in your district that they will be subject to inspection and examination of documents, ships, and cargoes by United States authorities before clearance is given, and will be subject to further examinations by United States authorities after clearance and while such vessel remains within the territorial waters of the United States. Such vessels shall stop and lie to for examination when signaled by a United States vessel.

3. Any foreign-bound vessel whose character as a merchant vessel is established to your satisfaction is entitled to clearance (subject to the requirements of paragraph 1), no matter what the character of her cargo or what her destination.

4. You will not refuse clearance to merchant vessels, whether of the United States or other neutral power, or whether of a belligerent power, solely on the ground that the cargo contains contraband of war.

5. When a vessel of a belligerent power, which has arrived as a merchant vessel, alters, or attempts to alter, her status as a merchant vessel or there is reason to believe she intends to alter such status, so as to become an auxiliary cruiser or an armed vessel in any degree, you will immediately notify the department by wire, giving all particulars. Any of the following acts will constitute such a change of status: (a) The placing in position or otherwise changing the location of guns which were on board the vessel at the time of her arrival;

(b) so changing the appearance, color, rig, or equipment of a vessel as to render her suitable for some purpose of war;

(c) the taking on board of guns, arms, or ammunition under circumstances which in any way indicate the outfitting of the vessel for any purpose of war, or in aid of a military expedition.

6. Should any vessel depart or attempt to depart from your district without a regular clearance, you will wire the department and also the commander of the nearest naval vessel or revenue cutter.

7. You will report by wire to the department and to the commander of the nearest naval vessel or naval station the arrivals and departures of all war vessels of foreign nations.

8. In case of doubt wire the department for instructions.

9. All telegrams relating to the foregoing and similar questions should be, until further orders, addressed, “Customs Division, Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.”

W. G. Mcadoo
Secretary of the Treasury
Wm. C. Redfield
Secretary of Commerce

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/87

[Document 959]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 9, 1914.

No. 259]

Sir: With reference to my note No 252 of the 4th instant,2 I have the honour to inform you that I have now received instructions from. Sir Edward Grey to make a further communication to you in explanation of the position taken by His Majesty’s Government in regard to the question of armed merchantmen.

As you are no doubt aware, a certain number of British merchant vessels are armed, but this is a precautionary measure adopted solely for the purpose of defence, which, under existing rules of international law, is the right of all merchant vessels when attacked.

According to the British rule, British merchant vessels can not be converted into men-of-war in any foreign port, for the reason that Great Britain does not admit the right of any power to do this on the high seas. The duty of a neutral to intern or order the immediate departure of belligerent vessels is limited to actual and potential men-of-war, and, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, there can therefore be no right on the part of neutral Governments to intern British armed merchant vessels, which can not be converted into men-of-war on the high seas, nor to require them to land their guns before proceeding to sea.

On the other hand, the German Government have consistently claimed the right of conversion on the high seas, and His Majesty’s Government therefore maintain their claim that vessels which are adapted for conversion and under German rules may be converted into men-of-war on the high seas should be interned in the absence of binding assurances, the responsibility for which must be assumed by the neutral Government concerned, that they shall not be so converted.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay

2  Ante, p. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/543

[Document 960]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 12, 1914.

No. 264]

Sir: With reference to my notes Nos. 2522 and 259 of August 4 and August 9, respectively, stating and explaining the position taken up by His Majesty’s Government in regard to the question of armed merchantmen, I have the honour to state that I have now been informed by Sir Edward Grey that exactly similar instructions were at the same time issued by him to His Majesty’s representatives in practically all neutral countries to address the same communications to the respective Governments to which they were accredited.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay

2  Ante, p. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/481

[Document 961]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 12, 1914.
[Received August 13.]

No. 267]

Sir: In view of the state of war now existing between Great Britain and Austria-Hungary I have the honour, under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to refer you to my note No. 252 of the 4th instant,1 stating the position taken by His Majesty’s Government in respect to the arming of merchant vessels in neutral countries and the responsibility of neutrals.

I am to call your attention to the fact that it is known that Austria-Hungary, like Germany, favours the policy of converting her merchant vessels into armed ships on the high seas and that it is probable therefore that attempts will be made to equip and despatch merchantmen for such conversion from the ports of the United States.

A similar communication is being addressed by His Majesty’s representatives to practically all the neutral powers.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay

1  Ante, p. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) File No. 763.72111/85

[Document 962]

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914.

Sir: I Have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication No. 252 of the 4th instant, which was made to this Government in pursuance of instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, with respect to the arming of merchant vessels in neutral waters.

The communication states the principles of neutrality, as contained in the treaty signed at Washington on May 8, 1871, by representatives of the United States and Great Britain, and reproduced, as you say, almost textually in Article 8 of the Hague convention, signed October 18, 1907, concerning the rights and duties of neutral powers in case of maritime warfare, the principles of which have been, as you state, agreed to by practically every maritime power.

The communication next considers the question of conversion of enemy merchantmen on the high seas, a policy which your Government opposes. It is then stated that Germany favors the policy of conversion; that it will probably attempt to use the ports of the United States to equip and despatch merchantmen for conversion from such ports; and that most of the preliminary arrangements leading to conversion will have to be made within neutral ports before the vessels proceed to the high seas to complete their transformation into vessels of war.

The purpose of the communication is apparently to lay down the principles of law which your Government believe should be applied by the United States in fulfilling its neutral obligations, especially in the matter of conversion of merchant vessels into war vessels, and, assuming these principles to be correct, to tax this Government with damages to British trade or shipping, or injury to British interests generally, if these principles, the correctness of which you assume, are not applied to German merchant vessels “equipped at, or departing from, United States ports.”

In acknowledging this communication, it does not seem appropriate to enter into any discussion as to what may or what may not be the policy of Germany in the matter of converting its merchant ships, which may be within the jurisdiction of the United States, into ships of war after they have left American ports and have reached the high seas. The assertion of the right so to convert merchant ships upon the high seas, made by Germany at the Second Hague Conference and maintained at the London Naval Conference, does not of itself indicate an intention on the part of the German Government to exercise this right, and this Department does not feel justified in its correspondence with foreign governments to assume, in the absence of specific information, an intention on the part of Germany so to do. The Department will, however, carefully examine the facts and circumstances of any particular case when it is called to its attention.

The question of the place where the belligerent right of conversion may be exercised, difficult in itself, is complicated by the fact that there has been a difference of opinion among the maritime states parties to the present war, and that at the conferences, to which reference has been made, the British delegation stated that there was no rule of international law on the question. Germany and Austria-Hungary insisted at the conferences upon the right to convert merchant vessels upon the high seas. France and Russia, allies of Great Britain in the present war, likewise insisted upon the right so to convert. Great Britain and Belgium, intimately associated with France and Russia in the prosecution of hostilities against Germany and Austria-Hungary, opposed the right of conversion on the high seas at the Second Hague Conference, where both these nations were represented; and at the London Naval Conference, to which Belgium was not invited and in which it did not participate, Great Britain maintained its previous attitude. It is thus seen that the right to convert merchant vessels upon the high seas was asserted in international conferences by four of the maritime countries now at war and that two of the maritime nations now at war opposed this contention. It is further seen that the maritime nations at war with Germany and Austria-Hungary are evenly divided on this question.

At the Second Hague Conference, the British delegation, opposing conversion on the high seas, stated that there was no rule of international law on the question; that in its carefully prepared memorandum presented to the powers invited to the London Naval Conference, the British Government held that “no general practice of nations has prevailed in the past on this point from which any principles can be deduced and formulated as the established rules of international law. So far as can be ascertained there are no precedents on the subject.”

In the official report of the conference, drafted by Mr. Renault, it is stated that agreement on conversion upon the high seas was impossible; and, in the report of the British delegates to their Government, it is said:

We were met with a refusal to make any concessions or to abate one jot from the claim to the absolutely unfettered exercise of the right, which its advocates vindicate as a rule forming part of the existing law of nations. In these circumstances we felt that we had no option but to decline to admit the right, and the result is that the question remains an open one.

It is obvious that the subject of conversion must be carefully examined and considered, and, in view of these circumstances, it is deemed by the Department of State inexpedient to declare a policy as to what measures it will take in a contingency which has not yet arisen, and that it may well content itself, in so far as this matter is concerned, with an acknowledgment of your note.

In the course of your communication it is stated as recognized “that a neutral government is bound to use due diligence to prohibit its subjects or citizens from the building or fitting out to the order of belligerents, vessels intended for warlike purposes and also to prevent the departure of such vessels from its jurisdiction.” It is asserted in this connection that “the starting point for the universal recognition of this principle was the three rules formulated in Article 6 of the treaty between Great Britain and the United States of America for the amicable settlement of all causes of difference between the two countries, signed at Washington on May 8, 1871.” After quoting the Three Rules of Washington, the note thus continues:

The above rules may be said to have acquired the force of generally recognized rules of international law, and the first of them is reproduced almost textually in Article 8 of the Hague convention No. XIII of 1907 concerning the rights and duties of neutral powers in case of maritime warfare, the principles of which have been agreed to by practically every maritime State.

As the communication apparently lays great stress on the expression “due diligence,” contained in the treaty of Washington, it is believed material to the present occasion to quote the following definition of it, contained in the Geneva award of 1872:

The “due diligence” referred to in the first and third of the said rules ought to be exercised by neutral Governments in exact proportion to the risks to which either of the belligerents may be exposed, from a failure to fulfill the obligations of neutrality on their part.

The expression “due diligence” was contained in the draft submitted by the British delegation to the Second Hague Conference, upon which Article 8 was based. Article 8 as finally adopted is as follows: ARTICLE 8A neutral Government is bound to employ the means at its disposal to prevent the fitting out or arming of any vessel within its jurisdiction which it has reason to believe is intended to cruise or engage in hostile operations, against a Power with which that Government is at peace. It is also bound to display the same vigilance to prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel intended to cruise, or engage in hostile operations, which had been adapted entirely or partly within the said jurisdiction for use in war.

As the expression “due diligence” was considered obscure, it was rejected, as the learned reporter of the convention, Mr. Louis Renault, says in the elaborate report which accompanies the convention and which is, in accordance with the practice of international conferences, to be considered as the official and authoritative interpretation of the convention which it explains, justifies, and interprets. “The expression of due diligence,” he says, “which has become celebrated by its obscurity since its solemn interpretation, was rejected. The convention merely requires in the first instance (On se contente de dire d’abord) that the neutral is bound to employ the means at its disposal. . . then, to display the same vigilance.”

It is to be presumed that Article 8 which “reproduced almost textually” the first rule of the treaty of Washington, is to be interpreted in the sense in which Mr. Renault’s report shows it to have been adopted, especially as Great Britain and the United States have ratified the convention without any objection or reservation as to Article 8 thereof.

It seems obvious therefore that by neither the terms nor the interpretation of the provisions of the treaties on this point is the United States bound to assume the attitude of an insurer. Consequently the United States disclaims as a correct statement of its responsibility the assertion in your note that “His Majesty’s Government will accordingly hold the United States Government responsible for any damages to British trade or shipping, or injury to British interests generally, which may be caused by such vessels having been equipped at, or departing from, United States ports.”

The United States has always looked upon the Three Rules of Washington as declaratory of international law, and as the necessary and natural consequences of the doctrine of neutrality, proclaimed and enforced by the United States since the wars of the French Revolution, to which Great Britain was a party. The Three Rules can, in the opinion of this Government, only be considered as the starting point of the doctrine of that degree of diligence which a neutral should observe in the sense that its recognition by Great Britain in an important international controversy called marked attention to an existing doctrine, and furnished an incentive to its incorporation and definition in the Hague convention concerning the rights and duties of neutral powers in case of maritime warfare.

The United States, since the earliest days of its existence, has been as solicitous of its neutral duties as of its neutral rights, and, without further consideration of your communication at this time, I request you to state to your Government that there is no reason to anticipate that the United States will be less mindful of its duties or of its rights as a neutral in the present case than it has been in the past.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) File No. 763.72111/86

[Document 963]

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge your note No. 254 dated August 4, 1914, 11 p.m.,1 but presented to the Department on the following day, on the subject of the equipment and sailing of the Kronprinz Wilhelm from New York on the night of the 3d instant, and of preparations being made on board the German vessels Vaterland and Barbarossa in United States ports.

Under instructions from Sir Edward Grey you call my attention, in view of the state of war existing between Great Britain and Germany, “to the action taken in regard to these vessels and to urge the United States Government to take immediate steps to prevent these and other such vessels leaving United States waters without passengers and after carrying out such obviously warlike preparations as described above, which, when carried out in neutral waters, constitute a distinct breach of the laws of neutrality.”

In reply I have the honor to inform you that as the instance of the Kronprinz Wilhelm occurred, as you say, on the 3d instant before the declaration of war with Germany had been issued by the British Government, it would appear that the statement in your last paragraph quoted above has no application to the case of that vessel.

As to the attitude of the United States Government toward the other vessels mentioned in your note I have the honor to advise you that these vessels are, and have been for some time, under the surveillance of United States authorities with a view to preventing a breach by them of the neutrality of the United States. The Department is advised that these vessels have not as yet left American waters.

With reference to your statement quoted above as to what in the opinion of His Britannic Majesty’s Government may be considered as constituting a breach of the laws of neutrality in cases of this character, I have the honor to refer you to my note of the 19th instant 1 relating in some respects to the rights and duties of the United States as a neutral power during the pending European wars.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953].

1  Ante, p. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962].

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) File No. 763.72111/87

[Document 964]

The Secretary of State to the British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay)

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication No. 259 of the 9th instant,2 made to the Department of State under instructions from Sir Edward Grey, in regard to the question of armed merchantmen, informing this Government that a certain number of the British merchant vessels are armed as a precautionary measure for the purpose of defense, and maintaining that such merchant vessels can not be considered as vessels of war or subjected to the treatment properly accorded to vessels of the latter category in neutral ports.

In the last paragraph of this communication, you call attention to the right claimed by the German Government, in accordance with its rules, to convert its merchant vessels upon the high seas into vessels of war, and the communication states the contention of the British Government that the neutral Government concerned is taxed with responsibility if it does not intern such vessels, in the absence of binding assurances that they will not be converted into men-of-war on the high seas.

The Department of State acknowledges without comment the statement of British policy in such matters and also the British understanding of Germany’s intentions and policy, but as to the responsibility of the United States in the premises, you are referred to Department’s note of the 19th instant replying to your note No. 252 of the 4th instant.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

2  Ante, p.598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/88

[Document 965]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 25, 1914.
[Received August 26.]

No. 289]

Sir: With reference to Mr. Barclay’s notes Nos. 252 1 and 259 2 of the 4th and 9th of August, respectively, fully explaining the position taken up by His Majesty’s Government in regard to the question of armed merchantmen, I have the honour, in view of the fact that a number of British armed merchantmen will now be visiting United States ports, to reiterate that the arming of British merchantmen is solely a precautionary measure adopted for the purpose of defence against attack from hostile craft.

I have at the same time been instructed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to give the United States Government the fullest assurances that British merchant vessels will never be used for purposes of attack, that they are merely peaceful traders armed only for defence, that they will never fire unless first fired upon, and that they will never under any circumstances attack any vessel.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1  Ante, p. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

2  Ante, p.598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 966]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 25th instant in which, referring to previous correspondence, you state that, in view of the fact that a number of British armed merchantmen will now be visiting United States ports, you desire to reiterate that the arming of British merchantmen is solely a precautionary measure adopted for the purpose of defense against attack from hostile craft. You add that you have been instructed by His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to give the Government of the United States the fullest assurances that British merchant vessels will never be used for purposes of attack, that they are merely peaceful traders armed only for defense, that they will never fire unless first fired upon, and that they will never under any circumstances attack any vessel.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the (Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/96

[Document 967]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the (Secretary of State

New York, August 31, 1914.
[Received 12:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I beg to draw your attention to the fact that the White Star liner Adriatic entered this port armed with cannons and has not left New York within twenty-four hours.

J. Bernstorff

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/113

[Document 968]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

New York, September 1, 1914.
[Received 8:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

British steamer Merion, American Line, 13,000 tons burden, arrived last night at Philadelphia armed with six cannons. Intends staying several days. Takes freight for Liverpool.

I beg to draw your attention to the above.

J. Bernstorff

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72111/185

[Document 969]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador at Washington (Spring Rice)

Foreign Office,
September 2, 1914.[Left at the Department of State, 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Nothing is known either by Admiralty or White Star Line of Adriatic’s carrying troops. That would be contrary to our proposal that vessels armed only for defensive purposes and engaged solely in carrying cargoes of peaceful merchandise and as regards which there is an undertaking that they will never use force unless attacked should be treated as ordinary merchant vessels.

Please explain about Adriatic and endeavour to get State Department to make some fair distinction as above that would apply equally to British and German ships.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111/96

[Document 970]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, September 3, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your telegram August 31 regarding S. S. Adriatic . Department being satisfied that vessel is merchantman has allowed clearance accordingly.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111/113

[Document 971]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your telegram September 1. This Department being satisfied that Merion is merchant vessel has advised her clearance. Department is assured that all ammunition will be taken off and guns dismounted and placed in her hold.

W. J. Bryan

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/144

[Document 972]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, September 4, 1914.[Received September 5.]

No. 302]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that at the request of your Department1 I drew the attention of my Government to the fact that two British merchant vessels, the Adriatic and the Merion, were at present in United States ports, and that they were carrying guns—the former four and the latter six. I added that the fact of these vessels carrying guns was likely to lead to the raising of difficult questions as to the enforcement by the United States Government of the neutrality of American ports, although an assurance had been given that these guns would only be used for defensive purposes and in case the merchant vessels in question were attacked by an enemy ship when on a commercial voyage.

I have now received a reply from Sir Edward Grey, in which he informs me that His Majesty’s Government hold the view that it is not in accordance with neutrality and international law to detain in neutral ports merchant vessels armed with purely defensive armaments. But in view of the fact that the United States Government is detaining armed merchant vessels prepared for offensive warfare, and in order to avoid the difficult questions of the character and degree of armament which would justify detention, His Majesty’s Government have made arrangements for landing the guns of the Merion, the Adriatic having already sailed before the orders reached her. In the case of the latter ship, the passenger list and cargo had proved that she was proceeding to sea on ordinary commercial business. These and other papers relative to the case will be duly communicated to your Department.

This action has been taken without prejudice to the general principle which His Majesty’s Government have enunciated and to which they adhere.

It is presumed that no objection will be raised by your Government to the guns being shipped subsequently to England as cargo in some vessel without mountings or ammunition.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Request made by telephone

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/156

[Document 973]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

memorandum

The British Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State of the United States and, with reference to his note No. 302 of September 4, has the honour to state that he is informed by the British Consul General that the steamship Adriatic, which sailed from New York on September 3 with four guns mounted and 200 rounds of ammunition, took 28 first-class passengers, 43 second, and 89 third. She also took 637 bags of mail and a general cargo of provisions and manufactured goods. She had no war material on board and no army reservists.

These data bear out the assurances that the Adriatic is bound on a peaceful commercial voyage and that her armament is destined solely for defensive purposes.

British Embassy,
Washington, September 7, 1914 .
[Received September 10.]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/410

[Document 974]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

memorandum

The German Government have openly entered upon the policy of arming merchant ships as commerce destroyers and even claim the right to carry out the process of arming and equipping such merchant ships in neutral harbours or on the high seas. It is in consequence of this that the British Admiralty have been compelled, in accordance with the practice followed in the great wars of history, to arm a certain number of British merchant ships for self-defence only.

The practice of arming ships in self-defence is very old and has been ordered by. Royal proclamation in England from early in the seventeenth century. During the Napoleonic wars the right to arm in self-defence was recognized by British and United States prize courts in the cases of the Catherine Elizabeth, (British) and the Nereide (United States). The right of a merchant ship of a belligerent to carry arms and resist capture is clearly and definitely laid down in modern times. The right of resistance of merchant vessels is recognized by the United States naval war code, by the Italian code for mercantile marine, and by the Russian prize regulations. Writers of authority in many European countries, also recognize the right. To mention a German authority, it may be stated that the late Dr. Perels, at one time legal adviser to the German Admiralty, quotes with approval Article 10 of the United States naval war code, which states: “The prisoners of merchant vessels of an enemy who in self-defence and in protection of the vessel placed in their charge resist an attack, are entitled to the status of prisoners of war.” The Institute of International Law at its meeting in 1913 prepared and adopted a manual of the laws of naval warfare, Article 10 of which expressly declared that private ships are allowed to employ force to defend themselves against the attack of an enemy’s ship.

A merchant vessel armed purely for self-defence is therefore entitled under international law to enjoy the status of a peaceful trading ship in neutral ports and His Majesty’s Government do not ask for better treatment for British merchant ships in this respect than might be accorded to those of other powers. They consider that only those merchant ships which are intended for use as cruisers should be treated as ships of war and that the question whether a particular ship carrying an armament is intended for offensive or defensive action must be decided by the simple criterion whether she is engaged in ordinary commerce and embarking cargo and passengers in the ordinary way. If so, there is no rule in international law that would justify such vessel, even if armed, being treated otherwise than as a peaceful trader.

British Embassy,

Washington, September 9, 1914.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72111/411

[Document 975]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

memorandum

In a memorandum of to-day’s date the British Ambassador has set forth the grounds upon which His Majesty’s Government hold that British merchant vessels which are armed for defensive purposes only are entitled to be treated as peaceful trading vessels. In urging this view upon the consideration of the United States Government the British Ambassador is instructed to state that it is believed that German merchant vessels with offensive armament have escaped from American ports, especially from ports in South America, to prey upon British commerce in spite of all the precautions taken. German cruisers in the Atlantic continue by one means or another to obtain ample supplies of coal shipped to them from neutral ports, and if the United States Government take the view that British merchant vessels which are bona fide engaged in commerce and carry guns at the stern only are not permitted purely defensive armament, unavoidable injury may ensue to British interests and indirectly also to United States trade which will be deplorable.

British Embassy,
Washington, September 9, 1914.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/174

[Document 976]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, September 16, 1914.

No. 315]

Sir: With reference to my note No. 315 of yesterday’s date2 respecting large cargoes of coal being taken on board German ships in United States ports, I have the honour to bring to your notice that the Vaterland which is in readiness to sail from New York Harbour has 17,000 tons of coal on board.

In calling your attention to the above fact, which clearly indicates that the ship in question is not bent on a peaceful mission, and also in view of the circumstance that there is a strong probability of the Vaterland being converted into a German armed cruiser on the high seas, I have the honour to request that pending investigation by the United States authorities the vessel may be detained with a view to such action as the United States Government may think right and proper.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

2 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 977]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, September 17, 1914.

Excellency: The Department has received your note of the 16th instant calling attention specially to the Vaterland which you state is in readiness to sail from New York Harbor with 17,000 tons of coal, on board. You add that there is a strong probability of the Vaterland’s being converted into a German armed cruiser on the high seas.

In reply I have the honor to state that your information differs from the Department’s regarding the intentions of the Vaterland and the amount of coal on board, since on the 14th instant this Government was advised by its agents that this vessel had on board 5,000 tons of coal, no cargo, no provisions, and had apparently no intention to sail immediately. The appropriate officers of the Government are under instructions to report immediately any new facts regarding foreign vessels in New York Harbor, particularly the German ships to which you have called the attention of this Government.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/191

[Document 978]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

memorandum

With reference to recent conversations at the State Department respecting the preparations for departure from New York which are apparently being made by ships of the Hamburg-American Line and are of such a nature as to lead to the presumption that belligerent operations are intended, His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador has the honour to observe that there is grave reason to believe that the ships in question might be able to effect their departure from neutral waters without difficulty unless there is a United States naval force on the spot to prevent them.

British Embassy,
Washington, September 17, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 979]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

memorandum

With reference to the memorandum of His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador, dated the 17th instant, relative to the possible departure from the port of New York of ships of the Hamburg-American Line with the intention of engaging in belligerent operations, the Acting Secretary of State has the honor to observe that he is advised that although the U. S. S. Florida has been detached from patrol duty at New York, the U. S. revenue cutter Seneca is on that station, together with several destroyers for use in case a chase is necessary.

The Department of State is now advised of the investigation made of German vessels in New York Harbor, and particularly of the Hamburg-American ship Pisa. This investigation discloses that with the exception of the Pisa all of the vessels carried cargo coal only, but none to an amount to excite suspicion. The Pisa, however, carries a large amount of coal and machinery oil besides provisions and fire brick, but there is apparently no intention to sail. The report of the investigation specially mentions that there has been “no painting out of names.”

The appropriate officers of the Government have been directed to report any further developments in regard to these vessels.

Department of State,
Washington, September 17, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States File No. 763.72111/226a

[Document 980]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Belligerent States

Department of State,
Washington, September 19, 1914.

[Circular]

Dear Mr. Ambassador: I am enclosing for your information two memoranda, which the Department has issued to-day and which define the general rules which this Government will follow in dealing with cases involving the status of armed merchant vessels visiting American ports, and with cases of merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent warships from American ports.1

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

[Enclosure]

THE STATUS OF ARMED MERCHANT VESSELS

A. A merchant vessel of belligerent nationality may carry an armament and ammunition for the sole purpose of defense without acquiring the character of a ship of war.

B. The presence of an armament and ammunition on board a merchant vessel creates a presumption that the armament is for offensive purposes, but the owners or agents may overcome this presumption by evidence showing that the vessel carries armament solely for defense.

C. Evidence necessary to establish the fact that the armament is solely for defense and will not be used offensively, whether the armament be mounted or stowed below, must be presented in each case independently at an official investigation. The result of the investigation must show conclusively that the armament is not intended for, and will not be used in, offensive operations. Indications that the armament will not be used offensively are: 1. That the caliber of the guns carried does not exceed six inches.

2. That the guns and small arms carried are few in number.

3. That no guns are mounted on the forward part of the vessel.

4. That the quantity of ammunition carried is small.

5. That the vessel is manned by its usual crew, and the officers are the same as those on board before war was declared.

6. That the vessel intends to and actually does clear for a port lying in its usual trade route, or a port indicating its purpose to continue in the same trade in which it was engaged before war was declared.

7. That the vessel takes on board fuel and supplies sufficient only to carry it to its port of destination, or the same quantity substantially which it has been accustomed to take for a voyage before war was declared.

8. That the cargo of the vessel consists of articles of commerce unsuited for the use of a ship of war in operations against an enemy.

9. That the vessel carries passengers who are as a whole unfitted to enter the military or naval service of the belligerent whose flag the vessel files, or of any of its allies, and particularly if the passenger list includes women and children.

10. That the speed of the ship is slow.

D. Port authorities, on the arrival in a port of the United States of an armed vessel of belligerent nationality, claiming to be a merchant vessel, should immediately investigate and report to Washington on the foregoing indications as to the intended use of the armament, in order that it may be determined whether the evidence is sufficient to remove the presumption that the vessel is, and should be treated as, a ship of war. Clearance will not be granted until authorized from Washington, and the master will be so informed upon arrival.

E. The conversion of a merchant vessel into a ship of war is a question of fact which is to be established by direct or circumstantial evidence of intention to use the vessel as a ship of war.

1 Post, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993].

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) File No. 763.72111/156

[Document 981]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State,
Washington, September 26, 1911

No. 500]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 4th instant,1 in which, with reference to the presence in American ports of the British armed merchant vessels Adriatic and Merion, you advise the Department of the receipt of a despatch from Sir Edward Grey in which he states that His Majesty’s Government hold the view that it is not in accordance with neutrality and international law to detain in neutral ports merchant vessels armed with purely defensive armaments.

In reply I have the honor to say that this Government has had the matter of the status of armed merchant vessels under consideration, and that it has already made a public announcement thereon. In this relation I have also the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Embassy’s memorandum of the 7th instant,2 announcing the departure of the Adriatic from New York, and pointing out that, as she had no war material on board and carried no army reservists, these data bear out the assurances that the Adriatic was bound on a peaceful commercial voyage and that her armament was destined solely for defensive purposes.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972].

2  Ante, p. 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974].

The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) to Collectors of Customs T D. 34811

[Document 982]

The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) to Collectors of Customs

Treasury Department, Washington, October 8, 1914 ,

To Collectors of Customs: Your attention is invited to T. D. 34693 of August 10, 1914,1 paragraph 5 of which specifies certain acts which will change the status of a merchant vessel to that of a war vessel.

You are instructed that a mere change of the color of a merchant vessel or of any portion thereof, evidently designed only to render her less visible and diminish the risk of capture, shall not be deemed to constitute a change of the status of the vessel when not accompanied by any other evidence of intent to alter her status as a merchant vessel.

T. D. 34693 is therefore hereby modified accordingly.

Andrew J. Peters
Assistant Secretary

1  Ante, p.597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/473

[Document 983]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 15, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received October 16, 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

515. The Foreign Office sends me the following memorandum on the subject of the treatment of armed merchant ships in neutral ports:

According to an official notice in the Westminster Gazette of September 21, 1914, the Department of State at Washington has ruled that the ships of belligerents which are furnished with armament and ammunition shall nevertheless be treated in American ports as merchant ships, provided the armament serves exclusively defensive purposes. This ruling fails wholly to comply with the principles of neutrality.

The purpose of the equipment of the British merchant vessels with artillery is armed resistance against the German cruisers. Such resistance is contrary to international law because a merchant vessel is not permitted to defend itself in a military sense against a war vessel; the act of resistance would give the warship [the right to send the merchant ship to the bottom] with crew and passengers. It may be questioned whether ships armed in this manner may be admitted into the ports of a neutral country at all. In any event, such ships cannot enjoy any better treatment in neutral ports than regular warships intended for use in legitimate warfare; they would, therefore, at least be subject to the rules issued by a neutral country restricting the stay of warships.

If the American Government believes that it fulfills its duty as a neutral by confining the admission of armed merchant ships to such ships as are fitted out for defensive purposes only, it must be pointed out that as far as determining the warlike character of a ship is concerned, the distinction between offensive and defensive arms is irrelevant; the destination of the ship for use of any kind in war is conclusive. Furthermore, restrictions of the extent of armament afford no guarantee that ships armed for defensive will not, in certain circumstances, be used for offensive purposes.

Gerard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 984]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your 515, October 15. The Government of the United States is obliged to dissent from the views of the German Government as expressed in your telegram in regard to the treatment to be accorded armed merchant vessels of belligerent nationality in neutral ports. The practice of a majority of nations and the consensus of opinion by the leading authorities on international law, including many German writers, support the proposition that merchant vessels may arm for defense without losing their private character and that they may employ such armament against hostile attack without contravening the principles of international law.

The purpose of an armament on a merchant vessel is to be determined by various circumstances, among which are the number and position of the guns on the vessel, the quantity of ammunition and fuel, the number and sex of the passengers, the nature of the cargo, etc. Tested by evidence of this character the question as to whether an armament on a merchant vessel is intended solely for defensive purposes may be readily answered and the neutral government should regulate its treatment of the vessel in accordance with the intended use of the armament.

This Government considers that in permitting a private vessel having a general cargo, a customary amount of fuel, an average crew, and passengers of both sexes on board, and carrying a small armament and a small amount of ammunition, to enjoy the hospitality of an American port as a merchant vessel, it is in no way violating its duty as a neutral. Nevertheless it is not unmindful of the fact that the circumstances of a particular case may be such as to cause embarrassment and possible controversy as to the character of an armed private vessel visiting its ports. Recognizing, therefore, the desirability of avoiding a ground of complaint this Government, as soon as a case arose, while frankly admitting the right of a merchant vessel to carry a defensive armament, expressed its disapprobation of a practice which compelled it to pass upon a vessel’s intended use, which opinion if proven subsequently to be erroneous might constitute a ground for a charge of unneutral conduct.

As a result of these representations no merchant vessels with armaments have visited the ports of the United States since the 10th of September. In fact from the beginning of the European wars but two armed private vessels have entered or cleared from ports of this country and as to these vessels their character as merchant vessels was conclusively established.

Please bring the foregoing to the attention of the German Government and in doing so express the hope that they will also prevent their merchant vessels from entering the ports of the United States carrying armaments even for defensive purposes though they may possess the right to do so by the rules of international law.

Lansing

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/681

[Document 985]

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 11, 1914.

From all the information which reaches this Embassy it appears that a number of the German liners now in American ports are quite ready for sea and are prepared to sail at a moment’s notice. There is also strong reason for the belief that a plan has been formed and may be put into execution in a short time by which these fast ships will participate in belligerent operations in conjunction with the German cruisers now in the Pacific against the commerce and naval forces of the Allies in the Atlantic and elsewhere. The consequences of such a contingency would be most serious. If after the many warnings which have been addressed to the United States Government the German liners are eventually found to engage in belligerent action, the British Government would be bound to hold that of the United States responsible for the possible serious losses which might ensue to the shipping and trade of Great Britain.

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy [Document 986]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

memorandum

In reply to British Embassy’s memorandum of the 11th instant with reference to the supposed plan of a number of German liners in American ports to prepare to sail at short notice and participate in belligerent operations in conjunction with German cruisers now in Pacific waters, the Department of State has to state that the United States Government is continuing its customary vigilance to maintain the neutrality of the United States.

With reference to the responsibility of the United States in this respect as a neutral in the present war, the Department of State has the honor to refer the British Embassy to the note of the Secretary of State to Mr. Colville Barclay, Chargé d’Affaires of Great Britain, dated the 19th of August last.1 .

Department of State ,

Washington, November 16, 1914.

1  Ante, p. 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962]

Treatment of merchant ships supplying belligerent warshipsTreatment of merchant ships supplying belligerent warships

File No. 763.72111/21

[987] The Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, August 11, 1914.

[988] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914.

[989] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/54

[990] The Collector of Customs at San Francisco (Davis) to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

San Francisco, August 21, 1914. [Telephoned to the Department of State by the Treasury Department, August 20 [21], 1914, 9:50 a.m.]

[991] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, August 22, 1914.

[992] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, September 15, 1914. [Received September 17.]

File No. 763.72111/180

[993] Memorandum issued by the Secretary of State

September 19, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/226a

[994] The Vice Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Rio De Janeiro, September 21, 1914, midnight. [Received September 22, 4:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111B46/–

[995] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Washington, September 21, 1914. [Received September 23.]

File No. 763.72111/204

[996] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, September 29, 1914.

[997] The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

Washington, October 1, 1914.[Received October 2.]

File No. 195.1/108

[998] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/241

[999] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, October 13, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/446

[1000] The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters)

Department of State , Washington, October 17, 1914.

[1001] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, October 14, 1914. [Received October 15.]

File No. 195.1/128

[1002] The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, October 15, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/471

[1003] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State , Washington, October 22, 1914.

[1004] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy , Washington, October 20, 1914. [Received October 22.]

File No. 195.1/142

[1005] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 24, 1914. [Received October 27.]

File No. 763.72111/564

[1006] The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

[1007] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 31, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/724

[1008] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, November 1, 1914, 9:30 a.m.

[1009] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 2, 1914.

[1010] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/616

[1011] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 15, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1115

[1012] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72111B46/5

[1013] The Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Valparaiso, November 21, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111Sa1/1

[1014] The Acting Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State, Washington, November 22, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/721a

[1015] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 23, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1115

[1016] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 23, 1914. [Received November 24.]

File No. 763.72111/736

[1017] The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/994

[1018] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/595

[1019] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, November 24, 1914. [Received November 25.]

File No. 763.72111/752

[1020] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/736

[1021] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 763.72111B46/5

[1022] The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State, Washington, November 25, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/824a

[1023] The Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Valparaiso, November 26, 1914, 4 a.m. [Received 10:10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111/791

[1024] The Acting Secretary of State to the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling)

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914. 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/796

[1025] The British, Embassy to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 27, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/860

[1026] The Acting Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/864a

[1027] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/806

[1028] The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

Washington, December 1, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/994

[1029] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/806

[1030] The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State, Washington, December 3, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/998a

[1031] The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters)

Department of State, Washington, December 3, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1100

[1032] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1914.

File No. 195.1/160

[1033] The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

Washington, December 16, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1106

[1034] The British, Embassy to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 21, 1914. [Received December 23.]

File No. 703.72111/1264

[1035] The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

Washington, December 23, 1914.

[1036] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington December 15, 1914. [Received December 16.]

File No. 763.72111Em1/1

[1037] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Wshington, December 24, 1914.

[1038] The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

Washington, December 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1161

[1039] The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Santiago, December 29, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received December 30, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111Sa1/12

[1040] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher)

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1914, 5 p.m.

[1041] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State, Washington, January 11, 1915.

File No. 763.72111/1409a

[1042] The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State, Washington, January 11, 1915.

File No. 763.72111/1404a

The Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) to the Secretary of State [Document 987]

The Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, August 11, 1914.

Sir: The collector of customs at New York reports by telephone the following facts in relation to the German S. S. Barbarossa :

The Barbarossa is taking on board 5,000 tons of coal, filling not only coal bunkers but also all of the cargo hatches, except one. The quantity of coal necessary for the trip to Bremen is 1,500 tons. On the pier alongside of the steamship lie three large wooden beams, about 35 feet in length, which it is believed are intended for use in transferring coal at sea. The customs inspectors state that three similar beams were laden on the S. S. Kronprinz Wilhelm , of this line, immediately prior to her departure from this port on August 3. There are also on the pier 15 coal buckets, about 10 of which are new, and a quantity of wire cable, all of which would seem to be intended to facilitate the transfer of coal at sea. In addition to the above, there are about 1,117 barrels of fuel oil now lying alongside the steamer on lighters, which it is believed are intended to be laden and the hatch still remaining vacant. These are all the facts available. So far as known she has no arms and no ammunition on board, has not been repainted and has not changed her rig or equipment.

Please advise this Department whether, if it is satisfied that it is the purpose of the Barbarossa to recoal ships of war of one of the belligerent powers at sea, such fact would constitute sufficient grounds for refusing clearance.

Respectfully,

Byron R. Newton
Acting Secretary

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 988]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your letter August 11 regarding coaling of Barbarossa at New York. Assuming vessel is private ship Department on facts stated sees no ground for refusing clearance.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/54

[Document 989]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to state that this Department is in receipt of the following telegram dated the 19th instant from the collector of customs at San Francisco, California:

Have just learned that John Rothschild and Company on Tuesday August 11 bought 500 tons sack coal from Western Fuel Company and arranged with one Simon Reimer and the German Consul to deliver this coal to cruiser Leipzig at sea, one half of which was loaded on lighters. They engaged tugboat man to deliver the coal and agreed to pay for his services $5,000. Plan ultimately fell through and this same coal is now being delivered to steamer Mazatlan. Mazatlan is under German flag and am informed that she will apply for change to Mexican registry. According to my information Mazatlan will clear for Mexico and deliver this coal to German cruiser either at sea or Mexican coast. Will verify information in my possession and if found correct will refuse clearance to Mazatlan. Wire instructions.

It appears from previous telegrams from the collector that on the 18th instant the Leipzig departed from San Francisco after having been permitted to take on only enough coal, etc., to carry her to German Samoa.

I will thank you to advise me whether or not the collector of customs shall be instructed to refuse clearance to the Mazatlan if he shall find correct the information he has communicated in the telegram quoted above.

Your early advice is requested in order that the collector may be properly instructed by wire.

Respectfully,

W. G. Mcadoo
Secretary

The Collector of Customs at San Francisco (Davis) to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 990]

The Collector of Customs at San Francisco (Davis) to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

San Francisco, August 21, 1914.
[Telephoned to the Department of State by the Treasury Department, August 20 [21], 1914, 9:50 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Concerning my telegram 19th, also 20th and this date,1 regarding the steamer Mazatlan which has applied for clearance to Guaymas, Mexico, having on board 500 tons of coal that was bought, sacked and prepared for delivery to the cruiser Leipzig, proposition has been submitted as follows:

Acting German Consul has offered to give written statement that this coal is an excess supply inadvertently purchased in connection with coaling the Leipzig in this harbor recently, and guarantees that the coal will be delivered in Guaymas. The German Consul denies the jurisdiction of the United States requesting the disposition of this coal after it is landed in Guaymas. Shipowner volunteers to give a bond in double the amount of the value of the coal, guaranteeing delivery in Guaymas. A large and particularly perishable cargo is on the vessel which is now in the stream awaiting clearance.

In view of this assurance of the German Consul and the bond given by the, steamship company, unless otherwise directed by the Department, Mazatlan will be cleared 9 o’clock to-morrow morning. I have delayed this clearance of this vessel to conduct an investigation of this specific shipment of coal, the history of which furnishes much evidence that it was intended for belligerent purposes in violation of neutrality.

Davis , Collector

1 Telegrams of August 20 and 21 not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 991]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, August 22, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 20th instant in which you enclose a telegram from the collector of customs at San Francisco regarding the clearance of the Mexican steamer Mazatlan flying the German flag and carrying a cargo of coal apparently destined to German cruisers in Pacific waters. I also acknowledge the receipt over the telephone of a further telegram from the collector stating that the acting German Consul has offered to give a written guarantee that while this coal was an excess supply purchased for the Leipzig, the coal will be delivered in Guaymas, Mexico. The shipowner also volunteers to give bond guaranteeing the delivery of the coal at this Mexican port.

All the facts of this case before this Department have been laid before the Joint State and Navy Neutrality Board for its opinion. On the basis of that opinion the Department recommends under the circumstances of this special case that the collector be instructed to give clearance to the Mazatlan with coal on board on condition that in addition to the written guarantee which the German Consul offers to give as described in the telegram of the collector he give further written assurances: (1) that the coal shipped by the Mazatlan will not be delivered to any German war vessel that has already received coal in a United States port since the outbreak of hostilities within three months after such receipt and (2) that if the coal be delivered to any other German war vessel, the fact of such delivery will prevent the last-named war vessel from receiving coal in any United States port within a period of three months after said delivery.

Failing the receipt of these written assurances from the German Consul it is recommended that clearance to the S. S. Mazatlan be denied unless the coal in question is first discharged.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/180

[Document 992]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, September 15, 1914.
[Received September 17.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: My Government has just heard that on the 11th of this month, three German steamers were loading large quantities of coal in Manila.

In a general way, according to the reports that have come to the knowledge of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that port seems to be a center of indirect replenishment for German warships.

By order of my Government, I have the honor to draw the Federal Government’s attention to this situation, and I should be very thankful to your excellency if you would kindly let me know what measures the Government of the United States may think it possible to take so as to bring these operations to an end.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Jusserand

Memorandum issued by the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/226a

[Document 993]

Memorandum issued by the Secretary of State1

MERCHANT VESSELS SUSPECTED OF CARRYING SUPPLIES TO BELLIGERENT WARSHIPS

1. A base of operations for belligerent warships is presumed when fuel or other supplies are furnished at an American port to such warships more than once within three months since the war began, or during the period of the war, either directly or by means of naval tenders of the belligerent or by means of merchant vessels of belligerent or neutral nationality acting as tenders.

2. A common rumor or suspicion that a merchant vessel laden with fuel or other naval supplies intends to deliver its cargo to a belligerent warship on the high seas, when unsupported by direct or circumstantial evidence, imposes no duty on a neutral government to detain such merchant vessel even for the purpose of investigating the rumor or suspicion, unless it is known that the vessel has been previously engaged in furnishing supplies to a belligerent warship.

3. Circumstantial evidence, supporting a rumor or suspicion that a merchant vessel intends to furnish a belligerent warship with fuel or other supplies on the high seas, is sufficient to warrant detention of the vessel until its intention can be investigated in the following cases: (a) When a belligerent warship is known to be off the port at which the merchant vessel is taking on cargo suited for naval supplies, or when there is a strong presumption that the warship is off the port;

(b) When the merchant vessel is of the nationality of the belligerent whose warship is known to be off the coast;

(c) When a merchant vessel which has on a previous voyage between ports of the United States and ports of other neutral states failed to have on board at the port of arrival a cargo consisting of naval supplies shipped at the port of departure seeks to take on board a similar cargo;

(d) When coal or other supplies are purchased by an agent of a belligerent government and shipped on board a merchant vessel which does not clear for a port of the belligerent but for a neighboring neutral port;

(e) When an agent of a belligerent is taken on board a merchant vessel having a cargo of fuel or other supplies and clearing for a neighboring neutral port.

4. The fact that a merchant vessel, which is laden with fuel or other naval supplies, seeks clearance under strong suspicion that it is the intention to furnish such fuel or supplies to a belligerent warship, is not sufficient ground to warrant its detention if the case is isolated and neither the vessel nor the warship for which the supplies are presumably intended has previously taken on board similar supplies since the war began or within three months during the period of the war.

5. The essential idea of neutral territory becoming the base for naval operations by a belligerent is repeated departure from such territory by a naval tender of the belligerent, or by a merchant vessel in belligerent service which is laden with fuel or other naval supplies.

6. A merchant vessel, laden with naval supplies, clearing from a port of the United States for the port of another neutral nation, which arrives at its destination and there discharges its cargo, should not be detained if, on a second voyage, it takes on board another cargo of similar nature.

In such a case the port of the other neutral nation may be a base for the naval operations of a belligerent. If so and even if the fact is notorious, this Government is under no obligation to prevent the shipment of naval supplies to that port. Commerce in munitions of war between neutral nations can not as a rule be a basis for a claim of unneutral conduct, even though there is a strong presumption or; actual knowledge that the neutral state, in whose port the supplies are discharged, is permitting its territory to be used as a base of supply for belligerent warships. The duty of preventing an unneutral act rests entirely upon the neutral state whose territory is being used as such a base.

In fact this principle goes further in that, if the supplies were shipped directly to an established naval base in the territory or under the control of a belligerent, this Government would not be obligated by its neutral duty to limit such shipments or detain or otherwise interfere with the merchant vessels engaged in that trade. A neutral can only be charged with unneutral conduct when the supplies, furnished to a belligerent warship, are furnished directly to it in a port of the neutral or through naval tenders or merchant vessels acting as tenders departing from such port.

7. The foregoing propositions do not apply to furnishing munitions of war included in absolute contraband, since in no event can a belligerent warship take on board such munitions in neutral waters, nor should it be permitted to do so indirectly by means of naval tenders or merchant vessels acting as such tenders.

Department of State,

September 19, 1914.

1 For circular note of September 19, 1914, to the representatives of belligerent governments, transmitting copies of this memorandum and of another giving rules for the treatment of armed ships, see ante, p.611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 979 and Doc. 980]

The Vice Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111B46/–

[Document 994]

The Vice Consul General at Rio de Janeiro (Burnell) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Rio De Janeiro, September 21, 1914, midnight. [Received September 22, 4:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Master American steamer Berwind, owners, New York and Porto Rico Steamship Company, states that the vessel, chartered to Hamburg-American Line, sailed from New York August 5 laden with coal for Buenos Aires or other ports; arrived Rio de Janeiro September 18; that he has no manifest of cargo; that orders were given to him at New York to follow instructions of supercargo who was provided by the Hamburg-American Line; that by the direction of supercargo he discharged at sea in or near Northwest Bay, Brazilian Island Trinidad, practically entire cargo of coal into the German merchant vessels Cap Trafalgar and Eleanore Wörmann; that the Berwind arrived off north coast of island August 25 and sailed from there for Rio de Janeiro September 14 immediately after a naval engagement between the Cap Trafalgar and an unidentified. British auxiliary cruiser; that the Cap Trafalgar was sunk and the cruiser was last seen enveloped in smoke apparently on fire going to westward; that subsequently [?] receiving 300 tons of coal from the Berwind, Cap Trafalgar was armed with the guns and ammunition of the German gunboat Eber which at the time convoyed merchant vessels above mentioned and the German merchant vessels Santa Lucia and Pontus.

It is known here that the Santa Lucia and the Eber are now at Bahia. Berwind is at Rio de Janeiro for bunker coal which she has not yet been able to procure from local British coal dealers because of suspicious circumstances of her arrival. Master states that the local agents Hamburg-American Line have placed the vessel entirely in his control and that he has the assurances of a cargo of sugar and coffee from Rio de Janeiro and Santos to New York.

Burnell

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/204

[Document 995]

The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Washington, September 21, 1914.
[Received September 23.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: My Government has been informed that, in the early part of the month of August last, the American steamer Riopasig cleared from Manila for Guam, a neutral port, with a cargo of 4,000 tons of coal, and has since heard that the ship merely called at Guam without landing the coal and is supposed to have turned southward, presumably to resupply German war vessels.

Such acts being contrary to the rules of neutrality and likely eventually to entail serious consequences for the vessel concerned, I have, by order of my Government, the honor to bring the foregoing information which it has received to your excellency’s knowledge.

Be pleased to accept [etc.]

Jusserand

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) [Document 996]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, September 29, 1914.

No. 1388]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 21st instant, stating that your Government has been informed that in the early part of August last the American steamer Riopasig cleared from Manila for Guam, a neutral port, with a cargo of 4,000 tons of coal, and that it has since been reported that the ship merely called at Guam without landing the coal and is supposed to have steered southward, presumably to resupply German war vessels.

It is added that, “such acts being contrary to the rules of neutrality and likely eventually to entail serious consequences for the vessel concerned,” your Government has instructed you to bring the foregoing information, as it has been received, to the attention of this Department.

In reply I have the honor to say that this Department’s information is that the Riopasig cleared (date unknown) from Manila for Guam, and, probably, thence to Yap, one of the Caroline Islands and that the vessel was seized while approaching Zamboanga, Philippine Islands, and is now held as a prize of war at Sandakan, British North Borneo.

The Department regrets that, on the facts known to it, it cannot agree with your excellency’s statement that this case constitutes a breach of the rules of neutrality.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/108

[Document 997]

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

memorandum

In the course of the month of September the steamer Alexandria, belonging to the Kosmos Line and flying the German flag, was bought by a company at San Francisco styling itself the Northern and Southern Steamship Corporation who applied for United States registry. This company is formed by various persons interested in shipping matters and it is reported that the manager is also the local manager and paid employee of the Kosmos Line. The stevedores of that line are stated to be shareholders of the new company. The Kosmos Line is a German line operating steamers from Hamburg to San Francisco via Brazilian, Uruguayan, Chilean, Peruvian and Mexican ports. There are stated to be various steamers of this line laid up in South American ports and it is supposed that the Alexandrian will bring up their cargoes. The name of the vessel has been changed to the Sacramento or Mission Rock. It is further stated that this vessel will load 4,000 tons of steam coal, ostensibly for South American ports where coal is very scarce. Various circumstances, however, point to the possibility that this coal, or some of it, will be eventually used to coal German cruisers.

In bringing this matter to the attention of the Department of State, the British Embassy wishes to state that there is no desire or intention to object to the transfer to the American flag, but the peculiar features of the transaction as reported to the Embassy and the circumstances surrounding it appear prima facie to give it an ambiguous character and the British Consul General has been instructed to call the attention of parties interested to the declaration of the International Naval Conference.

British Embassy,

Washington, October 1, 1914.[Received October 2.]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) File No. 763.72111/241

[Document 998]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

No. 1389]

Excellency: In further reply to your note of the 15th ultimo,1 relative to the supplies of coal reported to have been obtained by German steamers at the port of Manila, I have the honor to advise you that this matter was brought to the attention of the appropriate authorities, who have investigated and reported on this case.

It appears from the report that the Elmshorn and Bochum, have loaded, respectively, 4,000 and 5,000 tons of coal; that the balance of the cargo is general; and that they have no passengers or armament, and are believed to be without ammunition. It appears further that these vessels have taken coal and supplies at Manila for the first time during the war, and their usual trade routes are Hamburg, Australia, via Java. The destinations of the vessels are as yet unknown, as no applications for clearance have been made. The vessels appear to have called at Manila to avoid possible capture at sea.

Instructions have been issued to detain these vessels when clearance is applied for, in order that the Government may have opportunity to determine whether there is sufficient evidence from the circumstances to detain the vessels further, in order to maintain the neutrality of the United States.

As to the use of the Philippine Islands as a “center of indirect replenishment of German war vessels,” I have the honor to say that the officers of the Government, acting under special instructions, are believed to be specially vigilant in investigating and preventing any and all attempts to violate the neutrality of the United States.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Ante, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/446

[Document 999]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, October 13, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a telegram, dated the 10th instant, from the collector of customs at San Francisco further in regard to the cargo of coal of the Mazatlan, which it appears ultimately reached the German cruiser Leipzig.

I will thank you for advice of any action that you may desire taken in the matter by this department or its customs officers.

A copy of the collector’s telegram has also been forwarded to the Attorney General for such instructions to the United States Attorney or other action, if any, as he may deem necessary.

By direction of the Secretary,

Respectfully,

A. J. Peters Assistant Secretary

[Enclosure—Telegram]

The Collector of Customs in San Francisco (Davis) to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

San Francisco , October 10, 1914.

Referring your telegram August 22 advising me of conditions imposed by State Department concerning release of steamer Mazatlan with coal consigned to Guaymas, Mexico. Before clearance was granted Mazatlan, German acting Consul General entered into written agreement as follows:

Referring to certain coal now on the Mexican steamer Mazatlan, in the port of San Francisco, California, to wit, 7,143 sacks of coal described in the manifest of F. G. Braue Company, sworn to August 20, 1914, to be landed at Guaymas, Mexico, said coal having been purchased from the Western Fuel Company on or about August 11, 1914, by John Rothschild and Company for the German Consulate, intended at that time to be supplied to the German cruiser Leipzig, I, as acting Imperial German Consul General, hereby agree and guarantee: (1) That said coal will be delivered in regular course by said vessel Mazatlan at Guaymas, Mexico; (2) That said coal will not, nor will any part thereof, be delivered to any German war vessel that has already received coal in a United States port since the outbreak of present hostilities between Germany and other European nations within three months after the receipt by such vessel of coal at a United States port; (3) That if the said coal or any part thereof be delivered to any other German war vessel not having received coal as aforesaid such delivery shall prevent such war vessel from receiving coal in any United States port within a period of three months after such delivery.

Respectfully,

Imperial German Consulate, by V. Schack

Recently hearing rumored that this coal had been put aboard German cruiser Leipzig I requested Admiral Pond to wireless commander cruiser Albany to ascertain, if possible, disposition of coal, Albany having been in Guaymas Harbor at the time and in position to furnish information. Admiral Pond has just delivered to me translation of radiogram in part as follows:

Steamer Mazatlan delivered 500 tons bags coal on lighter to her agents, Guaymas, Mexico. Leipzig later purchased this and 480 tons more of railroad company which she took on board at Guaymas.

Evans, Howard

Assuming information from Evans, commander Albany, to be correct, German acting Consul General clearly violated contract entered into with this office. The matter is submitted for information and action of proper authorities.

Davis

The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) [Document 1000]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters)

Department of State
, Washington, October 17, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your letter of the 13th instant, enclosing a telegraphic report from the collector of customs at San Francisco in regard to the cargo of coal taken on board in that port by the Mazatlan, and discharged in the port of Guaymas, Mexico. It appears that the collector believes that the contract entered into by the German acting Consul General in regard to the disposition of this coal has been violated by the fact that after its discharge at Guaymas, the German cruiser Leipzig came into that port and purchased this coal, together with 480 tons in addition and placed it on board.

It does not appear to this Department that the agreement of the German acting Consul General has been violated by the action of the Leipzig. The Department notes with satisfaction that the collector’s telegram has been forwarded to the Attorney General for such action, if any, as he may deem necessary to take in the matter.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 195.1/128

[Document 1001]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, October 14, 1914.
[Received October 15.]

[Translation]

No. A. 1638/14]

Mr. Secretary of State: The German Consulate at San Francisco has reported to me as follows regarding the steamer Alexandria lying there.

This steamer, which belonged to the Hamburg-American Line and was chartered by the Kosmos Line, was sold recently to the Northern and Southern Pacific Steamship Company, an American concern. This company had applied to the Navigation Bureau at Washington for registration in the American ship register and to the Collector of Customs at San Francisco for clearance. Neither thing has yet been granted. The ship must therefore still be regarded as German both in regard to its ship’s register and to the flag it flies.

According to a report of the captain and of the first officer, an armed guard, consisting of a non-commissioned officer and five men of the American Navy, was placed on the ship on the evening of the 3d, having been strengthened to eleven men the next night in spite of the protest of the German Consulate against this measure taken at the instance of the customs authority. During its stay on board the guard set in operation the wireless station, which had thitherto been kept under seal by the Navy Department, and telegraphed to the American warship New Orleans, which was lying in the vicinity and to whose crew the guard belonged.

According to the statements of the naval officer who placed the first guard on board, these measures were taken in order to prevent the ship from departing secretly, though there was no warranted suspicion of such a thing according to the report of the German Consulate at San Francisco.

The German Consulate learned only subsequently of this procedure through the report of the officers of the Alexandria.

I have the honor to most humbly request your excellency to kindly investigate the matter and ascertain, in the spirit of the treaty of friendship and commerce between the United States and Prussia, whether the procedure of the American authorities at San Francisco is in accordance with the provision of Article 12, paragraph 2, of the consular convention between Germany and the United States.

While awaiting an early reply from your excellency, I avail myself [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/471

[Document 1002]

The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, October 15, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit for your information a copy of a letter dated October 14, 1914, from the collector of customs at Norfolk, enclosing a copy of a communication from the British Vice Consul at Newport News, Virginia, dated October 14, 1914, calling attention to the Italian S. S. Amistà now loading with coal at Newport News.1

The British Vice Consul states that it is suspected that the coal is intended for the use of the enemies of His British Majesty’s Government, and requests that clearance be denied.

The collector reports that the Amistà has not yet offered to clear for any port, and that it is his understanding, under the regulations as laid down by this department, that when this vessel offers to clear she is entitled to clearance papers, unless he is not satisfied of her status as a merchantman; and that unless otherwise instructed by this department, he will proceed according to this understanding and clear the Amistà upon proper application for her clearance.

I have accordingly advised the collector by wire to clear the vessel unless satisfactory evidence is presented tending to show that the proposed clearance is not bona fide.

Respectfully,

A. J. Peters Assistant Secretary

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 1003]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State
, Washington, October 22, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge, with thanks, the receipt of your letter of the 15th instant, with which is enclosed a copy, of a communication from the collector of customs at Norfolk, covering a copy of a letter from the British Vice Consul at Newport News, calling attention to the supplies taken on board by the Italian S. S. Amistà , which supplies, it is suspected, are destined for the use of the enemies of Great Britain.

This Department concurs in the action taken by the Treasury Department in instructing the collector to clear the vessel unless satisfactory evidence is presented tending to show that the proposed clearance is not bona fide. In the meantime the Department has taken up the matter orally with the British Embassy here.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 195.1/142

[Document 1004]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy
, Washington, October 20, 1914.
[Received October 22.]

Dear Mr. Lansing : With reference to previous communications on the subject I beg to transmit herewith for your further information copy of a memorandum which I have received from His Majesty’s Consul General at San Francisco, respecting the S. S. Alexandria transferred to United States registry on October 8 under the name of Sacramento.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure]

The British Consul General at San Francisco (Ross) to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

British Consulate General,
San Francisco , October 10, 1914.

memorandum

S. S. Alexandria

On the 8th instant United States registry was granted to the ship.

I am informed that the vessel has loaded 4,000 tons of Australian coal, purchased here from the Rolph Navigation Company at $9 per ton, a very high price. In addition, the vessel has taken a quantity of potatoes and other provisions, probably also lubricating oil—of the last I am not certain.

The cargo is consigned to the Valparaiso Light and Power Company. My experience in South America led me to believe that this company was largely German and this surmise has been confirmed by the local Chilean consul and by a telegram from H. M.’s Consul General in Valparaiso.

The last named official in his telegram informs me that the following are to-day’s prices of coal at Valparaiso, viz: Australian 35 s. a ton

Chilean 26 s. “ “

American Pocahontas 32 s. 6d. “ “

He adds that there is no scarcity of coal. The master of a collier, recently arrived here, who was in Valparaiso in the end of July, reported there was no market for coal there at that time; all dealers were overstocked. I asked the master to see the collector of customs here, which he did. The master of another collier which came here ten days later gave similar information.

It is stated that the vessel cost the new owners $135,000 and that freight has already been paid amounting to $65,000.

A bank in Mexico City is said to be financing the new company.

A. Carnegie Ross

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72111/564

[Document 1005]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 24, 1914.
[Received October 27.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: Information has reached His Majesty’s Government that the firm of Moore, San Francisco, is supplying coal to German cruisers at Guaymas by means of steamers chartered by him and consigned to his agent Martinez at Guaymas. Amongst other vessels recently chartered by him for this purpose was the British steamer Bankdale, which took 6,000 tons. Moore is stated to be using the railway plant at Guaymas to store his coal. There is evidence that he has already coaled the Leipzig in this way and still has coal stored there.

The case of the Mazatlan, which supplied coal to the German cruisers in a similar manner, will be readily recalled, and I have the honour, under instructions from my Government, to call your attention to this specific instance of a firm at San Francisco which is using a port in Mexico as a base or a pretext for supplying belligerent vessels with coal shipped from a United States port.

In bringing the above facts and considerations to your knowledge, I have the honour to request that they may be submitted to the proper department of the United States Government with a view to such action as may appear necessary in view of the established principles of international law.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 1006]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I have received your note of. October 24 relative to the action of the firm of J. J. Moore & Company of San Francisco in supplying coal to the port of Guaymas, Mexico, for the use of German cruisers. As pointed out in the Department’s statement of September 19,1 though a port of another neutral nation is being used as a base for the naval operations of a belligerent, this Government does not deem itself under obligation to prevent the shipment of naval supplies to that port. The duty of preventing an unneutral act rests entirely upon the neutral state whose territory is being used as such a base.

In this relation I desire to call your attention to a report from J. J. Moore & Company that the British ship Lowther Range, under time charter to that company with a cargo of coal belonging to that company shipped from Newcastle, Australia, and consigned to the Southern Pacific Railroad of Mexico for its own use, was seized off the port of Guaymas, Mexico, October 11 by the British cruiser New castle, and, after part of the coal had been removed by the cruiser, was sent with a prize crew on board to Esquimalt, British Columbia. The company alleges that the loss of time due to the seizure alone has caused them a loss of over $30,000, and that prior to clearing from Newcastle the customs authorities there demanded and were given the name of the cargo, the name of the consignee, and destination of the cargo.

The Department has difficulty in perceiving cause for this seizure of a neutral cargo apparently destined in good faith to a neutral port, and therefore feels obliged to request that, if the facts are as stated, the cargo be released and that the owners be compensated for the losses sustained by them as a result of the action of the British cruiser1

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993].

1 Correspondence on this case not printed, as it was adjusted between the owners and the British Government (File No. 341.115M78)

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/724

[Document 1007]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

No. 371]

Sir: With reference to my verbal communication which I made on the 16th with regard to the Italian S. S. Amistà , I have the honour, under instructions from my Government, to make the following communication:

This ship was chartered by the Berwind-White Coal Mining Company of New York and loaded coal and stores at Newport News. Representations were made in writing to the collector of customs by the British Vice Consul on the ground that the Berwind-White Coal Mining Company of New York was under strong suspicion of chartering neutral ships in order to supply German cruisers, that the firm named in Punta Arenas as receivers of the cargo were only nominal consignees, and that the neutral clause in the vessel’s charter party was incorrect.

The collector replied that he had enquired into the matter and had satisfied himself that the master and agents of the vessel were acting in good faith and that he could not see his way to withhold clearances.

The vessel cleared at the customhouse on October 17 and the collector invited the Consul to inspect the clearance papers, which were in order, the vessel clearing for Montevideo via Barbados.

I have now received information from my Government to the effect that the Amistà never arrived at Barbados. At the slowest speed she should have arrived October 24. Under these circumstances I have the honour to invite the earnest attention of your Government to this confirmation of the suspect character of the vessel’s voyage.

I have to add that the systematic way in which neutral ships have left American ports in order to supply German cruisers, and have been allowed to operate freely in the ports of the United States, in spite of the warnings which have been given, is a matter which causes grave anxiety to His Majesty’s Government. I am therefore instructed to request that, in view of the usages of international law and the terms of the instructions of the United States Government to local authorities for the preservation of the neutrality of the United States, such measures as are possible may be taken to prevent the use of ports of the United States for this unneutral purpose.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) [Document 1008]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, November 1, 1914, 9:30 a.m.

[Telegram]

With reference to Italian S. S. Amistà , British Ambassador states that she was chartered by the Berwind-White Coal Mining Company of. New York arid loaded with coal and stores at Newport News, where she cleared October 17 for Montevideo via Barbados. It is asserted that she never arrived at Barbados where at the slowest speed she should have made port October 24. With a view to determine bona fides of destination, Department would be glad to have any information regarding name and address of consignee of Amistà cargo, in order that the Department may ascertain by telegraph to the nearest consul as to whether consignee expects such shipments.

While one instance of furnishing supplies to belligerent war vessels at sea may not be sufficient to constitute United States ports a base of supplies, yet Department suspects that certain concerns are chartering a series of vessels which are loaded with coal and stores and despatched at well-timed intervals to supply warships at sea. It is conceivable that such operations may easily make United States ports a base of operations. It seems necessary, therefore, to take precautions to ascertain by an investigation of each vessel the name of the owner or charterer and the firm supplying the cargo, as well as the name and address of the consignee, in order that the data so determined may be checked up with a view to ascertaining the nature of a firm’s transaction as whole. This Department will use the name and address of consignees for the purpose of telegraphing to the nearest consul for information, as will be done in the case of the Amistà.1

Robert Lansing

1 The information requested above was thereafter transmitted regularly in regard to vessels clearing from American ports. In cases open to suspicion, the consuls at ports named as destinations were asked to report as to whether the cargoes were expected by the consignees. For further instructions building up the Department’s service of information regarding the movements of vessels carrying cargoes of coal and other supplies useful for belligerent warships, see post: Letter to the Secretary of the Treasury, November 14, p. 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]. Circular telegrams to all seaport consuls, November 22, p. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]; November 25, p. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]; November 28, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]. Telegrams to the Secretary of the Treasury, November 28, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]; December 2, p. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]. Circular telegram to all seaport consuls, December 3, p. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]. For the restriction of reports to suspicious cases, see: Telegram to the Secretary of the Treasury and circular telegram to all seaport consuls, January 11, 1915, p. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043].

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 1009]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 2, 1914.

Excellency: With reference to your note of the 31st ultimo regarding the Italian S. S. Amistà , which is reported to have cleared from Newport News on the 17th ultimo for Montevideo via the Barbados, where you state she appears not to have arrived, I have the honor to advise you that steps have been taken to make a further investigation of this case with a view to determining any other facts in regard to the bona fides of the destination of this vessel. The Department will also undertake to ascertain, if possible, whether the consignee of the cargo of the Amistà expected such shipments to arrive.

You further state that the systematic way in which neutral vessels have left American ports in order to supply German cruisers and have been allowed to operate freely in the ports of the United States in spite of the warnings which have been given, is a matter which causes grave anxiety to His Britannic Majesty’s Government, and you request under instructions from your Government that such measures as are possible may be taken to prevent the use of the ports of the United States for this unneutral purpose.

In reply I have the honor to state that so far as I am advised every suspicious case of vessels leaving American ports to supply German cruisers which has been brought to the attention of the Government of the United States, with any basis of fact to support such suspicion, has been thoroughly investigated by the authorities of the United States with a view to determining in every possible way whether the transaction was bona fide, or such as might be interfered with this Government for the preservation of the neutrality of the United States. Further than this the Government of the United States does not understand that its duty in these matters requires it to go, for otherwise the war would impose upon the United States the burden of enforcing restrictions which are not, in the opinion of this Government, prescribed by the rules of international law. The Government of the United States, therefore, feels obliged to decline to accept any suggestion intimating that its vigilance in the maintenance of its neutral duties under international law has been relaxed so as to allow vessels engaged in violations of such duties to “operate freely in the ports of the United States.”

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) File No. 763.72111/616

[Document 1010]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, November 14, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Department’s letters of November 7 and November 9, 1914, in further relation to the S. S. Evelyn , which, it was stated by the British Embassy at this capital, was operating in the interests of Germany.1

In reply I have the honor to refer, in this relation, to the Department’s telegram of October 31 [November 1] in the Amistà case, and to say that the Department will be glad to have the collectors of customs instructed, if such action has not already been taken, to ascertain as far as possible in each case of an incoming vessel when she last left an American port, and whether she has transshipped any of her cargo to cruisers at sea.2

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing
Counselor

1 Not printed.

2 Sworn statements on these points were thereafter required from the masters and forwarded to the Department of State.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1115

[Document 1011]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 15, 1914.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I beg to communicate to you herewith the following rules issued by the Brazilian Government relative to the treatment of merchant vessels in Brazilian ports, which I have received from Sir Edward Grey: 1. No merchant vessel shall be permitted to leave any Brazilian port without its ports of call and destination being declared by the consular representative of the nation to which the vessel belongs, and without an assurance from that consular officer that the vessel is sailing on a purely commercial errand.

2. In the case of any merchant vessel which has already left or in future will leave Brazilian ports, if it is proved that either by the time that has elapsed or by the course she has taken, she did not proceed direct to the ports of call or destination specified by the consular officer, she shall be detained when she next touches at a Brazilian port by the Brazilian authorities, and considered by the Brazilian Government as forming part of the naval forces of her nation and treated as such.

Sir Edward Grey is of opinion that these rules appear likely to place proper restrictions on illicit operations on the part of German and other merchant vessels in furnishing supplies of coal and provisions to German warships, and he desires me to enquire whether the United States Government would be disposed to issue rules of a similar nature and to regard as suspect any ship, whatever her nationality, which has given a false declaration of destination on clearing from a port in another country, or has unloaded cargo on the way, or has taken an excessive time over her voyage.

His Majesty’s representatives in all American Republics have also been instructed to make a like request to the Governments to which they are accredited and to urge them, in case they should not see their way to issue similar rules, to treat with special caution ships acting in the suspicious manner prohibited by the Brazilian rules so as to prevent the use of their ports as bases of supply of German cruisers, contrary to the recognized rules of neutrality.

I am [etc.]

For the Ambassador:
Colville Barclay

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111B46/5

[Document 1012]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

No. 391]

Sir: Under instructions from my Government, I have the honour to bring the following matter to your notice.

The American steamer Berwind, with a full cargo of coal on board and under charter to the Hamburg-American Line, cleared for Buenos Aires from New York on the 5th of August last.

It is now established beyond all possible doubt that the Berwind in fact never did proceed to Buenos Aires; that on September 18 last she arrived in ballast at Rio de Janeiro after having coaled the German warships Cap Trafalgar and Dresden; and that she is now again in the port of New York, having arrived there from Rio de Janeiro on the 15th instant.

In the rules issued by your Department on September 191 for the guidance of United States officers in dealing with merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent vessels, it is stated as follows: 3. Circumstantial evidence, supporting a rumor or suspicion that a merchant vessel intends to furnish a belligerent warship with, fuel or other supplies on the high seas, is sufficient to warrant detention of the vessel until its intention can be investigated in the following cases: . . . (c) When a merchant vessel, which has on a previous voyage between ports of the United States and ports of other neutral states failed to have on board at the port of arrival a cargo consisting of naval supplies shipped at the port of departure, seeks to take on board a similar cargo.

Under instructions from Sir E. Grey I have the honour to request that in the event of the Berwind preparing to put to sea again with supplies or fuel on board, she may be detained in port in accordance with the rules quoted above.

I have [etc.]

For the Ambassador:
Colville Barclay

1  Ante, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993].

The Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111Sa1/1

[Document 1013]

The Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Valparaiso, November 21, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Sacramento reports cargo taken by German war vessels [and prisoners put aboard?] from French sailing vessel Valentine which was sunk by Germans.

Easterling

The Acting Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls File No. 763.72111/721a

[Document 1014]

The Acting Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State,
Washington, November 22, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

Department desires to obtain complete information regarding vessels arriving at port where you are stationed from ports of United States with view to ascertaining whether such vessels have discharged any portion of their cargoes at sea to belligerent warships or otherwise rendered unneutral service. Department regards it at the present time as one of your most important duties to keep it fully and immediately informed by cable of the arrival of any vessel from an American port, name of owner of vessel, nature of her cargo, presence of supercargo, the consignor and consignee, whether consignee expects the cargo and intends to have it discharged or sent on to belligerent warships at sea, and whether she has en route discharged to belligerent warships at sea any cargo loaded in American ports. You will therefore make these reports without waiting for special instructions in each case, and follow them up with such further information as you will from time to time endeavor to ascertain on the subject of this instruction.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72111/1115

[Document 1015]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 23, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I have received your note of the 15th instant in which you communicate two rules issued by the Brazilian Government relative to the treatment of merchant vessels to the effect that (1) before vessels leave port the consular officer concerned make a declaration of the ports of call and destination, and give an assurance of the commercial character of the voyage; and (2) that vessels be treated as part of the naval forces of the nation if it is proved either by lapse of time or by the course taken that the voyage has not been direct to the ports of call or destination declared by the consular officer. You state that Sir Edward Grey desires to know whether the United States Government would be disposed (1) to issue rules of a similar nature, and (2) to regard as suspect any ship, whatever her nationality, which has given a false destination or taken an excessive time over her voyage, or unloaded cargo en route.

In regard to the first rule issued by the Brazilian Government my opinion is that in the present status of American law this Government would not be warranted in detaining a merchant vessel and refusing clearance until the consular officer of that vessel’s nationality has declared the ports of call and destination and has assured the Government that its errand is purely commercial. It seems to me that in order that the declaration and assurance of the consular officer should have full legal effect he should derive his authority from an agreement between the United States and his country. The negotiation of such an agreement with all the countries which might be concerned appears to me to be a task which it is impracticable to perform in time to make it of value during the present war.

In regard to the second rule issued by the Brazilian Government it seems to me that to treat a merchant vessel as part of the naval forces of her nation because excessive time has elapsed in reaching her port of call or destination, or because by deviation from her course she did not proceed directly to those ports, is to place the treatment on unjustifiable grounds. The United States has, in its statement of September 19,1 set forth certain circumstances under which it is deemed proper to detain vessels pending an investigation f their intention. Some of these circumstances have perhaps the same evidential weight as lapse of time and deviation from course, but it will be noted that the detention is only for purposes of investigation. A distinction, therefore, is made between detaining a vessel on these grounds pending investigation and treating her as a part of the naval forces of her country. It seems to me that to treat a vessel as part of the naval forces of her country should be based upon direct evidence that she has been acting in that character. Mere lapse of time and deviation from course may have a confirmatory effect, but standing alone they have to my mind no direct evidential value. The German merchant ship Locksun was interned as a naval tender of the German gunboat Geier because the facts regarding her operation stamped her with that character. I am inclined to think, therefore, that the second Brazilian rule would be unacceptable to this Government.

The request of your Government, however, includes an additional point, namely, the matter of regarding as suspect any ship which has unloaded cargo en route. It is assumed that the unloading mentioned refers to transshipment at sea to belligerent warships. This point is, I think, covered by the Department’s statement of September 19 in relation to “Merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent vessels.”1 The case of the Locksun was of this kind and involved a foreign merchant vessel. The case of the Berwind mentioned in your note of the 20th instant is a similar case involving an American vessel. In the latter case I may state that the Government is acting with the utmost expedition to prevent, if possible, a recurrence of the Berwind incident. I mention these cases as showing concretely the methods used by this Government in dealing with actual cases of unloading cargoes at sea.

Finally you state that, in case this Government should not see its way clear to issue rules similar to the Brazilian rules, you are instructed to urge that ships acting in the suspicious manner prohibited by the Brazilian rules be treated with special caution so as to prevent the use of our ports, as bases of supplies for German cruisers. In reply I can assure you that this Government is, and has been, using the utmost vigilance to prevent the use of its ports as bases for supplies for belligerent war vessels as the concrete cases above mentioned fully bear out.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993].

1  Ante, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993].

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/736

[Document 1016]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 23, 1914.
[Received November 24.]

No 397]

Sir: With reference to my immediately preceding note of yesterday’s date on the subject of the Sacramento’s voyage,1 I have the honour to state, under instructions from Sir Edward Grey, that the systematic continuance of ships sailing from United States ports with the object of supplying and cooperating with German cruisers is a matter of gravest anxiety to His Majesty’s Government. They fully recognise the absolute sincerity of the United States authorities in endeavouring to satisfy themselves as to the innocence of shipments made by these German supply ships under neutral flags, but the fact remains that the confidence of the authorities is systematically abused by the German agents and shippers. It is feared that the instructions recently issued prohibiting the disclosure of any information in regard to merchant vessels and their cargoes leaving the United States ports play directly into the hands of agents of the German Government who direct in United States territory the operations of these supply ships under neutral flags. If the supply ships, which act as auxiliaries to the German fleet, continue to carry on freely their operations from United States ports, His Majesty’s Government feel unable to admit that the United States Government can repudiate all responsibility for the damage and depredations caused by German cruisers.

His Majesty’s Government have reliable information that some of the persons connected in the dealings of the Sacramento are now concerned in the Olson and Mahony vessel under the United States flag, which is due to sail on November 24 from San Francisco with Valparaiso as ostensible destination. These facts make it more than probable that this vessel, like the Sacramento, is also engaged in supplying German cruisers.

Under these circumstances of gravest suspicion I have the honour to request that the Olson and Mahony may not be allowed to sail without a most careful and searching investigation on the part of the United States Government.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Not printed.

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/994

[Document 1017]

The British Embassy to the Secretary of State

memorandum

The Norwegian steamer Gladstone, whose name has recently been changed to Chilean, left Norfolk, Virginia, on November 20, having taken on board there a full cargo of coal for Newport News. At Newport News she has been fitted with electric light and wireless telegraphy and she has also shipped large quantities of salt meat belonging to the Hamburg-American Steamship Company, together with 40 tons of provisions and a large number of barrels of oil. The Chilean is expected to sail on November 25. Her ostensible destination will probably be a port in South America but there are strong suspicions that her real intention is to supply German cruisers.

It is requested that enquiry may be made into the destination and intentions of this vessel as there is a presumption, which almost amounts to a certainty, that her voyage is not bona fide and that use is being made of the port of Newport News for clearing for a false destination with the direct intention of assisting in belligerent operations against peaceful commerce.

It is urged that special caution should be exercised by the United States authorities in the case of this vessel and that she should be detained pending an indication on the part of the consular representative of the nation concerned of the ports of call and the destination and pending assurances that the vessel is sailing for purely commercial purposes.

British Embassy,

Washington, November 24, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) File No. 763.72111/595

[Document 1018]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to my letter of the 20th instant in regard to Italian S. S. Amistà ,1 I desire to advise you that the Department is in receipt of official information that this vessel arrived at Barbados, West Indies, on the 28th ultimo, sailed on the same day for Montevideo, and that she arrived at Buenos. Aires on the 19th instant with her full cargo of coal, at which port she awaits the bill of lading before discharging.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/752

[Document 1019]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Acting Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, November 24, 1914.
[Received November 25.]

Dear Mr. Lansing : With reference to your letter of the 20th instant1 and previous correspondence respecting the Italian S. S. Amistà , Sir Edward Grey desires me to inform you that he has only just heard that this vessel did in fact put into Barbados on October 28, in accordance with her clearance papers. I am to express to you Sir Edward Grey’s regret for the inaccuracy on this point which was, quite unintentionally, contained in my note No. 371 of the 31st ultimo.2

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72111/736

[Document 1020]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

No 559]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 23d instant, in which, with reference to your note of November 22 last concerning the S. S. Sacramento , you advise the Department that His Majesty’s Government has reliable information that certain of the persons connected with the dealings of the Sacramento are now concerned in the Olson and Mahony, a vessel under the United States flag, which was due to sail from San Francisco on November 24 with Valparaiso as its ostensible destination, and that these facts make it more than probable that this vessel, like the Sacramento, is also engaged in supplying German cruisers. You accordingly request that the Olson and Mahony may not be allowed to sail without a most careful and searching investigation on the part of the Government of the United States.

In reply I have the honor to advise you that, on the 23d instant, this matter was brought to the attention of the Secretary of the Treasury, for his appropriate action.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72111B46/5

[Document 1021]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

No. 560]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 20th instant,1 in which, by instruction of your Government, you bring to the attention of this Government the case of the American steamer Berwind, with a cargo of coal and under charter to the Hamburg-American Line, which cleared for Buenos Aires from New York on August 5 last.

It is stated that the Berwind never did in fact proceed to Buenos Aires; that on September 18 last she arrived in ballast at Rio de Janeiro, after having coaled the German warships Cap Trafalgar and Dresden; and that she is now again in the port of New York, having arrived there from Rio de Janeiro on the 15th instant. It is, therefore, requested that, in the event of the Berwind’s preparing to put to sea again with supplies or fuel on board, she may be detained in port in accordance with the rules issued for the guidance of United States officers in dealing with merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent vessels.

In reply I have the honor to advise you that, on November 21 last, this matter was brought to the attention of the Attorney General, with a view to such action as may be possible to prevent the Berwind or its owner from again using the ports of the United States as a point of departure of cargoes of coal or supplies for war vessels of the belligerents at sea in such manner as to constitute United States ports as bases of supplies for such armed vessels.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Ante, p. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012].

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls File No. 763.72111/824a

[Document 1022]

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State,
Washington, November 25, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

Department’s circular telegram November 22.2 When there are several consignors or Consignees you need not report the names unless there is a principal consignment composing the main part of the cargo. This includes regular line steamers as well as tramp steamers.

Bryan

2  Ante, p. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

The Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/791

[Document 1023]

The Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Valparaiso, November 26, 1914, 4 a.m.
[Received 10:10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Supplementing November 21, 11 a.m.1 No entries in official log Sacramento Ship’s daily log shows seals on wireless broken November 4 in order to communicate with agents, Valparaiso, regarding position British vessels. Master stated on oath that on November 5 the course was shifted, direction Mas a Fuera, to avoid war vessels because of hearing code messages; that on November 7, after changing course to Valparaiso direct, met first German vessel; that some provisions transshipped on the high sea, remaining cargo, Mas a Fuera. Communication with shore is prohibited except with the full permission of Consulate or port authorities. What degree protection should vessel receive? Master reported Kosmos office agents before Consulate. Consignees were Company Tranvia Electrica. Have been advised of irregularities crew and masters. British Consul also claims knowledge of irregularities aboard. Is investigation advisable? Chilean Government making rigorous investigation. Will hold papers for Department’s instructions.

Easterling

1  Ante, p. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling) File No. 763.72111/796

[Document 1024]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Vice Consul at Valparaiso (Easterling)

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914. 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

Yours November 26, 4 p. [a.] m. and 9 p.m.1 Report amounts and kinds of cargo supplied to German vessels at sea and names of such vessels. Cable briefly other irregularities known. Investigate thoroughly but discreetly.

Lansing

1 Not printed.

The British, Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/860

[Document 1025]

The British, Embassy to the Secretary of State

PRO MEMORIA

In the Sam Francisco Bulletin of October 5 a report is printed as to statements made by G. D. Smith, wireless operator on board the Mexican steamer Mazatlan, originally under the German flag, before Rear Admiral Pond and other Government authorities on the 4th October at San Francisco, complaining as to violations of neutrality by Captain Fred Jebsen, head of the Jebsen Steamship Company, and Captain zur Helle of San Francisco.

It was alleged that the Mazatlan was given clearance papers for Guaymas, although only after a bond of $20,000 had been posted and representation had been made that the coal on board the ship was not for delivery aboard the Leipzig, but that notwithstanding Jebsen and zur Helle went on board the vessel at San Pedro and arranged for the transfer of the coal from the Mazatlan, to the Leipzig.

The British Embassy would be glad to be informed, if there is no objection, as to the results, of the inquiry made by Rear Admiral Pond and as to any action, if any, which may have r been taken by the United States authorities.

British Embassy,

Washington, November 27, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls File No. 763.72111/864a

[Document 1026]

The Acting Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

Department’s circular instructions November 221 and 25. Reports teed not be made on vessels engaged especially in passenger service but should be made on all American and foreign vessels arriving from American ports in ballast or with cargo. You will not enforce investigation, nor seek to detain vessels, nor do anything to offend authorities of port in obtaining this information. You may discreetly obtain information from any available source which need not be official. If you find that war vessels have been supplied at sea, report their names if possible. Make reports brief.

Lansing

1 Ante, p. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) File No. 763.72111/806

[Document 1027]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your letter November 25.2 From reports at hand, Department deems it unnecessary for collectors to report upon vessels clearing with cargoes manifestly of, no use to war vessels, such as cotton, grain, fertilizers, barbed wire, etc. Also where the consignors are several and the consignees numerous; it is not necessary to report on vessels, unless there is a single consignment composing the main part of the cargo, for the reason, that the Department cannot ascertain from American consuls whether all the consignees expect the consignments. Otherwise Department desires information on the seven points indicated in the collector’s letter, regardless of the suspicious character of transaction. Of course the crux of the investigation is to ascertain whether cargoes are to be supplied to war vessels at sea.

Robert Lansing

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy File No. 763.72111/994

[Document 1028]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

memorandum

The Department of State has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the British Embassy’s memorandum of November 24, 1914, relative to the activities of the Norwegian steamer Gladstone, whose name has recently been changed to Chilean, it being suspected that this vessel is engaged in conveying supplies to German cruisers.1

In reply the Department of State has the honor to inform the British Embassy that, on November 24, request was made to the Treasury Department that clearance be refused this vessel until the shippers or owners clearly show that her cargo will not be transshipped to war vessels at sea during her voyage.

Department of State,

Washington, December 1, 1914.

1  Ante, p.637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017].

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) File No. 763.72111/806

[Document 1029]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, December 2, 1914.

[Telegram]

Reference to Department’s telegram November 28. Collectors may investigate but Department deems it unnecessary for them to report upon vessels chiefly engaged in passenger traffic or upon vessels engaged in regular long-established trade between United States and foreign ports.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls File No. 763.72111/998a

[Document 1030]

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State,
Washington, December 3, 1914.

Circular telegram]

Department’s circulars November 22, 25 and 28.2 No reports need be made on vessels in following cases: vessels carrying cargoes manifestly of no use to war vessels, such as cotton, lumber, grain, fertilizers, etc.; vessels engaged in regular long-established trade between ports of United States and ports in your district; vessels arriving after entering at intermediate ports and being reported on by consuls there; vessels which you have no doubt left United States ports in ballast.

Bryan

2  Ante, p. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015], p. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], and p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027], respectively

The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters) File No. 763.72111/1100

[Document 1031]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Peters)

Department of State,
Washington, December 3, 1914.

Referring to your letter of to-day’s date1 and to my conference with Mr. Hamilton, the collector at Norfolk, Department will raise no objection to clearance of Gladstone If Appropriate Parties Give Assurance Under Oath That The Cargo Will Be Discharged At The Foreign Port Or Ports To Which It Is Consigned. See Department’S Telegram November 24.1

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

1 Not Printed.

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 195.1/160

[Document 1032]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1914.

NO. 1155]

Excellency: Referring to the Department’s note No. 1123, of November 12, 1914,1 I have now the honor to inform you that the Department is in receipt of a further communication from the Secretary of the Navy enclosing the full report of the Commandant of the twelfth naval district with reference to the placing of a guard on board the S. S. Alexandria , while she was lying in the harbor of San Francisco.

It appears from this report and from other documents now in the possession of the Department that the Alexandria arrived in the port of San Francisco on August 7 last and was, on account of the European war, laid up in Richardson Bay, off Sausalito; that during the month of September negotiations were entered into between the owners of the Alexandria, the Hamburg-American Packet Company, and the Northern and Southern Steamship Company, an American corporation, for the transfer of this vessel to the latter company, and that these negotiations were concluded and the sale consummated, the bill of sale from the Hamburg-American Packet Company having been executed and filed with the collector of customs at San Francisco on September 21. On September 22, 1914, the Northern and Southern Steamship Company made application to the Department of Commerce for the registration of this ship under the name of the S. S. Sacramento , as an American merchant vessel under the provisions of the act of Congress approved August 18, 1914. Some ten days after this application was made by the Northern and Southern Steamship Company, and pending Ole decision of this Government as to the registration of the S. S. Sacramento as an American vessel, the officers of the American corporation which had purchased the ship, applied to the collector of customs at San Francisco on October 3 for the immediate clearance of the vessel. This fact, together with certain other circumstances and evidence at that time known to the officials of the Government of the United States, made it seem advisable to take such steps as might be necessary to render it impossible for the vessel to leave port without proper clearance papers, and with this object in view a small guard, consisting of eight men, including a petty officer and a wireless operator, were on the night of Saturday, October 3, placed on board the vessel which was then lying in Mission Bay. On subsequent nights this guard was reduced to four men and a wireless operator. It appears that no protest against the placing of the guard on board the vessel was at any time made by any one connected therewith, nor that any protest has at any time been made concerning the using by this guard of the wireless outfit of the ship. It further appears that the action of the officials of this Government in placing the guard on board the vessel was known to the Imperial German acting Consul at San Francisco on Monday, October 5, at which time he called at the office of the Commandant of the twelfth naval division in regard to the matter, without making objection thereto, and that the acting Consul subsequently addressed two communications on the subject, dated, respectively, October 6 and October 7, to the Commandant, in neither of which appears any protest with regard to the action of the officers of this Government. The S. S. Sacramento was formally registered as an American merchant vessel on October 8.

By note of October 14, 1914,1 your excellency requested this Department to institute an investigation into the matter referred to above with a view to determining whether the procedure of the authorities at San Francisco was in accordance with the provisions of paragraph two of Article 12 of the consular convention concluded between the United States and the German Empire on December 11, 1871. The treaty provision referred to is as follows:

The judicial authorities and customhouse officials shall in no case proceed to the examination or search of merchant vessels without having given previous notice to the consular officers of the nation to Which the said vessels belong, in order to enable the said consular officers to be present.

As the action of the United States naval officers in placing a guard on board the S. S. Alexandria was neither for the purpose of examining or of searching the vessel, but was merely a precautionary step calculated to insure the strict observance of the neutrality laws of them United States, the Department feels confident that your excellency will concur in its opinion that no violation of the treaty provision referred to was either contemplated or committed.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1 Not printed.

1  Ante, p. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 1000 and Doc. 1001].

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy File No. 763.72111/1106

[Document 1033]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

PRO MEMORIA

The Department of State of the United States of America has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the pro memoria of November 271 in which the British Embassy inquires as to the legal action which may have been proposed or taken in the case of the steamer Mazatlan, accused of a violation of neutrality by buying coal at San Francisco for delivery on board the German cruiser Leipzig.

In reply the Department of State begs to enclose a copy of a letter of December 10 from the Department of Justice, stating that it has failed to discover any facts in the case of the Mazatlan constituting a violation of the Federal penal laws.2

Department of State,

Washington, December 16, 1914.

1  Ante, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027].

2 Not printed.

The British, Embassy to the Secretary of State File No. 703.72111/1264

[Document 1034]

The British, Embassy to the Secretary of State

memorandum

The British Embassy has the honour to acknowledge the receipt of the pro memorial of the State Department dated December 18, [161 enclosing copy of a letter of December 10 from the Department of Justice relative to the case of the S. S. Mazatlan .

The Department of Justice has replied that already on October 19 it had informed the State Department that no facts had been discovered in the case constituting a violation of the Federal penal laws.

The British Embassy has the honour to refer again to its communication of the 27th November in which information was asked as to the results of the enquiry made by Rear Admiral Pond and as to any action, if any, which may have been taken by the United States authorities.3

It will be remembered that the Mazatlan was originally a German ship, but was transferred to the Mexican flag; that clearance Was refused to her at San Francisco on suspicion of her intention to bring coal to the German steamer Leipzig and subsequently allowed on posting of a bond; that she put into San Pedro, for which port she had not cleared, and took on board three German agents who after communicating with the Leipzig arranged for the transference to the warship of the coal she had on board after unloading at Guaymas. There are also accusations of using the wireless in American waters. I may add that the San Francisco Bulletin of October 8 published the story in great detail.

It would naturally be of much importance in considering the question which is now before His Majesty’s Government to ascertain whether it is to be understood from the reply of the Department of Justice that after a full enquiry into the facts it has appeared to the United States Government that laws of the United States have not been violated and that no further action in the matter will be taken.

British Embassy,

Washington, December 21, 1914.
[Received December 23.]

3  Ante, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027].

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy [Document 1035]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

memorandum

The Department of State has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the memorandum of the British Embassy dated the 21st instant, and to refer to the pro memoria of the British Embassy of the 27th ultimo in regard to the results of the inquiry made by Rear Admiral Pond reported in the San Francisco Bulletin of October 5, and in regard to any action which may have been taken by the United States authorities in this case.1

In reply the Department of State has the honor to state that it has not been advised as to what legal action is contemplated by the Department of Justice as a result of the inquiry made by Rear Admiral Pond and the United States District Attorney, but it is understood that the latter officer still has the case under consideration with a view to taking such action as may appear appropriate and possible in the circumstances.

Department of State,

Washington, December 23, 1914.

1  Ante, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027].

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111Em1/1

[Document 1036]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington December 15, 1914.
[Received December 16.]

J. No. A 2985]

Mr. Secretary of State: The position taken by the Government of the United States as to the delivery of coal and other necessaries to warships of the belligerent states constituting a violation of neutrality is, in the opinion of the Imperial German Government, untenable in international law. The Imperial Government has set forth its position on this point in a memorandum which, incompliance with instructions, I have the honor to forward to your excellency.

The Imperial Government indulges the hope that the Government of the United States, upon perusal of the memorandum will concur in the view of the Imperial German Government and, within the limits indicated in the memorandum, will grant free clearance to vessels supplying German warships with coal. I should be thankful to your excellency for a communication in this respect.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

[Enclosure—Translation]

memorandum

Under the general principles of international law no exception can be taken to neutral estates letting war material go to Germany’s enemies from or through their territory. This is in accordance with Article 7 of the Hague conventions of October 18, 1907, concerning the rights and duties of neutrals in naval and land war. If, however, a state avails itself of that liberty in favor of our enemies, then it must, in accordance with a rule generally accepted in international law and confirmed in Article 9 of the two conventions above cited, place no obstacle to the German military force procuring contraband from or through its territory.

The neutrality declaration of the United States takes this construction into full account when it allows contraband of war to be delivered equally to all belligerents.

All persons may lawfully and without restriction by reason of the aforesaid state of war manufacture and sell within the United States arms and ammunitions of war and other articles ordinarily known as contraband of war.

The public declaration of the State Department of the United States of October 15, 1914, on the subject of neutrality and contraband, gave the widest acceptation to the above-stated principle.1

In spite thereof, various American port authorities have denied clearance from American ports to vessels of the merchant marine seeking to convey needed supplies or fuel to German warships either on the high seas or in ether neutral ports.

According to the principles of international law above cited, a neutral state need not prevent furnishing supplies of this character nor may it after allowing the adversaries to be furnished with contraband, either detain or disable a merchant ship carrying such a cargo. Only if contraband trade should turn the ports into bases of German military operations, would the unilateral stoppage of the trade of those vessels become a duty. Such perhaps, would become the case if German coal depots were established in the ports, or if the vessels called at a port in regular voyages on the way to German naval forces. But it stands to reason that an occasional sailing of one merchant vessel with coal or supplies for German warships does not turn a neutral port into a German base in violation of neutrality.

Our enemies draw from the United States contraband of war, especially arms, worth several billions of marks. This in itself they are authorized to do. But if the United States prevents our warships from occasionally drawing supplies from its ports, a great injustice grows out of the authorization, for it would amount to an unequal treatment of the belligerents and constitute a breach of the generally accepted rules of neutrality to Germany’s detriment.

1  Ante, p. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920].

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) [Document 1037]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Wshington, December 24, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 15th instant enclosing, by direction of your Government, a copy of a memorandum of the Imperial Government on the subject of the delivery of coal and other necessaries to warships of belligerent states. In the course of the memorandum your Government takes the opportunity to set forth its attitude toward traffic in contraband of war by citizens of neutral countries. I take note therefore, of your Government’s statement that “under the general principles of international law no exception can be taken to neutral states letting war material go to Germany’s enemies from or through neutral territory,” and that the adversaries of Germany in the present war are, in the opinion of the Imperial Government, authorized to “draw from the United States contraband of war, especially arms, worth several billions of marks.” These principles, as you state, have been accepted by the United States Government in the statement issued by the Department on October 15 last, entitled “Neutrality and trade in contraband.”1 Acting in conformity with propositions there set forth this Government has itself taken no part in contraband traffic and so far as possible has lent its influence toward equal treatment for all belligerents in the matter of purchasing arms and ammunition in the United States. Complaint, however, appears to be made by the Imperial German Government of the refusal of clearance by American authorities to merchant vessels intending to furnish fuel and supplies to German warships on the high seas or in neutral ports.

In reply I desire to call to your attention that the Government is not aware that any merchant vessel has been refused a clearance on these grounds during the present war, although certain temporary detentions have been found to be necessary for the purpose of investigating the bona fides of the alleged destinations of particular vessels and the intentions of their owners or masters. This has been done in an effort to carry out the principles of international law and the declarations of treaties with respect to coal supplies for belligerent warships and the use of neutral ports as bases of naval operations. Although as a rule there is on the part of the nationals of neutral countries entire freedom of trade in arms, ammunition, and other articles of contraband, nevertheless the Imperial German Government will recall that international law and the treaties declaratory of its principles make a clear distinction between ordinary commerce in contraband of war and the occasional furnishing of warships at sea or in neutral ports. In this relation I venture to advert to Articles 18 to 20, inclusive, of Hague Convention XIII, 1907. From these articles it will be observed that a warship which has received fuel in a port belonging to a neutral power may not within the succeeding three months replenish her supply in a port of the same power. It is, I am sure, only necessary to call your attention to these articles to make it perfectly clear that if a number of merchant vessels may at short intervals leave neutral ports with cargoes of coal for transshipment to belligerent warships at sea, regardless of when the warships last received fuel in the ports of the same neutral power, the conventional prohibition would be nullified, and the three months’ rule rendered useless. By such practice a warship might remain on its station engaged in belligerent operations without the inconvenience of repairing to port for fuel supplies.

Furthermore, Article 5 of the same convention forbids belligerents to use neutral ports and waters as a base of naval operations against their adversaries. As stated in the Department’s statement on “Merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent vessels,” dated September 19 last (a copy of which is enclosed),2 the essential idea of neutral territory becoming the base for naval operations by a belligerent is, in the opinion of this Government, repeated departure from such territory of merchant vessels laden with fuel or other supplies for belligerent warships at sea. In order to ascertain the vessels which are thus operating, the Government has been obliged to investigate certain cases in order that it might determine whether there have been or are about to be repetitions of such acts. But in all respects equality of treatment has been observed toward all merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent vessels.

It is hardly necessary to recount in this note the provisions of the Hague conventions in regard to the fitting out or arming of vessels within the jurisdiction of a neutral power, or the stipulations in the same conventions regarding the departure of vessels intended to cruise or engage in hostile operations which have been adapted entirely, or in part, for such use within neutral jurisdiction. To the extent of these restrictions the furnishing of munitions of war included in absolute contraband is prohibited in neutral waters, and therefore should not be permitted indirectly by means of naval tenders, or merchant vessels acting as tenders, carrying such materials from a neutral jurisdiction to belligerent warships at sea.

It is not necessary in further reply to the memorandum of the Imperial German Government to advert in detail to other provisions of the Hague conventions or to other rules of international law, for no particular cases have been adduced as a ground for your Government’s complaint. If, however, they will specify the vessels which they must have in mind as having been accorded unequal treatment, the Department will be glad to give further consideration to the memorandum of your Government in the light of actual facts. It is, then, sufficient to say for the present that in the pursuance of the policy to carry out the principles above referred to, which is part of the program of this Government to preserve and maintain the neutrality of the United States, all merchant vessels suspected of carrying supplies to belligerent warships at sea have been subjected, and will continue to be subjected, to unremitting and painstaking investigation. Such action can not, it is believed, be fairly taken to amount to “unequal treatment of the belligerents and constitute a breach of the generally accepted rules of neutrality to Germany’s detriment.”

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Ante, p. 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920].

2  Ante, p. 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy File No. 763.72111/1161

[Document 1038]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

memorandum

The Department of State has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the British Embassy’s memorandum of December 12, 1914,1 in which, with reference to the memorandum from the Department of State, dated December 1 last,2 to the effect that the Treasury Department had been requested to refuse clearance to the Norwegian steamer Gladstone, now the Chilean, until the shippers or owners have clearly shown that her cargo would not be transshipped to war vessels at sea during her voyage, it is stated that the firm of Funch, Edye and Company refused to ship or to accept stores for this vessel from a Captain Suhern, who is stated to be acting in German interests, and that this refusal on the part of the firm named appears to indicate that in its view the intended voyage is not bona fide.

In reply to the British Embassy’s request to be informed whether the Treasury Department is in a position to state whether the shippers or owners have given the evidence required of them, the Department of State has the honor to say that it is advised that the Chilean left Newport News on December 16 last for Port Limon, bound for Chilean ports, and that the master and shippers have taken oath that the cargo will be discharged at the foreign port or ports to which it is consigned.

Department of State,

Washington, December 24, 1914.

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030]

The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111Sa1/12

[Document 1039]

The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Santiago, December 29, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received December 30, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegrams December 22, 7 p.m., December 28, 6 p.m.1 Foreign Office informs me that unless Sacramento leaves within twenty-four hours, as notified to do through the American Consulate this afternoon, both ship and crew will be interned. Consulate acting under the instructions of Department, November 30, 7 p.m.,1 is holding ship’s papers.

Fletcher

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) [Document 1040]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher)

Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your December 29, 10 p.m., Sacramento. As circumstances of case appear to show that register was fraudulently obtained, Department of Commerce requests that Consul withhold ship’s papers and refuse to discharge crew until further notice. Consul instructed in this sense. Department of Commerce would be pleased to see vessel and crew interned.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) File No. 763.72111/1409a

[Document 1041]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo)

Department of State,
Washington, January 11, 1915.

[Telegram]

Referring to your Department’s letter of November 13,1 and this Department’s communications of November 14,2 24, 28,3 December 2,4 9, 11, and 14, relative to reports on incoming and outgoing vessels.5 From results of recent reports of collectors Department deems it unnecessary for collectors to report further under these instructions, except in suspicious cases. Collectors should not, however, relax their vigilance to prevent violations of neutrality or to obtain and report evidence regarding transshipment of cargoes at sea to belligerent warships. The investigations of the collectors in their efforts to obtain information required by their instructions are having, it is believed, a good effect upon shipowners and attempts at illicit trade in general.

W. J. Bryan

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

3  Ante, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027],

4  p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

5 Department’s November 24 and December 9, 11, and 14 not printed.

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls File No. 763.72111/1404a

[Document 1042]

The Secretary of State to all Seaport Consuls

Department of State,
Washington, January 11, 1915.

[Circular telegram]

You need not report further in response to circular instructions of November 226 and following relative to unneutral service, except in suspicious cases. You will not, however, relax your vigilance to obtain and report information regarding violations of American neutrality and transshipment of cargoes at sea to belligerent warships.

Bryan

6  Ante, p.634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015]

Maintenance of neutrality in the Panama Canal ZoneMaintenance of neutrality in the Panama Canal Zone

[1043] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 18, 1914. [Received December 19.]

File No. 763.72111/1223

[1044] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State

German Embassy, Washington, December 21, 1914. [Received December 22.]

File No. 763.72111/1239

[1045] The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of state, Washington, December 23, 1914.

[1046] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 25, 1914. [Received December 28.]

File No. 763.72111/1273

[1047] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, January 2, 1915.

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1223

[Document 1043]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, December 18, 1914.
[Received December 19.]

No. 432]

Sir: For some days past the press of this country has reported various incidents of the violation of neutrality of the Panama Canal of which British ships have been accused and the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone has, it is stated, been obliged to ask for an armed force in order to put a stop to these alleged violations. Al though I have received no official representations from you, Sir, I thought it well to request from the British representative in Panama a report on the subject in order that I might be in a position to discuss the matter should it be brought officially to my attention. I now have the honour to state that I have to-day received an answer from Sir C. Mallet, the British Minister in Panama, which is to the following effect:

Facts are as follows: The steamship Mallina, an Admiralty collier, arrived here from Acapulco without a bill of health from the American consul. She was in consequence indicted for a violation of the quarantine regulations of the Canal Zone. A nominal fine of $50 was imposed on her by the court. At Balboa the master of the Mallina was ordered to sea early the next morning and notified the port captain accordingly. Clearance papers were ready, but it appears that the master had expected that they would he sent to him together with some stores which he had ordered from the commissariat of the Canal. Neither the stores nor the clearance papers arrived. He thus had to choose between a violation of the customs law and a violation of neutrality. Of these two courses he thought the wiser course was to choose the former, and accordingly left without his clearance papers.

It further appears that the Mallina was accused by his excellency Colonel Goethals, the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone, of having used her wireless installation within the limits of the Canal Zone and thus having violated the regulations governing the use of radio instruments in waters under American jurisdiction. As a matter of fact the Mallina has no installation for wireless telegraphy. A communication has now been received in writing from his excellency stating that he had been wrongly informed.

As far as I am aware no breach of neutrality of any kind has been committed by British vessels within the waters of the Canal Zone. British warships have no doubt when off the coast used powerful wireless telegraph installations and this may have given rise to the rumours current in the press. Neither the warships nor the colliers have, so far as I know, been guilty of any infringement of the regulations.

It will be in the recollection of your Department, as also of the Secretary for War, that I have on several occasions asked to be supplied with the regulations which as I understood were being prepared for enforcing neutrality in the Canal Zone. It was the desire of my Government that such information should be obtained as soon as possible in order that it might be communicated to British ships. On August 6 this Embassy addressed to you an urgent note1 enquiring whether any and, if so, what restrictions would be placed on belligerent vessels passing through the Panama Canal, and on the 12th, 13th, and 14th of the same month Mr. Barclay again spoke as to the necessity of issuing regulations for the Canal Zone without delay, in view of the short time remaining before the opening of the Canal. It was not until November 17 that the Embassy received the memorandum of the State Department dated November the 14th,1 enclosing copy of the rules and regulations governing the use of the Panama Canal by vessels of the belligerents and the maintenance of neutrality by United States in the Canal Zone.

On receipt of these regulations I telegraphed to my Government and also transmitted the regulations, which as you are aware are of some length, by post to London. My telegram only contained a brief summary. The regulations themselves could not have reached London before the last days of November, and it was materially impossible for ships which reached the Canal Zone in the first days of December to be cognisant of the full text.

The above facts, of which you will find proof in the archives of your Department, will show that this Embassy has, I trust, been guilty of no negligence in the communication of the regulations.

I now have the honour to appeal to your courtesy in order to be informed what charges, if any, have been brought by the United States authorities against British ships or officers for violations of the Canal Zone regulations in order that such charges may receive the fullest investigation. I trust I need not say that it is the desire of His Majesty’s Government that British ships and officers should conform in every way to every detail of the regulations imposed by the United States authorities under the authority of the President and in conformity with the treaty obligations of Great Britain.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Not printed. For the rules transmitted on November 14, see the proclamation of neutrality dealing with the Canal Zone, November 13, ante, p. 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886]

1 Not printed. For the rules transmitted on November 14, see the proclamation of neutrality dealing with the Canal Zone, November 13, ante, p. 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886].

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72111/1239

[Document 1044]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Counselor for the Department of State

German Embassy,
Washington, December 21, 1914. [Received December 22.]

J. NO. A 3180]

My dear Mr. LANSING: I learn that the British S. S. Mallina and Tremeadow , which served as tenders to British cruisers, now demand to be allowed to coal in Panama and to leave for Australia, alleging that they have ceased to be tenders of British warships. I beg to draw your attention to the fact that, as far as can be seen from here, their case, in the principal points, is identical with the case of the German S. S. Locksun .1

I am [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

1 See the section on treatment of belligerent warships, their crews and tenders, in American ports— Internment of the Geier and Locksun—ante, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937].

The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) [Document 1045]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of state,
Washington, December 23, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: In reply to your note of the 21st instant, with reference to the British S. S. Mallina and Tremeadow , which you state have served as tenders to British cruisers, and are demanding coal in the Panama Canal Zone, I would advise you that these vessels have been considered by the Canal authorities as coming under rule 2 of the President’s proclamation of November 13 last in relation to the neutrality of the Panama Canal Zone,2 which accords to transports or fleet auxiliaries the same treatment as that given to belligerent vessels of war.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

2  Ante, p. 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886].

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1273

[Document 1046]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, December 25, 1914.
[Received December 28.]

No. 448]

Sir: With reference to my note No. 432 of the 18th instant on the subject of the neutrality rules of the Panama Canal Zone I have the honour to inform you that I have received a further statement from His Majesty’s Minister in Panama to the effect that certain British colliers had violated the quarantine regulations by arriving without a bill of health from an American consular officer at the port of departure, as the law requires. These acts, the Minister states, were involuntary on the part of the masters of these vessels but representations have been made and steps have now been taken in order to inform British masters as to the requirements of the law.

With regard to the statement as to the improper use of the wireless apparatus by British ships, the Minister states that only one of them, the Protesilaus, was fitted with a wireless apparatus and that he had understood from the master that this was dismantled immediately on the arrival of the ship in port. It appears, however, from subsequent enquiries that she received a wireless code message while lying in the bay at 8 p.m., December 10, and requested the landing station to receive in plain language a message for the British Consul. The reply was in the negative and the wireless was then dismantled and was not used again.

With regard to the breach of the “law” (but not of the “neutrality” regulations) by the steamer Mallina, as already explained, she had not received her clearance papers at the hour fixed for her departure by the authorities, under the neutrality rules, and she consequently chose the lesser of the two evils, by leaving without her clearance papers. The Mallina had no wireless apparatus.

The action of the local authorities in the case of the Protesilaus was of course in entire accordance with the practice observed in United States waters and which has been the subject of correspondence with this Embassy. The British Government, as you, Sir, are aware, has always been of the opinion that the sealing of wireless apparatus in neutral waters is right and proper.

The Minister’s report has been transmitted to Sir Edward Grey, who has now instructed me to inform you that the British Government will impress upon British shipmasters the duty of studying the neutrality rules of the Zone and of adhering to them as closely as possible. But I venture to point out that the rules are not six weeks old and that until they are well known and have been acted on for some time incidents such as that of the Mallina are liable to occur. Should this happen, which I trust will not be the case, the requisite action will no doubt be taken by the United States authorities with their wonted courtesy and consideration and His Majesty’s Government confidently hope that too much importance should not be attached to such incidents especially at this early date after the publication of the rules.

I have [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) [Document 1047]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, January 2, 1915.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of December 25, 1914, with reference to the neutrality rules and quarantine regulations of the Panama Canal Zone.

The contents of your note will receive the Department’s attentive consideration in connection with your excellency’s previous note on the above subject, dated December 18.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Actions of belligerent warships outside territorial waters—HoveringActions of belligerent warships outside territorial waters—Hovering

[1048] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 1, 1914. [Received September 8.]

File No. 763.72111/132

[1049] The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

Washington, September 22, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/179

[1050] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for theDepartment of State

British Embassy, Washington, September 24, 1914.[Received September 25.]

File No. 768.72111/245

[1051] The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/423

[1052] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, October 7, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/8014

[1053] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, October 21, 1914 [Received October 22.].

File No. 763.72111/502

[1054] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, October 26, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/710

[1055] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/711

[1056] The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Newton)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

[1057] The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

[1058] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, October 29, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/552

[1059] The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, November 5, 1914.

[1060] The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, November 23, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/502

[1061] The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/1206

[1062] The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy, Washington, January 9, 1915. [Received January 12.]

File No. 763.72111/3010

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/132

[Document 1048]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

memorandum

His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador has received instructions to draw the attention of the United States Government to the proceedings of the German warships Leipzig and Nürnberg. It is a matter of common knowledge that these ships have been lying off the coast of California for some days and it is known that the German Consul visited the Leipzig in a tug in which the San Francisco Examiner sent out papers containing information of the whereabouts and movements of belligerent men-of-war. This incident was characterized by Rear Admiral Charles F. Pond of the United States Navy, in a notice issued August 13, as unneutral service and a violation of the President’s proclamation of neutrality. He warned the newspapers and all persons that acts of this character would be done at the peril of the persons or organization taking part in them.

His Majesty’s Government are informed that on August 13 the two German cruisers which were lying just outside the three-mile limit at the entrance to San Francisco were in constant communication by radio-telegraphy with the German Consul. Such messages between belligerent men-of-war and their consul can hardly be presumed to refer to anything else than warlike operations.

The Ambassador is accordingly instructed to ask the United States Government to be good enough to make enquiries with a view to ascertaining what steps were taken to ensure that these messages were not of an unneutral nature and such as are prohibited by the Executive Order of August 5, 1914.

He would feel greatly obliged if the Secretary of State would be good enough to let him know the result of these enquiries.

British Embassy,

Washington, September 1, 1914.
[Received September 8.]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy File No. 763.72111/179

[Document 1049]

The Secretary of State to the British Embassy

memorandum

In reply to the memorandum of September 1 from His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy, relative to the passage of radio messages between German warships and the German Consul at San Francisco, the Department of State begs to advise His Britannic Majesty’s Embassy of the receipt of a letter on the subject from the Secretary of the Navy, in substance as follows:

Two messages of this character were picked up by radio stations in the vicinity of San Francisco about August 12, 1914, and by order of the Commandant, twelfth naval district, whose headquarters are at San Francisco, they were not transmitted.

The Commandant of the district, in reporting the circumstances, called attention to the possibility of such messages being received by an amateur, unlicensed station, and recommended that all such stations be closed. The Navy Department ordered that this be done, and since then any messages that may have been sent could only have been received by a regularly licensed station or a naval radio station, where they would, of course, be subject to the Navy Department’s instructions regarding censorship.1

It is added that no report of any unneutral message or message of any kind between belligerent war vessels and shore stations has been received since.

Department of State,

Washington, September 22, 1914.

1 See the section on control over wireless telegraphy, post, p. 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068].

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for theDepartment of State File No. 768.72111/245

[Document 1050]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Counselor for theDepartment of State

British Embassy,
Washington, September 24, 1914.[Received September 25.]

Dear Mr. Counsellor: You were good enough to call my attention to a report which had reached your attention to the effect that a British warship had communicated by wireless with the shore a request for some supplies.1 I at once informed my Government, who have telegraphed to me that His Majesty’s ships have been instructed on no account to telegraph to New York for supplies or newspapers.

Yours sincerely,

Cecil Spring Rice

1 Reports from the Navy Department of Messages intercepted from and to the Suffolk not printed (File Nos. 763.72111/133,134). According to the following letter of the Counselor for the Department to the British Ambassador, the matter was brought to the Ambassador’s attention orally

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) File No. 763.72111/423

[Document 1051]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

Dear Mr. Ambassador: The Navy Department has sent to this Department a communication from Admiral Fletcher, Commander in Chief of the Atlantic Fleet, dated October 1, in which he states that his flagship, the Wyoming, on leaving New York September 22, passed the British cruiser Lancaster two and one-half miles south by east of Scotland Lightship.2 The admiral calls attention to the position of the cruiser and its ability to control all ingress and egress at the largest port of the United States.

This statement of Admiral Fletcher is similar to the case of the cruiser Suffolk, to which I orally called your attention a few days ago, and I must say that the presence of these vessels in near proximity to the harbor of New York, where the commerce of that port converges, causes a very bad impression and will induce much adverse comment if the fact becomes the subject of public discussion.

While, of course, the presence of these vessels does not constitute anything in the nature of a blockade by Great Britain, the effect is to interfere so with our commerce with her enemies as to infringe upon our commercial rights in appearance if not in fact.

I am writing you personally in regard to this matter, as I have already told you informally that the presence of the Suffolk had caused considerable concern and that its continuance might be construed into an unfriendly act, requiring official action. This latter possibility I hope can be avoided.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

2 Not printed.

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72111/8014

[Document 1052]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, October 7, 1914.

Dear Mr. Lansing : I did not fail to inform Sir E. Grey of the contents of your personal and confidential note of the 5th instant, calling attention to the presence of the British cruisers Lancaster and Suffolk in close proximity to the harbour of New York. I now beg to inform you that I have received a telegram from Sir E. Grey in reply, stating that instructions have been issued to the British Admiral to take the necessary steps to prevent a repetition of these incidents.

Believe me [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/502

[Document 1053]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, October 21, 1914
[Received October 22.].

[Translation]

J. No. A 1775]

Mr. Secretary of State: I am told that the tug F. B. Dalzell at 11 p.m. in the night of September 31—October 1 put to sea from Pier 6, East River, New York, to carry provisions to the British cruiser Essex. The Essex was lying about five nautical miles off Gedney Channel, two nautical miles southeast of Scotland Lightship. As she came out of Gedney Channel the tug is said to have come under the searchlight of the American warship Florida that was lying in front of the channel. The provisions, about 40 tons of fresh meat wrapped in cloth, were taken from the tug in boats that had been sent from the war vessel. The tug then returned to New York where it arrived at daybreak.

The tug G. H. Dalzell, which belongs to the same line, went on a similar errand in the night of October 1-2. That tug also left from Pier 6, East River.

I have the honor to bring the foregoing to your excellency’s knowledge with a request that you will kindly set on foot an investigation of the case and ascertain whether it constitutes a violation of the neutrality laws.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/710

[Document 1054]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department,
Washington, October 26, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to state that the following cablegrams were received Sunday from the collector of customs at Honolulu:

October 24, 1914, 4:50 p.m. Japanese battleship Hizen, which has been off this port since October 21, last evening at 5:15 p.m. came within three-mile limit and remained there until 6:50 p.m. At 9 a.m. to-day Hizen is moving slowly back and forth off entrance to harbor range six miles.

October 24, 1914, 11:50 p.m. The following radiogram was received by Admiral Moore at 2:15 p.m. to-day from the Japanese battleship Hizen off port [to] Japanese Consul:

I captured a German schooner this morning. I hope to release the crew at Honolulu. In order to have conference over the matter with American officials I wish to send a steam launch to Honolulu. Will you get permission of it from the customs collector? Also I wish to see you on the Hizen as soon as possible.

Captain Y. Kawanami

Admiral Moore replied as follows:

Captain G. Kawanawia [sic]: I am not authorized to confer with any officer on any subject concerning neutrality. All such matters are under control collector customs.

C. B. T. Moore

Upon receipt of copies of these radiograms I wirelessed Captain Kawanami as follows:

Am unwilling to grant you further communication with this port until I hear from the Department in Washington. Have taken the matter up with them.

After conference with Mr. Lansing the following reply was addressed to the collector:

Permit steam launch Japanese battleship Hizen to enter your port for conference. Also permit landing captured crew German schooner. Advise captain Japanese battleship Hizen that this Government deprecates his action in blockading your port in manner indicated. Observe strictly neutrality regulations regarding furnishing supplies.

This Department is in receipt this morning of further cablegrams from the collector as follows:

October 25, 1914, 5:42 p.m. Captain Brown, commanding revenue cutter Thetis, reports steam launches from Japanese battleship Hizen steaming without lights in this harbor Friday and Saturday nights. I have protested against the use of steam launches from Japanese battleship in our waters. Impossible to make commander of Japanese battleship Hizen observe our neutrality. Wire instructions immediately.

October 25, 1914, 6:39 p.m. Following radiogram received from Brown, commanding revenue cutter Thetis, naval station Honolulu:

Please phone collector of customs that Captain of Japanese cruiser Hizen has sent crew of Æolus on board the German steamer Locksun at anchor outside harbor. He sent wireless to the Thetis that situation demanded immediate disposal of crew of Æolus. One Chinaman in crew.

Brown

The Locksun is German merchant steamer lying in neutral waters.

I will thank you to advise me as soon as possible what further instructions you desire to be given to the collector in the matter. By direction of the Secretary,

Respectfully,

B. R.Newton
Assistant Secretary

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/711

[Document 1055]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to the Secretary of State

Treasury Department, Washington, October 27, 1914.

Sir: For your consideration in connection with this Department’s letter of the 26th instant, relative to the Japanese battleship Hizen, I have the honor to communicate further cablegrams from the collector of customs at Honolulu, as follows:

Honolulu, October 26, 1914, 5:45 p.m. Captain Brown of the revenue cutter Thetis reports that steam launches from the Japanese battleship Hizen were again in neutral waters last night without lights.

Honolulu, October 26, 1914, 12:45 p.m. Captain Hisen desires to send sealed communications to the Japanese consul and receive sealed replies. Await instructions.

By direction of the Secretary,

Respectfully,

B. R. Newton ,
Assistant Secretary

The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Newton) [Document 1056]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Newton)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

Sir: The Department has received your two letters of the 26th and 27th instant, relative to the Japanese battleship Hizen off the port of Honolulu, and has taken up the matter of the improper conduct of the battleship and its launches informally with the Japanese Ambassador, with the view to preventing further infractions of neutrality by the operations of this vessel.

In regard to the request of the captain of the Hizen to send sealed communications to the Japanese consul at Honolulu and receive sealed replies, the Department is of the opinion that communications of this sort or communication in any other manner between the battleship Hizen and Japanese officers in Honolulu, bearing upon the belligerent operations of the vessel, would not comport with the strict neutrality of the United States, and therefore should not be allowed.

It is noted that one of the members of the crew of the Æolus is a Chinaman, whose release at Honolulu may raise a question in regard to his immigration into the United States. If such is the case, the matter should, I presume, be referred directly to the Department of Labor which, as you know, has jurisdiction of such matters.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda) [Document 1057]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Chinda)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: With reference to our conversation of yesterday in relation to the Japanese battleship Hizen off the port of Honolulu, I wish to call your attention to further information which has been received in regard to the operations of this ship and its launches in that locality. I am advised that the ship’s steam launches have been cruising in the Harbor of Honolulu without lights Friday, Saturday, and Sunday nights, and that the commander of the battleship appears disinclined to observe the neutrality of the port.

I am calling your attention to the improper conduct of the Hizen in this informal manner, in the hope of avoiding a formal communication to your Government on the subject, and of averting a situation which might assume a serious aspect.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/552

[Document 1058]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, October 29, 1914.

[Translation]

J. No. A 1883]

Mr. Secretary of State: It has come to my knowledge that a Japanese warship which is lying off the harbor of Honolulu had communication with the land on the 24th and 26th instant. I should be thankful to your excellency for the favor of an explanation of the particulars of and reasons for these occurrences.

Accept [etc.]

For the Imperial Ambassador:
Prince Hatzfeldt

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) [Document 1059]

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, November 5, 1914.

No. 1108]

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of October 29, 1914, stating that it has come to your knowledge that a Japanese war vessel lying off the harbor of Honolulu had communication with the land on the 24th and 26th ultimo.

In response to your request for information in the matter I have the honor to advise you that the Department is informed that the captain of the Japanese cruiser Hizen requested, on October 26, permission to send sealed communications to the Japanese Consul at Honolulu, and to receive sealed replies, but that such permission was refused; that on October 24 the captain of the Hizen sent a radiogram stating that he had captured a German schooner whose crew he desired to release at Honolulu, and that in order to confer with the American officers in regard to this matter, he desired to send a launch to Honolulu. The American authorities allowed the launch to enter the port for the conference, and also granted permission for the landing of the crew of the captured German cruiser. It appears, however, that the crew were put on board the German merchantman Locksun lying in the harbor.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72111/502

[Document 1060]

The Acting Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, November 23, 1914.

No. 1133]

Excellency: Referring to your note of the 21st ultimo,1 stating that your Embassy was in receipt of information to the effect that, on the night of September 30 last, the tug F. B. Dalzell put to sea from Pier 6, East River, New York, to carry provisions to the British cruiser Essex, which was lying off Gedney Channel; that as she came out of Gedney Channel the tug came under the searchlights of the U. S. S. Florida ; that the provisions were taken from the tug in boats sent from the Essex; and that the tug G. H. Dalzell went on a similar errand on the night of October 1, I have the honor to inform you that the Government of the United States has had the matter thoroughly investigated and has not been able to find as yet sufficient evidence showing that the tug F. B. Dalzell has furnished supplies to British warships. If your excellency can supply any evidence bearing on the matter, the Department will be glad to have a further investigation made on the basis of the new information.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) File No. 763.72111/1206

[Document 1061]

The Counselor for the Department of State to the British Ambassador ( Spring Rice )

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: I have been advised in a letter from the Navy Department,2 transmitting a communication from the Commander in Chief of the Atlantic Fleet, that two British men-of-war are habitually lying from three to six miles southeast of Ambrose Channel Lightship, and that one of these vessels is a cruiser of about 9,000 tons displacement and the other of about 6,000 tons displacement. It is further stated that this appears to be a regular station for observing the commerce entering and leaving the port of New York, and that it is understood the ships are changed about every two weeks by reliefs from the northward, probably Halifax. This case is similar to the one to which I called your attention in my personal note of the 5th October, and I must repeat what I said in that note, that the presence of these vessels in near proximity to the harbor of New York, where the commerce of that port diverges, will I fear induce much adverse comment if the fact becomes the subject of public discussion. You will no doubt recall that in the past such discussion has forced the Government to take a very strong stand against the hovering of foreign warships in the vicinity of our great ports. I am calling this matter to your attention personally, as I have the previous cases of this sort, because the presence of these vessels at first caused considerable concern and because the continuance of this practice might be construed into an act of unfriendliness, requiring some action on the part of the Government, which I hope may be avoided.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

2 Not printed.

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State File No. 763.72111/3010

[Document 1062]

The British Ambassador ( Spring Rice ) to the Counselor for the Department of State

British Embassy,
Washington, January 9, 1915.
[Received January 12.]

My dear Mr. Lansing : Immediately on the receipt of your personal and confidential letter of the 22d ultimo, I telegraphed to Sir E. Grey conveying to him the information received by you from the Navy Department as to the “hovering” of British men-of-war outside New York Harbour, and also your friendly warning as to the possibility that this practice, if continued, might require some action on the part of the United States Government which you hoped to avoid. I am now in receipt of a reply from Sir E. Grey, stating that instructions have been given to the British Admiral that the ships in question must not approach to the Ambrose Lightship nearer than a distance of six miles. In expressing the hope that this information may be satisfactory, I take this opportunity to thank you sincerely for your considerate action in giving me private warning of a possible complication which it is eminently desirable to avert.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The question of the limits of territorial waters—The Italian six-mile ruleThe question of the limits of territorial waters—The Italian six-mile rule

[1063] The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State

Italian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 13, 1914. [Received August 14.]

File No. 763.72111/322

[1064] The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State

Italian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, September 8, 1914.[Received September 10.]

File No. 763.72111/383

[1065] The Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere) to the Secretary of state

Italian Embassy, Washington, November 6, 1914. [Received November 9.]

File No. 763.72111/628

[1066] The Acting Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere)

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1914.

[1067] The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere)

Department of State, Washington, December 12, 1914.

The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/322

[Document 1063]

The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State

Italian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 13, 1914.
[Received August 14.]

[Translation]

No. 1267]

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of my Government I have the honor to inform your excellency that by Royal decree of the 6th instant the limit of territorial waters at sea, for the purposes of neutrality, has been fixed at six nautical miles, and that special rules will be framed for the determination of the said territorial waters in bays, bights, and gulfs, in accordance with Article 2 of the said decree.1

This affords me a welcome opportunity to renew [etc.]

R. Borghetti

1 A similar extension of the limit of territorial waters (to five miles) decreed by the Uruguayan Government on August 7, was transmitted by the Minister in Uruguay in his No. 700, August 13 (File No. 763.72111/438).

The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/383

[Document 1064]

The Italian Chargé d’Affaires (Borghetti) to the Secretary of State

Italian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, September 8, 1914.[Received September 10.]

[Translation]

No. 1426]

Mr. Secretary of State: With reference to your excellency’s note dated August 17 last,2 I have the honor to quote hereinbelow the text of the provisions contained in Article 2 of the Royal decree of August 6, 1914, in respect to the limits of Italian territorial waters in bays, bights, and gulfs, for the purposes of neutrality:

Article 2. In bays, bights, and gulfs, territorial waters, for the purposes set forth in the foregoing article, lie within a straight outward line tangent to two circumferences with a six-mile radius and having their centers at the extreme points of the opening of the bay, bight, or gulf; provided the distance between the said points does not exceed 20 nautical miles (37,040 meters).

If the distance between the extreme points of the opening exceeds 20 nautical miles, the territorial waters lie within a straight line drawn between the two outermost points of the bay, bight, or gulf separated by a distance of at least 20 nautical miles.

Accept [etc.]

R. Borghetti

2 Not printed.

The Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere) to the Secretary of state File No. 763.72111/628

[Document 1065]

The Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere) to the Secretary of state

Italian Embassy,
Washington, November 6, 1914.
[Received November 9.]

[Translation]

No. 1837]

Mr. Secretary of State: By note of August 13 last the Royal Embassy had the honor to inform your excellency that under a Royal decree of the 6th of that month the limit of territorial waters, for the purposes of neutrality, had been set at six nautical miles, and certain special rules were laid down for the delimitation of such territorial waters in bays, bights, and gulfs in accordance with Article 2 of the said decree. In a subsequent note of September 8 the Royal Embassy quoted for your excellency’s due information the text of the provisions contained in the said article of the Royal decree. Your excellency was pleased to acknowledge the said communications by your notes of August 17 and September 19.1

Whether because of the fact that the limits of the marginal sea are not regulated by international conventions or general rules of international law—thus leaving every state at liberty to fix them within the sphere of its own sovereignty without subjecting its decision to the recognition of the other states—or because of the fact that no comment was made by your excellency on the Royal Embassy’s communications, His Majesty’s Government knows that no objections are made by the Federal Government to the six-mile limit set by us on our territorial waters for the purposes of neutrality.

Yet, with a view to removing any possible uncertainty, His Majesty’s Government would be very thankful for a declaration which would explicitly convey acceptance by the Federal Government of the decision as adopted. And, in compliance with instructions I have just received on the subject, I have the honor to apply to your excellency’s tried courtesy for such a declaration.

Most earnestly thanking your excellency therefor in advance, I take [etc.]

V. Macchi di Celleke

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere) [Document 1066]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere)

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1914.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s note of November 6, 1914, having reference to your previous notes of August 13 and September 8 last, the first of which notes contained announcement that by a Royal decree of the Italian Government, dated August 6, 1914, the limits of its territorial waters were set at six nautical miles from the shore, and the latter of which notes quoted the text of Article 2 of that decree, prescribing rules for the determination of the territorial waters in the bays, bights, and gulfs which indent the Italian shore. Of these notes I had the honor to acknowledge receipt, respectively, on August 17 and September 19 last gone.1

In your note of November 6 your excellency says that in order to remove any possible uncertainty respecting the position of this Government, you will appreciate an explicit declaration on behalf of the United States accepting the decision of the Italian Government as embodied in the Royal decree referred to.

I am compelled to inform your excellency of my inability to accept the principle of the Royal decree in so far as it may undertake to extend the limits of the territorial waters beyond three nautical miles from the main shore line and to extend thereover the jurisdiction of the Italian Government.

An examination into the question involved leads to the conclusion that the territorial jurisdiction of a nation over the waters of the sea which wash its shore is now generally recognized by the principal nations to extend to the distance of one marine league or three nautical miles, that the Government of the United States appears to have uniformly supported this rule, and that the right of a nation to extend, by domestic ordinance, its jurisdiction beyond this limit has not been acquiesced in by the Government of the United States.

There are certain reasons, brought forward from time to time in the discussion of this question and advanced by writers on international law, why the maritime nations might deem the way clear to extend this determined limit of three miles, in view of the great improvement in gunnery and of the extended distance to which, from the shore, the rights of nations could be defended; but it seems manifestly important that such a construction or change of the rule should be reduced to a precise proposition and should then receive in some manner reciprocal acknowledgment from the principal maritime powers; in fine, that the extent of the open or high seas should better be the result of some concerted understanding by the nations whose vessels sail them than be left to the determination of each particular nation, influenced by the interests which may be peculiar to it.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere) [Document 1067]

The Secretary of State to the Italian Ambassador (Macchi di Cellere)

Department of State,
Washington, December 12, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: Referring to your oral communication of yesterday at the Department and to Department’s note of the 28th ultimo relative to an Italian Royal decree of August 6, 1914, extending the territorial waters of Italy to six nautical miles from shore, I desire to inform you that upon further consideration of this subject, while the Department is obliged to adhere to the opinions expressed in its note of the 28th ultimo, it has taken steps to furnish the Department of the Navy with a copy of the diplomatic correspondence on this matter, with the request that orders be issued to the public ships of the United States notifying them of the Royal decree of August 6 last mentioned above, and giving such further instructions as may be appropriate with a view to avoid so far as is possible any incident which may raise a question between the Governments of Italy and the United States as to the extent of the territorial waters of the former country.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Robert Lansing

Control over wireless telegraphyControl over wireless telegraphy1

1 For papers relating to control by the United States of wireless telegraph stations in Panama, see Foreign Relations, 1914, pp. 1036–52

[1068] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 4, 1914.

File No. 811.741/11

[1069] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 5, 1914. [Received 9 a.m.]

File No. 811.741/58

[1070] Executive order of August 5, 1914, regarding unneutral radio messages

The White House, 5 August, 1914.

[1071] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914.

File No. 811.741/58

[1072] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 811.741/11

[1073] The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, undated. [Received August 11, 1914.]

File No. 811.741/16

[1074] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1914, 7 p.m.

[1075] The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, August 15, 1914. [Received 2 p.m.]

File No. 811.741/13

[1076] The Secretary of State to the German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel)

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914.

[1077] The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 12, 1914. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/353

[1078] The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, August 14, 1914.

File No. 811.741/37

[1079] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 9, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received August 14, 8:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/411

[1080] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 811.741/22a

[1081] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 21, 1914, 12 noon.

File No. 811.741/19

[1082] The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to Collectors of Customs

Treasury Department, Washington, August 20, 1914.

T. D. 34718

[1083] The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State

Navy Department, Washington, August 22, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/73

[1084] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 28, 1914. [Received August 29, 7 p.m.]

File No. 811.741/29

[1085] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 30, 1914.[Received 3:02 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/93

[1086] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 30, 1914 11 a.m. , [Received August 31, 1 a.m.]

File No. 811.741/27

[1087] Executive order No. 2042 of September 5, 1914, regarding Government control of high-powered radio stations

The White House, 5 September, 1914.

[1088] The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Foreign Governments

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1914.

File No. 811.741/43 and 46

[1089] The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State

Navy Department, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 811.741/84

[1090] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Daniels)

Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1914.

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/11

[Document 1068]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 4, 1914. 2

No. 253]

Sir: His Majesty’s Government have reason to believe that the wireless telegraph stations at Sayville, Long Island, and at Tuckerton, New Jersey, which are owned by the Telefunken Wireless Company of the United States and the High Frequency Machine Company of Berlin, respectively, have now had their controlling power purchased by the firm of Siemanns and Halske of Berlin, who are under subsidy of the German Government.

Both stations are powerfully equipped. The first station has in fact frequently been used in the past few days by the German Government to convey messages from Berlin to their warships, the Dresden and the Carlsruhe, now off the American coast, while the Tuckerton station is provided with a system also capable of reaching the North Sea. It therefore follows that these stations, so long as they are controlled by the German company in question, subsidized as it is by the German Government, are intelligence bureaux for that Government, being in a position to give military and other information such as may cause the greatest prejudice and injury to Great Britain and her interests.

Under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs I have the honour to state that His Majesty’s Government are of opinion that the duty of impartiality should prevent neutrals from allowing belligerents to establish such bureaux on neutral territory, and they would urge upon the United States Government the desirability of their placing their own officers in charge of the above-mentioned stations so as to ensure equal treatment as between the belligerents or to close those stations until further notice.

Sir E. Grey is confident that the United States Government, animated as they are by the sincere desire of discharging their duties of strict neutrality, will concur in the contention of His Majesty’s Government that the existence of such stations in neutral territory under the direct control of a belligerent is contrary to the principles of impartiality which pertain to those duties.

I have [etc.]

Colville Barclay

2 Regarding date of receipt, see footnote to the Chargé’s No. 252, same date, ante, p. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/58

[Document 1069]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 5, 1914.
[Received 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

265. My attention has been called to the fact that the use of wireless stations in the United States by clerks [Germans?] constitutes an unneutral service.

The British Admiralty informs the naval attaché that a number of German merchant vessels have been diverted from their courses, with the object of evading British war vessels, by wireless instruction from Telefunken Company’s station, Sayville, in anticipation of war with this country, and hopes that some means may be found to prevent this if England goes to war.

American Ambassador

Executive order of August 5, 1914, regarding unneutral radio messages [Document 1070]

Executive order of August 5, 1914, regarding unneutral radio messages1

Whereas proclamations having been issued by me declaring the neutrality of the United States of America in the wars now existing between various European nations; and

WHEREAS it is desirable to take precautions to insure the enforcement of said proclamations in so far as the use of radio communication is concerned;

It is now ordered, by virtue of authority vested in me to establish regulations on the subject, that all radio stations within the jurisdiction of the United States of America are hereby prohibited from transmitting or receiving for delivery messages of an unneutral nature, and from in any way rendering to any one of the belligerents any unneutral service, during the continuance of hostilities.

The enforcement of this order is hereby delegated to the Secretary of the Navy, who is authorized and directed to take such action in the premises as to him may appear necessary.

This order to take effect from and after this date.

Woodrow Wilson

The White House,
5 August, 1914.

1 Communicated to the representatives of belligerent governments, August 7 (File No. 811.741/58).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 811.741/58

[Document 1071]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your 265. The President issued an Executive order on August 5 prohibiting all radio stations within the jurisdiction of the United States from transmitting or receiving for delivery messages in cipher or of an unneutral nature, and from in any way rendering to any one of the belligerents any unneutral service, during the continuance of hostilities. The Secretary of the Navy is strictly enforcing this order.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 811.741/11

[Document 1072]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

Have talked with Barclay about British protest against German use of wireless. British use one cable and French the other. We are not able to find substantial distinction between cable communication and communication by wireless. We are trying to devise a plan that will put all belligerent nations on same footing. Great Britain refused code dispatches at Barbados during Spanish-American war. We asked Barclay for suggestions looking to equal treatment of all cable and wireless messages. Will lay matter before President when he returns Thursday.

Bryan

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/16

[Document 1073]

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, undated.
[Received August 11, 1914.]

To be transmitted in cipher through the United States Embassy in Berlin to the Foreign Office there.1

The United States Department of State has, on my request, under consideration the reopening of telegraphic communication between the German Embassy, Washington, D. C., and the Foreign Office in Berlin, as follows:

(1) All the belligerents may send and receive wireless messages in code and cipher via Sayville and Tuckerton. The American censors at those stations receive the codes and ciphers used, in order to be able to see that the neutrality of the United States is not violated. Ciphers and codes to remain known only to the censors and the United States Government, also the contents of the messages sent; or

(2) Germany may use the English or French cables. The telegrams of all the belligerents submitted to censure as stated before.

This is not a proposal but merely a proposition under consideration upon which the United States Government reserves decision.1 I recommend acceptance of these terms warmly. The United States Government will consider also proposals of the German Government in this connection, provided strict neutrality is guaranteed. Immediate answer requested.

Haniel

1 The following, with slight changes in phraseology, was sent to the Ambassador in Germany, for transmission to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, by telegram, August 11, 7 p.m.

1 The foregoing sentence is inserted in the handwriting of the Secretary of State.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 1074]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)2

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

The Department has under consideration the question of communication by wireless and cable between the belligerent governments and their embassies here. It submits for the consideration of the British Government the following alternatives: (1) All the belligerents may send and receive wireless messages in code or cipher via Sayville and Tuckerton. The American censors at those stations to receive codes and ciphers used in order to be able to see that the neutrality of the United States is not violated. Ciphers and codes to remain known only to the censors and the United States Government, also the contents of the messages sent; or

(2) Germany may use the English or French cables. The telegrams of all the belligerents submitted to the censor as stated before.

This is not a proposal, but merely a proposition under consideration upon which the United States Government reserves decision. This Government will also be pleased to consider any proposals made by the British Government in this connection, provided the strict neutrality of the United States is secured. An immediate answer is requested.

Bryan

2 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in France.

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/13

[Document 1075]

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, August 15, 1914.
[Received 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

In order that equal treatment might be reestablished, I beg to suggest that censorship for wireless stations may be suspended while American Government has the general question of censorship under consideration.

Haniel

The Secretary of State to the German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) [Document 1076]

The Secretary of State to the German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel)

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

It is expected question concerning wireless will be settled tomorrow. Department advised that no license for operation of Tuckerton station has been taken out under the act of August 13, 1912.

W. J. Bryan

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/353

[Document 1077]

The French Chargé d’Affaires (Clausse) to the Secretary of State

French Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 12, 1914.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am informed that the Federal Government is contemplating steps to suppress the supposed differential treatment now accorded by the United States Government to wireless communications and cable messages. If my information be correct, I beg your excellency to consider the radically different nature of these two sorts of communication. What my Government objected to from the start was the direct communication with the German men-of-war by which they would have been warned of the movements of the French merchantmen and men-of-war and which constituted a violation of neutrality. It is only because of the impossibility to ascertain whether messages addressed to Germany would not reach German men-of-war that my Government protested against the indiscriminate use of the Tuckerton and Sayville wireless stations. All belligerents are in that respect on an equal footing and this Embassy is unable to let French men-of-war know of the movements of hostile vessels. The situation is different with cable communications, as a message forwarded that way can only reach a well-defined point. It cannot be sent to any man-of-war, thus making the United States directly participant to a non-neutral act. The discrimination against Germany now supposed to exist in the United States attitude is only apparent. It is the result of a legitimate act of war, that is, the cutting of German cables by a hostile force. It is in the order of things that the belligerent who has not been able to protect himself on that point should bear the consequences of it and it cannot be the duty of a neutral power to reestablish between the belligerents a balance that has been destroyed by a legitimate act of war.

Clausse

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/37

[Document 1078]

The British Chargé d’Affaires (Barclay) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, August 14, 1914.

No. 280]

Sir: I have the honour to recapitulate briefly the various points advanced by me in the course of conversations which I have had during the past few days with you and the Counsellor of the Department of State and in which I supported the contention of His Majesty’s Government that the use of the wireless stations at Sayville and Tuckerton for messages of an unneutral nature should not be reestablished.

1. The two wireless stations in question are under the direct control of the German Government and messages intercepted before the censorship was established indubitably show that they were in constant communication with German warships.

2. Information conveyed by wireless differs vastly from that conveyed by cable. A wireless message, from the very moment it is despatched, is spread in countless directions and is conveyed to any number of ships over a wide area. A cable message can only be delivered at one well-known point. That point of destination is a tangible one and the enemy are at perfect liberty to attack it and cut off communications.

3. It would appear that the German Embassy contends that it is cut off entirely from communication with its Government. His Majesty’s Embassy understands, however, that there are still cable routes open to them, via Italy, for instance. But even if this were not the case, the cutting of German cables is a perfectly legitimate act of war, which the German Embassy cannot expect it to be the duty of a neutral to redress.

4. The further contention of the German Embassy that it is being discriminated against and that a cable message is on the same footing as a wireless message is incorrect. A cable message cannot reach a warship. Any information which might be conveyed as to the movement of ships by cable takes a considerable number of hours to reach its destination. When information is ultimately sent to the ships, this information reaches them from the territory of the belligerent (by means of relays from Europe, which again take time—a matter of vital importance) and not direct from the territory of a neutral. A wireless message, on the other hand, sent from the Sayville or the Tuckerton stations is not only direct but immediate information conveyed to ships, merchantmen and warships.

5. In short, the two German wireless stations above mentioned are in a position to impart direct and immediate information to the German fleet, to the great danger of British shipping, and render United States territory a base for direct military operations against their enemies.

I have [etc.]

Colvillle Barclay

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/411

[Document 1079]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 9, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received August 14, 8:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Germany wants permission to send telegrams in cipher via Tuckerton wireless station which is in connection with Eilvese station here in Hanover. I suggest while waiting this permission, if you give it unconditionally, for the moment, Germany allowing me to send you daily one long despatch in cipher or English and that you be allowed to answer it in same manner. Send Tennessee, Rotterdam. Germany wants to communicate their Embassy at Tokyo. Better keep this communication your hands so we can keep this line open via Tuckerton.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 811.741/22a

[Document 1080]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

Please inquire of the Foreign Office whether the German Government has itself any connection, direct or indirect, with the radio station at Sayville, Long Island, now operated by a corporation known as the Atlantic Communication Company, or with the radio station at Tuckerton, New Jersey, built by the Hoch Frequenz Maschinen Actiengesellschaft für Drahtlose Telegraphic. We feel bound in fairness to the German Government to make these inquiries for our guidance in performing our obligations under the third article of the Hague convention of 1907.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 811.741/19

[Document 1081]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 21, 1914, 12 noon.

[Telegram]

The German Chargé d’Affaires would be very much obliged, if the following message could be transmitted to the Foreign Office in Berlin through his excellency the American Ambassador:

While the United States Government has under consideration the subject of wireless and cable messages, and until a decision is reached covering the matter, messages may be sent from the wireless station at Sayville on the following conditions: 1. Plain messages of neutral character may be sent at the usual rates for private parties and for governments represented here.

2. Cipher messages may be sent for both private parties and governments represented here, when the contents of such messages are made known, in confidence, to an American official designated for the purpose. Please wire if approved by Imperial Government.

Haniel

Washington,
August 21, 1914.

We have under consideration the issuing of the above order.

Bryan

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to Collectors of Customs T. D. 34718

[Document 1082]

The Secretary of the Treasury (McAdoo) to Collectors of Customs

Treasury Department,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

To Collectors of Customs (all sea and lake ports):

Department’s instructions, 10th instant (T. D. 34693),1 are hereby supplemented as follows: 1. Collectors of customs are charged with the duty of preventing violations of the neutrality laws, but may call upon the Revenue Cutter Service or officers of the Navy or Army for such force and assistance as may be necessary.

2. Vessels of war will not be permitted to take on coal or other supplies without permission from the collector of customs.

3. Collectors will apply to officers of the Revenue Cutter Service or Navy for advice as to the quantity of coal and other supplies that may be taken by such vessel.

4. All matters concerning radio communication involving neutrality shall be referred to the commander of a naval radio station or of a naval vessel at your port. If there be no such station or vessel at your port you will follow instructions of Navy Department issued August 6, 1914,2 and if necessary to enforce these instructions you will seal up the wireless room and apparatus of any merchant vessel of a belligerent power, the seals to remain until the vessel’s departure.

5. In case of war vessels you will notify their commanders that same can not be used while in port.

W. G. Mcadoo Secretary

1  Ante, p. 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958].

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/73

[Document 1083]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State

Navy Department,
Washington, August 22, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to forward herewith, for your information, copies of telegrams received and sent by this Department relative to the enforcement of the President’s neutrality proclamation during the existing wars among certain European countries.

Sincerely yours,

Josephus Daniels

[Enclosure 1—Circular telegram]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to naval officers charged with enforcing the President’s proclamation of neutrality

Navy Department,
Washington , August 8, 1914.

No cipher or code messages permitted to be handled with radio ship or shore stations of belligerent nations by any government or commercial radio station under jurisdiction of United States nor permitted to be sent from any radio station in United States via foreign radio stations if destined to belligerent. Radio messages containing information relative to operations, material, or personnel of armed forces of any belligerent nation will be considered unneutral in character and will not be Handled except in case of cipher messages to or from United States officials. In general censoring official will assure himself beyond doubt that no message of unneutral character is handled. Censors will demand, if necessary, that messages be presented for their ruling in a language that is understandable to them. In case of doubt as to character of message it should be stopped and contents with full explanation of details forwarded to Department (Operations) by land line for instructions as to proper procedure.

Daniels

[Enclosure 2—Circular telegram]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to commanding officers of navy yards

Navy Department,
Washington , August 21, 1914.

Collector of customs of a port is official charged with matters connection neutrality proclamation in port under his jurisdiction. Treasury Department will instruct those officials; copy instructions will be forwarded you. Be prepared to advise and render assistance in enforcement of proclamation and instructions when requested. Following agreement with Treasury Department regarding radio: In ports having naval radio stations, naval vessels, naval stations, or Department represented in other ways by naval officers, questions of radio handled directly by such naval representatives. Collector of customs in such ports supply information arrival of all vessels having radio. Ports no representative Navy Department, collector of customs seal up radio apparatus merchant vessels belligerent powers while in port.

[File copy not signed]

[Enclosure 3—Telegram]

The Commanding Officer of the Charleston Navy Yard (Helm) to the Secretary of the Navy (Daniels)

Navy Yard,
Charleston , August 22, 1914.

Referring Secretary of Navy’s telegram August 21, shall radio apparatus merchant vessel belligerent powers in this port be sealed by naval representatives? Request instructions.

Helm

[Enclosure 4—Telegram]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Commanding Officer of the Charleston Navy Yard (Helm)

Navy Department,
Washington , August 22, 1914.

Replying your telegram to-day, carry out President’s executive order regarding radio communication and instructions for officers charged with enforcement same, sealing radio apparatus of merchant vessels belligerent powers if necessary to insure compliance.

Daniels

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/29

[Document 1084]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 28, 1914.
[Received August 29, 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Foreign Office requests that you will kindly transmit the following to the German Chargé d’Affaires at Washington:

The German Government is willing to accept the propositions concerning telegraphic communication, provided censorship applies equally to all belligerents.

Three copies of a cipher book to be used for wireless messages will be forwarded by messenger sailing from Rotterdam August 29. Meanwhile follow provisional arrangement mentioned in your telegram August 21, using cipher 5604.

Use of French or English cables out of the question, as messages would be held up by French and British Governments.

Zimmermann

Gerard

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/93

[Document 1085]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 30, 1914.[Received 3:02 p.m.]

[Telegram]

514. In reply to your telegram of August 11, 7 p.m.,1 which I at once communicated to Sir Edward Grey,I have just received a note, of which the text is as follows:

I have had the honour of receiving your note of the 14th instant submitting for the consideration of His Majesty’s Government alternatives proposals as to the transmission of telegraphic correspondence subject to censorship between the various belligerent governments and their respective embassies in the United States.

I shall be glad if your excellency will inform your Government that of the two alternatives proposed His Majesty’s Government would prefer the adoption of the first, namely, that the wireless stations at Sayville and Tuckerton should be made available for the transmission of the telegraphic correspondence between the belligerent governments and their embassies subject to strict censorship by the United States authorities.

His Majesty’s Government do not regard it as practicable for German and Austro-Hungarian Government messages to be allowed to pass over British and French cables.

His Majesty’s Government trust the United States Government will agree with them that it is an essential part of the duties of the censor to paraphrase all messages of belligerent governments and their embassies in order to prevent, if possible, any hidden meaning being conveyed; this process, besides being followed in the case of messages sent in plain language, should also be applied to the text of all messages intended for translation into code or cipher before being despatched. His Majesty’s Government would also urge that the working of all wireless stations should be taken out of the hands of nationals of belligerent nations.

It is presumed that the adoption of the first alternative submitted by the United States Government would not entail the prohibition of the use of cable communication in preference to wireless for the telegraphic correspondence between Department of State and His Majesty’s Embassy, Such correspondence would, of course, be subject to censorship to the same extent and as the correspondence of belligerent governments conducted through wireless stations.

American Ambassador

1  Ante, p.670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/27

[Document 1086]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 30, 1914 11 a.m. , [Received August 31, 1 a.m.]

[Telegram]

With reference to your telegram of August 29, 3 p.m., [19, 2 p.m.] the following is substance of note received from Foreign Office:

The Government of His Majesty the Emperor is not connected directly or indirectly with the wireless stations at Sayville and Tuckerton in any business or other relations whatsoever and does not communicate to its armed forces directly or indirectly by this medium.

The German Telefunken Gesellschaft, which owns and operates the Nauen station, owns part interest in the Atlantic Communication Company which built and operates the wireless telegraph station at Sayville. The wireless telegraph station at Tuckerton is owned by the Hoch Frequenz Maschinen Actiengesellschaft für Drahtlose Telegraphie which owns and operates the wireless telegraph station at Eilvese in Germany.

Article 3 of the Hague convention relative to rights and duties of neutrals in case of war on land does not apply to these two stations since they were not constructed by a belligerent nor for purely military purposes but are open to public service.

The Hague convention mentioned has not yet been ratified by Great Britain, so by Article 20 its stipulations do not apply.

The German cable having been cut by a hostile power, the wireless communication between America and Germany affords the only independent and uncontrolled medium for the exchange of messages and the German Imperial Government hopes that the American Government is equally convinced that the maintenance of this service is in the best considered interests of the two countries.

Gerard

Executive order No. 2042 of September 5, 1914, regarding Government control of high-powered radio stations [Document 1087]

Executive order No. 2042 of September 5, 1914, regarding Government control of high-powered radio stations

Whereas an order has been issued by me dated August 5, 1914,1 declaring that all radio stations within the jurisdiction of the United States of America were prohibited from transmitting or receiving for delivery messages of an unneutral nature and from in any way rendering to any one of the belligerents any unneutral service; and

Whereas it is desirable to take precautions to insure the enforcement of said order in so far as it relates to the transmission of code and cipher messages by high-powered stations capable of transatlantic communication;

Now, therefore, it is ordered by virtue of authority vested in me by the radio act of August 13, 1912, that one or more of the high-powered radio stations within the jurisdiction of the United States and capable of transatlantic communication shall be taken over by the Government of the United States and used or controlled by it to the exclusion of any other control or use for the purpose of carrying on communication with land stations in Europe, including code and cipher messages.

The enforcement of this order and the preparation of regulations therefor is hereby delegated to the Secretary of the Navy, who is authorized and directed to take such action in the premises as to him may appear necessary.

This order shall take effect from and after this date.

Woodrow Wilson

The White House,
5 September, 1914.

1  Ante, p.668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Foreign Governments File No. 811.741/43 and 46

[Document 1088]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Representatives of Foreign Governments

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1914.

[Circular note]

Excellency: I have the honor to enclose herewith, at the request of the Navy Department, a copy of the regulations for the operation of the radio station at Tuckerton, New Jersey, in the form of instructions issued by the Navy Department to the officer in charge of the station.

The Navy Department adds that the nature of the supervision and control of the station will prevent any person being employed in the operation thereof except American citizens.

Accept [etc.]

Robert Lansing

[Enclosure]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the officer in charge of the Tuckerton Radio Station

In addition to complying with the provisions of the Executive Order of September 5, 1914, you will be guided by the following instructions relative to the operation of the Tuckerton Radio Station: (1) The station shall be used only for transmitting to or receiving from shore stations in Europe and the United Kingdom.

(2)Naval officials at this station must assure themselves that the messages handled are strictly neutral in character. No unneutral message will be permitted to be handled.

(3) No messages in cipher or code shall be transmitted or received for delivery unless the United States officials are furnished with a key to such messages.

(4) No messages in foreign languages or in unintelligible terms shall be transmitted or received for delivery unless the United States Naval officials are supplied with translations of such messages in the English language and the official censors are satisfied of the bona fides of the translations.

(5) Official radiograms from officials of the United States Government, or from officials of foreign governments on official (state) business, will have priority over all other messages and will be forwarded in the order of sequence of their receipt at the station.

(6) All commercial or private radiograms must be limited to twenty-five words, including the address and signature, and such radiograms must be in plain language, that is, no code or cipher messages for this class of radiograms will be received for transmission. They must not include any arbitrary terms or unintelligible matter which has not been explained to the officials.

(7) Radiograms involving press despatches will not be in any way different from other commercial or private radiograms.

(8) All commercial or private radiograms or press radiograms will only be accepted at the sender’s risk and will be transmitted in the order of receipt at the station, and furthermore there can be no guarantee given for their delivery in foreign points.

(9) All addresses must be in plain language and must consist of at least four words, and all radiograms must be accompanied by a signature which will consist of at least two words.

(10) All messages must be in the form of radiograms and shall apply the cable word count without minimum and shall not be transmitted unless fully prepaid at office of origin.

(11) No messages will be transmitted or delivered until they have been first paraphrased by the censors as may be necessary to ensure their neutral character, whether they are received or are to be sent in plain language or in code, cipher, or foreign language.

(12) No messages shall be sent or delivered until countersigned by the censor.

(13) The station charges of the Tuckerton Station will be 25 cents a word, cable count, without a minimum charge.

(14) Accounting returns will be made monthly on the regular forms to the office of the Superintendent of Radio Service, Radio, Virginia.

(15) Cipher and code books furnished as well as the contents of all messages handled will be considered as confidential.

(16) The call letters of the Tuckerton Station will be WGG.

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.741/84

[Document 1089]

The Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) to the Secretary of State

Navy Department,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

Sir: There is forwarded herewith a copy of regulations and instructions prepared in this Department, which it is proposed to substitute for previous regulations on the same subject which are now in force, as a consequence of the President’s Executive Order of August 5, 1914.

It is requested that the advisability or desirability of these proposed regulations be passed upon by the State Department, and with such comment as may be deemed pertinent, and if the Department of State thinks necessary and proper, to be forwarded to the International Law Board for further expression of opinion.

Josephus Daniels

[Enclosure]

Regulations governing radio communication

1 Radio messages containing information relating to the location or movements of armed forces of any belligerent nation, or relating to material or personnel of any belligerent nation, will be considered as unneutral in character and will not be handled by radio stations under the jurisdiction of the United States, except in the case of cipher messages to or from United States officials.

2 No cipher or code messages are permitted to be transmitted to radio ship stations of belligerent nations by any radio shore station situated in the United States or its possessions or in territory under the jurisdiction of the United States. Similar messages received by such radio stations from ships of belligerent nations will not be forwarded or delivered to addressee.

3 No communication of any character will be permitted between any shore radio station under the jurisdiction of the United States and warships of belligerent nations except calls of distress, messages which relate to the weather, dangers of navigation or similar hydrographic messages relating to safety at sea.

4 No cipher or code radio message will be permitted to be sent from or received at any radio station in the United States via any foreign radio station of a belligerent nation, except from or at certain stations directly authorized by the Government to handle such messages. Press items in plain language relating to the war, with the authority cited in each item, will be permitted between such stations, provided no reference is made to movements or location of war or other vessels of belligerents.

5 No radiogram will be permitted to be transmitted from any shore radio station situated in the United States or under its jurisdiction to any ship of a belligerent nation or any shore radio station that in any manner indicates the position or probable movements of ships of any belligerent nation. Similar radiograms in the reverse direction will not be forwarded for delivery,

6 Code or cipher messages are permitted between shore radio stations entirely under the jurisdiction of the United States and between United States shore stations and United States or neutral merchant vessels, provided they are not destined to a belligerent subject and contain no information of any unneutral character, such as the location or movements of ships of any belligerent nations. In such messages no code or cipher addresses will be allowed and all messages must be signed with the Sender’s name. Radio operating companies handling such messages must assure the government censor as to the neutral character of such messages. Such messages, both transmitted and received, must he submitted to the censor at such times as he may designate, which will be such that will not delay their transmission.

7 In general, censoring officials will assure themselves beyond doubt that no message of any unneutral character is allowed to be handled.

8 In order to insure that censors may, in all cases, be informed thoroughly and correctly as to the contents of radio messages coming under their censorship, they will demand, when necessary, that such messages be presented for their ruling in a language that is understandable to them.

9 At such radio stations where the censor is not actually present at the station when messages are received by the radio station for forwarding either by radio or other means, messages may pass provided they are unmistakably of a neutral character, without being first referred to the censor, but the operating company will be held responsible for the compliance by their operators with these instructions.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Daniels) [Document 1090]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy (Daniels)

Department of State,
Washington, November 19, 1914.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of November 7, 1914, transmitting a copy of regulations and instructions prepared in your Department, which it is proposed to substitute for previous regulations governing radio communication that are now in force, as a consequence of the President’s Executive Order of August 5, 1914.

In reply I have the honor to state that the Department is not in a position to determine the practical or technical questions involved in these regulations, but assumes that the experience of the Navy Department in supervising radio communication since August 5 last has shown the advisability and desirability of the proposed new regulations. From the point of view of our foreign relations no objection to the proposed regulations occurs to the Department at the present time.

I have [etc.]

Robert Lansing

Observance of neutrality by other American statesObservance of neutrality by other American states

[1091] The Consul at Barranquilla (Manning) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Barranquilla, October 3, 1914. [Received October 17.]

File No. 763.72111/478

[1092] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Buenos Aires, September 30, 1914. [Received October 27.]

File No. 763.72111/532

[1093] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Rio de Janeiro, October 7, 1914. [Received October 27.]

File No. 763.72111/534

[1094] The Colombian Legation to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 13, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/645

[1095] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 763.722111/615

[1096] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Hartman)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.

[1097] The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

New York, November 15, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/669

[1098] The Colombian Government to the Colombian Legation at Washington

Bogotá, November 15, 1914. [Left with the Secretary of State November 16.]

File No. 763.72111/680

[1099] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison)

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/719a

[1100] The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova)

Department of State, Washington, November 17, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/713

[1101] The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Quito, November 19, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received November 20, 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/721

[1102] The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

Ecuadorian Legation, Washington, November 19, 1914. [Received November 20.]

File No. 763.7211/713

[1103] The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bogotá, November 21, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received November 22, 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/720

[1104] The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Quito, November 25, 1914, 9 a.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/813

[1105] The Secretary of the Colombian Legation (Ancízar) to the Secretary of State

Colombian Legation, Washington, November 25, 1914. [Received November 27.]

File No. 763.72111/807

[1106] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Buenos Aires, October 24, 1914.[Received November 27.]

File No. 763.72111/830

[1107] The Minister in Uruguay (Grevstad) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Montevideo, October 26, 1914. [Received November 28.]

File No. 763.72111/854

[1108] The Minister in Uruguay (Grevstad) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Montevideo, October 28, 1914.[Received November 28.]

File No. 763.72111/855

[1109] The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bogotá, December 1, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received December 2, 3:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/939

[1110] The British Ambassador( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 2, 1914. [Received December 3.]

File No. 763.72111/953

[1111] The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

Ecuadorian Legation, Washington, December 3, 1914. [Received December 5.]

File No. 763.72111/1050

[1112] The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova)

Department of State, Washington, December 8, 1914.

File No. 763.72111/713

[1113] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 9, 1914. [Received December 11.]

File No. 763.72111/1098

[1114] The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Santiago, November 7, 1914. [Received December 12.]

File No. 763.72111/1132

[1115] The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bogotá, November 18, 1914. [Received December 12.]

File No. 763.72111/1133

[1116] The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bogotá, November 27, 1914. [Received December 17.]

File No. 763.72111/1181

[1117] The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Valparaiso, December 19, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received 11 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111/1213

[1118] The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Quito, December 22, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received December 23, 8 a.m.]

File. No. 763.72111/1251

[1119] The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Quito, November 26, 1914. [Received December 26.]

File No. 768.72111/1267

[1120] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of state

American Legation, Buenos Aires, November 24, 1914. [Received December 28.]

File No. 763.72111/1271

[1121] The Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Embassy at Washington

Washington, December 21, 1914. [Received in the Department of StateDecember 22, 1914.]

File No. 763.72111/1304

[1122] The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

Ecuadorian Legation, Washington, December 25, 1914. [Received January 2, 1915.]

File No. 763.72111/1336

[1123] The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Bogotá, December 11, 1914. [Received January 4, 1915.]

File No. 763.72111/1332

[1124] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Department of State, Washington, January 13, 1915.

File No. 763.72111/1336

[1125] The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova)

Department of State, Washington, January 13, 1915.

[1126] The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Buenos Aires, December 22, 1914. [Received January 18, 1915.]

The Consul at Barranquilla (Manning) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/478

[Document 1091]

The Consul at Barranquilla (Manning) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Barranquilla, October 3, 1914.
[Received October 17.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that there recently arrived in this city a gentleman who gave his name as Grant [Gaunt?] and claimed to be a captain in the British Navy and in conversation with the writer said he was here looking after the “neutrality of the wireless stations, and wireless on non-neutral steamers interned in neutral ports.” He claimed that the station belonging to the Telefunken Company at Cartagena had been performing non-neutral service, but it is the opinion of this Consulate that he found little on which to base his charges, as that station is now under close censorship.

From an instruction received from the American Legation a few days ago, I am led to believe he made the same charges against the radio station at Santa Marta, belonging to the United Fruit Company I am pleased to state that I have a letter of absolute denial from Mr. Goldsmith Williams, acting manager of the United Fruit Company, and he assures me that their station has at no time performed any unneutral service and that they are permitted to transfer only such messages as may pertain to their own business, and messages of the Colombian Government.

That this complaint probably came from the British Consulate here I have no doubt, and probably was in a measure personal spite against the company for having recently taken its financial agency away from the firm here of which the British Consul is an active member. I think it wise to place this matter before you at once, before it may be brought to your attention through the British Embassy there, to which I understand Captain Grant is attached, and which no doubt will be done, if Captain Grant accepts the charges against the Santa Marta station as having basis.

I am very glad indeed to state that I have so far heard no complaints of any non-neutral acts on the part of any American interests in Colombia.

I have [etc.]

Isaac A. Manning

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/532

[Document 1092]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, September 30, 1914.
[Received October 27.]

No. 356]

Sir: During the past three months there have occurred two incidents which have indirectly affected Argentine neutrality in the present European war and which have caused considerable interest throughout the country, increasing the strong anti-German spirit reflected in all circles here.

The first of these incidents concerns the alleged execution by German troops of the honorary Vice Consul of the Argentine Republic at Dinant, Belgium, on or about August 18 last. This official was a Belgian subject and one of the leading manufacturers of the city. It is alleged that he fired on German soldiers from his house. It is further alleged that the consular shield was broken, the Argentine flag pulled down, and the consular archives searched and destroyed. The Argentine Ministers at Berlin, Antwerp, and The Hague have been instructed to investigate this matter, but up to the present they have been unable to ascertain the exact facts of the case. The point of view of the Argentine Government is that, while it is possible that the Vice Consul might have been guilty of the charge of which it appears he was accused, there can be no possible excuse for the indignity to which the symbols of Argentine representation were said to have been submitted. The irresponsible journals as well as the students are urging the Government to take active measures in regard to this matter, but I am assured by prominent foreign office officials that no action will be taken until the charges have been proven and the German Government given an opportunity to fully explain the matter.

The second incident results from the conduct of the survivors of the German auxiliary cruiser Cap Trafalgar which was destroyed by British steamers off the coast of Brazil. The vessel carrying the survivors to this port anchored in the roads last week and its officers refused to allow newspaper reporters and others to go on board, threatening them with boiling water. As a result of this action it appears that an excited newspaper man fired on the captain and a general disturbance then followed. The survivors of the Cap Trafalgar were finally taken in charge by the marines and conveyed to Martin Garcia Island where they will be interned until the end of the war.

Another neutrality case of minor importance occurred a few days ago when a British freight steamer conveying coal to a German electric company at Santa Fe was captured by a British war vessel in the estuary of the River Plate, but undoubtedly over three miles from either the Argentine or Uruguayan shore. It is alleged that the commander of the British Fleet in South American waters recently informed the President of Uruguay that his Government would not recognize Argentina’s claim that it controls the waters of the Plate excepting those within three miles of the Uruguayan shore, but this report has not been confirmed.

The Argentine Government is closely following the terms of the Hague convention of 1907 governing neutrality. It appears, however, that several of the belligerent powers are complaining of the manner in which neutrality provisions are observed here. The Argentine Embassy in Washington has cabled the substance of the instructions issued to Treasury officials and others by the United States Government. This Government wishes as far as possible to act in the same manner as ourselves respecting neutrality, although Argentina was not a party to the London Conference.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard

The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/534

[Document 1093]

The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Rio de Janeiro, October 7, 1914.
[Received October 27.]

No. 466]

Sir: Since the outbreak of the present European war, for several reasons, the Brazilian Government has found difficulty in maintaining its neutrality against the attempts of the belligerent powers, their nationals and their friends in Brazil, to frustrate the measures which it has taken to that end. Moreover, largely on account of the influence of French civilization here—manners, customs, art, and literature—the sentiment of all the States, except those in the south, is mainly with the Allies. It is reported that the German colonists in the States of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catharina are, in one way or another, rendering service to the German warships cruising off Brazil’s southern coast. This, however, is a matter of speculation rather than of proven fact.

The character of the popular sentiment has been shown not only in the press but also in the Chamber of Deputies where Dr. Irineu Machado, a member of the opposition, has delivered a stirring speech in favor of France and has also taken an active part in a charity fete for the benefit of the families of French reservists who have gone to the front from this country. More recently, an equally strong appeal for Germany was made in the Chamber by Dr. Dunshee de Abranches. Because of his position as chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, his oration gave greater offense than that of Dr. Irineu Machado, since he appeared to speak for the Government, which, of course, he was not justified in doing. So strong, indeed, was public feeling against his attitude that his resignation as chairman of the committee was accepted as soon as it was offered and his successor was appointed. Whether a speech in favor of the Allies would have produced the same popular protest is a matter of speculation.

The presence in the Brazilian ports of a number of refugee German merchant vessels has occasioned the Brazilian Government considerable embarrassment. Consul Griffith of Pernambuco has already reported to the Department (in his despatch No. 293 of September 14 1 ) the behavior of the German steamer Patagonia, which on September 13, in disobedience to the orders of the captain of the port, suddenly and surreptitiously put to sea and was unsuccessfully chased by the Brazilian destroyer Rio Grande do Sul. The Hamburg-American steamers, Santa Lucia and Preussen, have also given trouble. After the captain of the port of Rio de Janeiro had allowed them to clear for Santos on the understanding that they were only freighted with sufficient coal and stores to proceed there, they put to sea for an unknown destination and arrived at Santos some three weeks after they sailed from here, having meantime supplied the necessities of the two German converted passenger vessels, Kronprinz Wilhelm and Cap Trafalgar. In accordance with an executive decree which was framed to meet their case, the two vessels in question are detained at Santos until the close of the war.

The waters around several groups of islands off the Brazilian coast have offered convenient places of refuge for both British and German cruisers. The lofty island of Trinidad was for some three weeks the base of operation of a group of German vessels assembled from North America, South Africa, and the River Plate for the purpose of fitting out as an armed cruiser the Hamburg South American liner Cap Trafalgar. It was near this island that the Cap Trafalgar received the guns and gun crew of the gunboat Eber, and coal and stores from the Santa Lucia and Berwind. In consequence of the unneutral use to which they have been put, the Brazilian Government, by an executive decree of September 30, arranged that a mixed garrison of soldiers and sailors should be stationed on the islands of Trinidad and Fernando Noronha. The islands of the Abrolhos, between Victoria and Bahia, are the base where a British cruiser is guarding several captured German merchantmen. A member of the Embassy staff, who passed those islands on a Lloyd Brazileiro vessel last Saturday, reports that there were probably five or six of these German freighters, as well as two British colliers.

It is not unfair to assume that the wireless installation on board the German merchant vessels in Brazilian ports has transmitted much information to German warships. The Brazilian authorities have attempted to stop this practice but have only partially succeeded. Under the regulations in force, belligerent merchant vessels in harbor can only use their wireless apparatus during the first forty-eight hours of their sojourn. After this period the apparatus must be disconnected and the operating cabins sealed. The Government wireless stations on land during the last month have been forbidden to transmit code messages. The Western Telegraph Company will only accept cablegrams en clair in the English and French languages, code addresses not being allowed. In spite of these precautions, I have reason to believe that considerable information filters out to the warships of all the belligerents.

I have [etc.]

Edwin V. Morgan

1 Not printed.

The Colombian Legation to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/645

[Document 1094]

The Colombian Legation to the Secretary of State

memorandum

The annexed copies or abstracts of Executive decrees tell by themselves how the Colombian Government has acted and in fact succeeded to prevent the use of radio stations for unneutral purposes. The decrees are:1 A. August 22. Providing for dismantling of radio apparatuses onboard the ships during their stay in Colombian waters.

B. September 1. Subjecting stations to censorship.

C. September 11. Closing Cartagena station for alleged transgressions.

D. September 17. Contract with an expert for the operation of thestation, with stringent clauses.

It is possible, although not probable, that notwithstanding so careful endeavors to maintain due and equitable neutrality, the belligerents have been able to build concealed stations in unknown parts of inhabited coasts where no ships used to go. Such cases occur even in the United States where there are no large tracts of inhabited coasts covered with thick forests.

If the British or French Governments have clear facts to be put before the Colombian Government at Bogota, proving the violation of neutrality by persons resident in Colombia, they may be sure to obtain the most serious investigations to trace and punish the culprits.

Colombian Legation,

Washington, November 13, 1914.

1 Not printed. File No. 763.72111/615

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) File No. 763.722111/615

[Document 1095]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

British and French Governments complain that the neutrality proclamation made by the Colombian Government is not being enforced. Charge is made of the use of wireless stations by the Germans. Discreetly enquire as to the facts and let us know.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) [Document 1096]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Hartman)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

British and French Governments complain that the neutrality proclamation made by the Ecuadorian Government is not being enforced. Charge is made of the use of the Galápagos Islands as a naval base by the Germans. Discreetly inquire as to the facts.

W. J. Bryan

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/669

[Document 1097]

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

New York, November 15, 1914.

[Telegram—Translation]

I beg you to tell me whether it is true that Ambassadors Great Britain, France complained against Ecuador for supposed violation neutrality so as to repair to Washington.

Minister Ecuador

The Colombian Government to the Colombian Legation at Washington File No. 763.72111/680

[Document 1098]

The Colombian Government to the Colombian Legation at Washington

Bogotá, November 15, 1914.
[Left with the Secretary of State
November 16.]

[Telegram]

We have no wireless stations on the Pacific Coast. As for the Atlantic, Cartagena radio station that belongs to a private company, the Government has a contract giving it full rights of inspection and censorship in case of war.

The British Legation made reclamations on the ground that there was no characterized expert, and the Government to comply with the Legation’s wishes closed the station.

Afterwards, the Government entered into an agreement with a professional expert, paid by the Government and put him at the head of the station which was again opened.

The British Legation after some days asked the dismissal of the German employees in the station, and although the Government’s expert is the only one who receives or transmits radiograms, it decided to dismiss and did dismiss foreign employees, and since then operates the station, handing its net produces [proceeds] to the company.

No codes are admitted.

Now the British Legation considers that even plain words and phrases are suspect as they may be used with a conventional secret sense and on that new ground has asked the Government to close again the station.

But as the company has rights not to be overlooked, the Government cannot comply with the Legation’s wishes, still less when it has its own expert operating the station. This is the only pending question.

The British Legation informed that it feared Germans may be hidden in Urabá using occult stations. The Government made investigations at Cartagena, at Turbo and at Quibdó and found an abandoned ship, the Oscar, of the Compania Bananera, with wireless apparatus out of use. A special official was sent to bring back the apparatus. The British Legation tendered its thanks to the Government for its zeal.

Do inform me if it is true—as the British Legation tells here—that the United States has closed the radio stations on account of the possibility that plain common words or phrases may be used with an occult sense.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) File No. 763.72111/719a

[Document 1099]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison)1

Department of State, Washington, November 16, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

If newspaper misrepresentations made here have reached Bogotá, please say to the Government that this Department is not responsible for the false and misleading construction placed upon the telegram sent you about alleged unneutral acts. This Government has no thought of attempting to control action of other Governments and British and French Governments have made no such requests when they asked our influence. They had reference to a moral influence and our inquiries were of the most friendly character and merely for information.

W. J. Bryan

1 Same message to Minister in Ecuador, with appropriate change in first line.

The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) File No. 763.72111/713

[Document 1100]

The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova)

Department of State,
Washington, November 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your telegram of 15th. No necessity for you to come to Washington in relation to representations made by British and French Ambassadors. They simply filed copies of statements made by their Governments to Ecuador. Newspapers have misrepresented this Government’s action in this matter.

W. J. Bryan

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/721

[Document 1101]

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Quito, November 19, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received November 20, 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your November 14, 7 p.m. and November 16, 6 p.m.1 I presented subject to the Minister for Foreign Affairs yesterday. He informed me he did not know whether the Germans had made use of the Galápagos Islands but that, if true, it was not with the previous knowledge of Ecuador. He showed me copies of orders to naval officers which he said had been sent, instructing them to observe strictly the neutrality proclamation. He declares that the Government will investigate the charges and if found to be [?], will make a protest to the German Government. He said that owing to the weakness of Ecuador and the present revolution, Ecuador could not do more than protest. The British and French Ministers express the belief that the Ecuadorian Government has done and is doing all in its power to enforce its proclamation of neutrality. Considering the distance of the islands from the mainland and from each other, the absence of telegraphic communication, and the lack of vessels, it is impossible to keep informed about them.

Hartman

1 See footnote, ante,p. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099]

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.7211/713

[Document 1102]

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

Ecuadorian Legation,
Washington, November 19, 1914.
[Received November 20.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary: I have to thank your excellency for your kindness in answering my telegram of the 15th.

With the object of learning the exact terms of the complaint submitted to your excellency by the British and French Ambassadors, I earnestly request you to be so good as to furnish me with a copy of the said document, the contents of which have already been communicated to my Government by the American Minister in Ecuador.

I renew [etc.]

G. S. Córdova

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/720

[Document 1103]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bogotá, November 21, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received November 22, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

As local newspapers published misleading telegrams from Washington and expressed apprehension as to alleged American intervention and criticised action of British and French Governments, I communicated verbally message of your November 16, 6 p.m. which was well received. The Minister for Foreign Affairs desired to publish correspondence with British and French Legations and asked me to put message in writing which I did. My note and voluminous correspondence published yesterday with excellent effect. Minister very pleased. The incident may be considered closed.

Fact of complaint being made by Great Britain and France in Washington and not through their representatives here created unfavorable impression and has been deprecated by their friends.

Harrison

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/813

[Document 1104]

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Quito, November 25, 1914, 9 a.m.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The Minister for Foreign Affairs has proposed that the diplomatic representatives of all the American Republics promulgate as soon as possible at Washington the following statement: “We declare that in respect to the neutrality of each one of the American nations we are all interested.” While the phraseology can be improved, I think that such a declaration is desirable for two reasons: First, it justifies our attitude recently taken regarding the alleged violating of neutrality by Ecuador and Colombia and thereby stops the criticism which that action aroused in South America; and, second, it is in effect an approval of the Monroe Doctrine.

Hartman

The Secretary of the Colombian Legation (Ancízar) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/807

[Document 1105]

The Secretary of the Colombian Legation (Ancízar) to the Secretary of State

Colombian Legation,
Washington, November 25, 1914.
[Received November 27.]

My dear Mr. Secretary: In this quite informal manner I take the liberty to ask you to read enclosed translations of cables from Bogotá and, the Minister being absent, I beg to give me an appointment should you be disposed to comply with the wishes expressed in the second cable.

Accept [etc.]

R. Ancízar

[Enclosures—Telegrams]

The Colombian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Colombian Legation in Washington

[Received November 19, 1914.]

All statements against Colombia’s neutrality are inexact and have been found inaccurate. In wireless stations we follow the same practices as the United States. In regard to coal we allow steamers to take the necessary [amount] to enable them to call at the nearest foreign port, as Colombia is not bound by the Hague convention which permits larger quantities of coal. This is the reason why no belligerent ships have coaled in our ports. The British and the French Legations have recognized Colombia’s scrupulous proceedings in neutrality.

Received November 24, 1914.

Please inform me about the United States Government’s opinion in regard to the circular sent by the Chilean Government to all other governments relating to Chile’s measures about neutrality.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/830

[Document 1106]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, October 24, 1914.[Received November 27.]

No. 362]

Sir: In continuation of my No. 356, of September 30, 1914,1 with respect to Argentine neutrality in the actual European war, I have the honor to report that the representatives of the belligerent powers continue to complain of the manner in which the neutrality provisions are fulfilled by the Argentine authorities, especially with respect to navigation. Although the Argentine decree of neutrality, which was duly sent to the Department, ordered that the text of the Hague convention of 1907 should be strictly adhered to, the subordinate officials of the customhouse and captain of the port’s office have acted in very careless manner with the result that practically all merchant vessels have been permitted to depart with their bunkers full of coal and in some cases even with cargoes of coal, notwithstanding the orders of the Ministry of Marine that only enough coal should be carried to enable steamers to reach the first port of call. Furthermore, several merchant vessels, both British, German, and French, are alleged to have embarked arms, ammunition, and supplies, with the cognizance of the authorities, to be used by the war vessels of their respective countries, and in some cases it is known that they have converted themselves into auxiliary cruisers and commerce destroyers as soon as they reached the high seas. Merchant vessels of the belligerent nations have also been permitted to leave port on the same day and, on two or three occasions, at the same hour. The British Minister, who has only recently returned to his post, has been especially vigorous in his complaints to the Government against this state of affairs. All but three of the German merchant vessels which were laying in this port when the war began have left the Plate for unknown destinations and are known to have given supplies to German cruisers in spite of the close watch which British war vessels are supposed to be keeping in the South Atlantic.

Several wireless stations are known to be in operation by Germans in different points of the Argentine coast and, although they have been denounced by the British Legation, only one has so far been located and closed down by the Argentine authorities.

Owing to the difficulty which Austro-Hungarians and German subjects have experienced in returning to their respective countries, even on neutral vessels, many of them have attempted to procure foreign passports. Several have applied for passports from this Legation and a certain number secured Danish passports, which are alleged to be false. The largest number, however, have attempted to secure Argentine citizenship. The Constitution of Argentina declares that naturalization is obtained after a two years’ continuous residence in the country. The Federal court has, however, decided that the naturalization of subjects or citizens of the belligerent countries would be a violation of neutrality. The court held that the fact of conceding citizenship to such persons, thus recognizing and protecting them as Argentines, might signify in some cases the depriving of friendly nations of the men who ought to render military service to them, and in other cases it would perhaps make it difficult for them to recover contributions authorized by the state of war, apart from the abuses which might be committed by making use of the new citizenship as a safe-conduct, all of which might be interpreted as a violation of neutrality.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard

1  Ante, p. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092].

The Minister in Uruguay (Grevstad) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/854

[Document 1107]

The Minister in Uruguay (Grevstad) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Montevideo, October 26, 1914.
[Received November 28.]

No. 757]

Sir: I have the honor to report that a number of secret installations for wireless telegraphy have been discovered and dismantled in the River Plate during the last fortnight, most of them in Buenos Aires and other places in Argentina and some in Montevideo. It would seem that these installations or most of them were owned by or in charge of Germans.

It is asserted that a chain of secret German radiographic stations are established along the South Atlantic coast from the Guianas to the Straits of Magellan.

I have [etc.]

Nicolay A. Grevstad

The Minister in Uruguay (Grevstad) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/855

[Document 1108]

The Minister in Uruguay (Grevstad) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Montevideo, October 28, 1914.[Received November 28.]

No. 761]

Sir: Referring to despatch No. 757 of October 26, 1914, relating to secret installations for wireless telegraphy recently discovered in the River Plate, I have the honor to forward in duplicate copy, with translation, of an Executive decree of October 20 by which it is forbidden to establish without permission granted by the Executive private radiographic installations in Uruguay either on land or on Uruguayan vessels; which forbids vessels to use their apparatus for wireless telegraphy within the territorial or jurisdictional waters of Uruguay, except as provided in the dispositions adopted by the national authorities; and which contains rules and regulations to be observed by private corporations or persons who may desire to establish and operate stations for wireless telegraphy in this Republic.1

I have [etc.]

Nicolay A. Grevstad

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/939

[Document 1109]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bogotá, December 1, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received December 2, 3:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Relative to Colombian neutrality. Newspapers publish telegram from Washington reporting statement by officials of the Department to the effect that “The United States will go so far as to permit European nations to send expeditions to force compliance, if it is so deemed necessary.”

Minister for Foreign Affairs asks if this is correct. He fears that it may indicate intention to despatch such expeditions which would be entirely undeserved.

Harrison

The British Ambassador( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/953

[Document 1110]

The British Ambassador( Spring Rice ) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy, Washington, December 2, 1914. [Received December 3.]

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have the honour to transmit herewith for your information the substance of a memorandum addressed by the Foreign Office to the Chilean Minister in London on the subject of the three new neutrality rules which the Chilean Government propose should be adopted by all governments on the American Continent.

At the same time the Chilean Minister was informed that if his Government are not disposed to agree to the extension of rules suggested in the memorandum, His Majesty’s Government are prepared to accept them as originally put forward. It was, however, pointed out that if Rule 1 is to be interpreted as imposing new restrictions on merely taking of British coal from British Government colliers in neutral waters—an interpretation which His Majesty’s Government thinks it cannot bear—Sir E. Grey is of opinion that due warning should be given so that there should be no discrimination against His Majesty’s Government who have openly counted upon the privileges hitherto allowed in this respect, whereas German warships have been and are still making use without hindrance of secret supplies of coal or colliers from neutral ports in neutral waters.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

[Enclosure]

Substance of a memorandum communicated on November 29 to the Chilean Minister in London

His Majesty’s Government agree to the rules proposed subject to the following observations:

Rule 1 should be extended so as to read as follows:

To limit provision of coal to belligerent men-of-war and vessels, which under the neutrality rules in force in the neutral country concerned are subjected to the same rules as men-of-war, to the quantity necessary to carry them to the first coaling port of the nation geographically next to that in which coal is supplied.

His Majesty’s Government conclude that this rule is designed to prevent belligerent men-of-war from obtaining coal either directly or indirectly from American territory, and that the question of extent to which men-of-war may use shelter of territorial waters for the sole purpose of taking from their own colliers coal not emanating from neutral territory will continue to be governed by the principles adopted by each neutral country. His Majesty’s Government would accept more stringent ruling on this point also provided all neutral countries were prepared to enforce it adequately by the patrolling of their territorial waters. At present, all American countries do not appear capable of doing this and, in the absence of strict patrol by all countries, more stringent rules on this point would only discriminate against His Majesty’s Government who desire to act openly in all such matters with full knowledge of neutral governments.

Rule 2 should be extended to read as follows:

To establish as a penalty for Infractions committed by merchant ships, whether neutral or belligerent, of rules which each country promulgates as to neutrality, the prohibition of supplying fuel to all vessels of the company, or other owner, to which the ship infringing the said rules belongs. If such a ship is working under charter, the said prohibition shall apply also to all vessels chartered by, or belonging to, the same charterer.

His Majesty’s Government offer the opinion that the above rules will prove ineffectual unless supplemented by a fourth rule limiting the amount of coal to be taken by any merchant ship, belligerent or neutral, to bunker coal only. In the case of a coal-exporting country like the United States further provisions should be added covering ports from which coal is normally exported as follows:

Cargoes of coal should only be exported from a coal exporting port after that the government of the exporting nation has enquired of its consul at the port of ostensible destination whether the cargo was really for the nominal consignee.

If such a stringent rule cannot be enforced His Majesty’s Government propose that an enquiry should only be made in cases where it is asked for by the consular representative of the belligerent nation.

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1050

[Document 1111]

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

Ecuadorian Legation,
Washington, December 3, 1914.
[Received December 5.]

[Translation]

Honorable Mr. Secretary: In accordance with the agreement reached at our interviews of the 1st and 2d instant, I beg leave to state to your excellency that my Government’s views on neutrality, already well known, are embodied in the proposals forwarded to me by Senor Elizalde, Minister of Foreign Affairs, in cablegrams dated the 15th and 25th of October last.

The said propositions may be reduced in substance to the necessity of an agreement of the American diplomats tending to induce the belligerents to declare the seas that wash the coasts of America a neutral zone, so as to exclude from them entirely the warlike operations that are inflicting so much harm on neutral commerce; and that the danger of the neutrality of some of the American countries being violated by the belligerents be met by a declaration that the respect due to the neutrality of any one of them is a matter of concern to all the nations of the American Continent.

I further desire to put on record the explanation I offered to your excellency of the manner in which the words of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ecuador spoken at an interview with the Chargé d’Affaires of Great Britain at Quito had been distorted in London. And as the said explanation was founded on a cablegram I received on the 30th of November last from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of my Government, I deem it proper to state its substance herein below:

Upon a statement of the American Minister that the Ambassadors of France and Great Britain complained of Germany’s using some of the Galápagos Islands for a naval base, I declared to the British Chargé d’Affaires that our Government had no knowledge of what was supposed to have occurred in the Galápagos, for want of communications. I may perhaps have given him some Indication that I feared some infringement of our neutrality might have been consummated by one of the nations at war, on account of the lack of Ecuadorian forces in the archipelago; but I never asserted that Germany had made actual use of the Galápagos as a naval base. This the British Chargé d’Affaires admits and he so declared to me to-day. On the other hand, I persist in asserting that no wireless communication of any kind has been carried on in our country in the service of any of the belligerents. Deny through the press any false report that may in any way impugn the good name of Ecuador and the propriety of her proceedings in the present European war.

With the most [etc.]

G. S. Córdova

The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) File No. 763.72111/713

[Document 1112]

The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova)

Department of State,
Washington, December 8, 1914.

My dear Mr. Minister: Answering your inquiry I beg to say that it is not customary to give copies of communications. I simply state the representations that have been made by France and Great Britain to Colombia and Ecuador in regard to the alleged violations of neutrality.

They allege that the wireless system of telegraphy has been used in both countries for giving information to German ships and that the Galápagos Islands have been used by the German cruisers as a base for supplies and observation.

The communications then recite the importance of the subject and the serious character of the alleged infraction of the rules of neutrality, and conclude by asking this Government to exercise its influence with the two countries to the end that they may observe the rules of neutrality.

Both communications refer, of course, to the exercise of a moral influence such as any nation may exercise in its dealings with other friendly nations.

The communications were entirely friendly in character and indicated a friendly interest which these Governments felt in Colombia and Ecuador and their earnest desire that nothing might arise that could cause friction between them and the European nations.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1098

[Document 1113]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

British Embassy,
Washington, December 9, 1914.
[Received December 11.]

Dear Mr. Secretary: In my letter of the 2d instant I had the honour to forward to you the substance of a memorandum addressed to the Chilean Minister in London by His Majesty’s Government on the subject of the three new neutrality rules proposed by the Chilean Government for general adoption on the American continent.

I have now received a further telegram from Sir Edward Grey in which, referring to these proposals, he points out that it would be desirable to limit the amount of coal which merchant vessels are allowed to take to the capacity of their fixed bunker, exclusive of their reserve bunkers.

It is understood that the Argentine Government have already brought such a rule into effect by a decree published on the 14th October last.

I am [etc.]

Cecil Spring Rice

The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1132

[Document 1114]

The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Santiago, November 7, 1914.
[Received December 12.]

No. 550]

Sir: I have the honor to report, as I have already done briefly by telegraph, that the German squadron under the command of Graf von Spee arrived in Valparaiso on Tuesday morning last. This squadron was composed of— (1) Scharnhorst: Armored cruiser; 11,420 tons displacement; length, 449½ feet; beam, 70¾ feet; depth, 24½ feet; 27,750 h. p.; constructed in Hamburg; launched in 1906 and completed in 1911; armament, 8 guns 8.2", 6 guns 5.9", 4 torpedo tubes; speed, 22.5 knots.

(2) Gneisenau: Armored cruiser; sister-ship of the Scharnhorst.

(3) Nürnberg: Cruiser; 3,396 tons displacement; length, 354¼feet; beam, 43½ feet; depth, 15¾ feet; 13,200 h. p.; constructed in Kiel; launched in 1906 and completed in 1908; armament, 10 guns of 4.1", 8 guns 2.1", 2 torpedo tubes; speed, 23.5 knots.

They reported that they met on the previous Sunday the British squadron under Admiral Craddock near the island of Santa Maria, off Coronel. The British squadron was composed of— (1) Good Hope: Armored cruiser; 14,100 tons displacement; length, 500 feet; beam, 71 feet; depth, 26 feet; 31,071 h. p.; constructed in Govan; launched in 1901 and completed in 1902; armament, 2 guns 9.2", 16 guns 6", and 15 smaller guns, 2 torpedo tubes; speed, 23.5 knots.

(2) Monmouth: Armored cruiser; 9,800 tons displacement; length,440 feet; beam, 66 feet; depth, 24½ feet; 22,000 h. p.; constructed in Glasgow; launched in 1901 and completed in 1903; armament, 14 guns 6", 19 smaller guns and 2 torpedo tubes; speed, 22.58 knots.

(3) Glasgow: light cruiser; 4,800 tons displacement; length, 430feet; beam, 47 feet; depth, 15¼ feet; 22,472 h. p.; constructed in Govan; launched in 1909 and completed in 1910; armament, 2 guns 6", 10 guns 4", 5 smaller guns and 2 torpedo tubes; speed, 25.8 knots.

(4) Otranto: Auxiliary cruiser of about 12,000 tons; armament unknown.

The British ships were sighted at about 6:30 p.m. and immediately engaged. The action was fought in a storm and lasted about one hour. The Germans, with guns of longer range, concentrated their fire on the British flagship Good Hope and the Monmouth. The latter was sunk and all on board perished. The Good Hope, badly damaged, made off in the darkness, but suffered a serious explosion, and newspaper reports state that the British Admiralty have admitted that the Good Hope also was lost. The Glasgow and Otranto seemed to have made good their escape.

In connection with this naval action, charges have been made in the London press and reechoed in the newspapers of the Argentine to the effect that the Chilean Government had failed to preserve a strict neutrality. These charges have been vehemently refuted and resented by the newspapers of Chile. To give the Government an opportunity to clear itself of these imputations, questions were asked in the Senate, and I have the honor to enclose a translation of the reply of the Minister for Foreign Affairs thereto.1 This official statement has been communicated to the British Government and published in the London papers, and I am informed that the British Government has expressed itself as entirely satisfied with the conduct and attitude of this Government in the matter. Many Englishmen believe, however, that information and supplies have been furnished the Germans in violation of Chilean regulations, but this they admit has been done in spite of the honest efforts of the Chilean officials to enforce a strict observance of neutrality.

I may mention also the case of the auxiliary Prince Eitel. This German transport anchored in the harbor of Valparaiso on the afternoon of November 5. Not having departed within the twenty-four-hour limit on the following day, the port authorities sent an officer on board to notify the captain that the ship must depart at once. This order was at once complied with. A local paper stated that the ship had remained in the port about one hour more than the time limit.

I have [etc.]

Henry P. Fletcher

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1133

[Document 1115]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bogotá, November 18, 1914.
[Received December 12.]

No. 116]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt on the 16th instant of your telegraphic instruction of November 14, 7 p.m.,2 regarding the complaint made by the British and French Governments that the Colombian Government was not enforcing its neutrality proclamation. In accordance with your directions discreetly to inquire as to the facts and let you know, I lost no time in obtaining the opinion of my French and British colleagues, both of whom, as I have had the honor to report to-day in my telegram dated November 18, noon,1 were perfectly satisfied with the measures taken by this Government to insure strict neutrality.

The complaint was as much of a surprise to them as to me, owing to the fact that this Legation had been kept informed of the protests made by the British and French Legations early in September regarding the German station at Cartagena and interned German merchantmen, especially by the British Chargé d’Affaires, who had but lately expressed his satisfaction at the measures taken by the Colombian Government. Moreover, Captain Gaunt, British naval attaché at Washington, who is here for a week on a tour of inspection, assured me that he felt convinced of the perfect neutrality of the United Fruit Company’s wireless station at Santa Marta and that he was satisfied with Dr. Jorge Caicedo Abadia, the Colombian censor at Cartagena, who although in the midst of German and pro-German influences, would, he believed, maintain neutrality to the best of his ability. This was, however, the only “unknown factor” in his estimate. The Captain also felt that the Colombian Government had done its utmost. Mr. Bowie, the British Chargé, said that the Colombian Government was even substituting Colombians for the German employees of the wireless station at Cartagena.

The small German wireless station at San Andres is not yet working.

There are no wireless stations on the Pacific coast of Colombia and the small experimental installation in this city is only capable of receiving messages, which is about the status of another small outfit which Captain Gaunt tells me exists at Calamar on the Magdalena River.

In view of the above I felt warranted in stating that as far as I could ascertain, the Colombian Government was enforcing its neutrality proclamation.

Of course my report cannot be considered complete as I have no means of knowing if unneutral acts have been permitted on the long Colombian coast line from Panama to Ecuador. We have no consular officers in Buenaventura and Tumaco, but my British and French colleagues, who have representatives in those ports, have no news of any such acts.

As I had the honor to state in my telegram, neither of my colleagues had received advices from their respective Governments and both were at a loss to account for the complaint.

I have [etc.]

Leland Harrison

2  Ante, p. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098].

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1181

[Document 1116]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bogotá, November 27, 1914.
[Received December 17.]

No. 117]

Sir: In confirmation of my telegram of November 21, 7 p.m.,1 relative to the explanation for delivery to the Colombian Government contained in your telegraphic instruction dated November 16, 6 p.m.,2 and in further reference to my despatch No. 116 of November 18, 1914,3 regarding the complaint made by the British and French Governments against the Government of Colombia for failure properly to maintain strict neutrality, I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information several clippings from local newspapers which contain various telegrams from Panama, London, Washington, and Buenos Aires, also editorial comments and the correspondence between the Foreign Office and the British and French Legations on this subject as well as my note communicating the message of your telegram of the 16th instant referred to above4

The first news of the complaint was received by the Gaceta Republicana from Panama and published on the evening of Friday the 13th. It was confirmed by telegrams from Buenos Aires and Washington published in El Liberal of the morning of the 17th. The evening papers of that day and of the morning of the 18th published editorials criticizing the step taken by France and Great Britain and expressing apprehension regarding the possible attitude of the United States in the matter.

The morning papers of the 19th published further telegrams from Washington even more misleading. That same morning, as I was unable to see the Minister on the 18th, I communicated verbally your message and since I had not had recourse to the Colombian Government for information as to whether it was maintaining strict neutrality, I had no difficulty in convincing Dr. Suárez that the purpose of your inquiry had been misconstrued and that the United States had no thought of attempting to control the action of other governments.

The Minister highly appreciated the spirit and friendliness of your message and asked me if I had no objection to put it in writing, as he desired to publish the correspondence which had passed between the Ministry and the British and French Legations on the subject. This I did that afternoon and a Spanish translation of my note was published in El Liberal of the 20th.

I have the honor to enclose copies of my note of the 19th to Dr. Suárez and of his reply dated the 23d with English translation.5

As reported in my telegram of November 21, 7 p.m., the publication of my note and the correspondence had an excellent effect and the incident was closed.

Among the correspondence published by Dr. Suárez, which is by no means all the dossier, I would respectfully invite the Department’s attention to the Minister’s note of November 14, informing the British Chargé that instructions had been issued to exclude the German employees from the wireless station at Cartagena and to Mr. Bowie’s private note of the same date expressing his appreciation of the attention given by Dr. Suárez to his numerous requests; also to tie French Charge’s note of the 17th to the effect that in the absence of instructions from his Government, he denied the truth of the newspaper report that he had been ordered to make a protest to the Colombian Government for failure to enforce neutrality.

The Department will note that by virtue of the contract between the Colombian Government and the German wireless company of May 23, 1912, the company has a right to continue working in time of war, on the condition that it submit to official censorship.

My French colleague tells me that he has now received telegraphic advices from his Government that the protest was made at the suggestion of the British Government, who complained that the Colombian Government had not paid sufficient attention to the protests made by the Legations here.

It would seem, however, as if the report made by Captain Gaunt to his Government from Cartagena at the end of October, in which he stated that the station was completely under German influence, although nominal censorship had been established, was the real cause of the complaint. But Gaunt at that time was under the impression that German wireless stations in the United States had been closed and did not know that the company had a contract right to remain open during war time. After his arrival here and especially after the German employees had been excluded from the station, he had no complaint to make.

As I had the honor to report in my telegram of the 21st, the manner of making the protest has caused unfavorable comment even amongst the friends of France and Great Britain.

In my conversation with the Minister when I conveyed your message and gave the explanation of the purport of the inquiry, especially as regards the request that the United States Government use its influence with Colombia, Dr. Suárez expressed his own and his Government’s endorsement of the principle that the United States, as the leader among the Republics of America, was called upon to use her moral influence with her sister Republics in just such cases as this, an attitude which I regret to say is not often reflected in the expressions of public men or encountered in the press of Colombia.

I have [etc.]

Leland Harrison

[Enclosure]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Colombian Minister (Suárez)

F. O. No. 50]
American Legation, Bogotá , November 19, 1914.

Mr. Minister: In reference to the conversation which it was my privilege to hold with your excellency this morning relative to the publication in the local press of certain telegrams from Washington reporting that the representatives of the Governments of Great Britain and France had formulated a complaint against the Government of Colombia for alleged failure to maintain strict neutrality, I have the honor to repeat what I then said to your excellency, under instructions from the Secretary of State, to the effect that the Department of State is not responsible for the false and misleading construction placed upon the telegraphic inquiry sent this Legation.

The Government of the United States has no thought of attempting to control the action of other governments and the British and French Governments made no such requests.

In asking the influence of the United States, the Governments of Prance and Great Britain had reference to a moral influence alone and the inquiry made by the Department of State was merely for information.

I improve the opportunity this note affords to renew [etc.]

Leland Harrison

1  Ante, p. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104].

2  Ante, p. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099].

3  Ante, p. 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1114 and Doc. 1115]

4 Only the last-named enclosure printed.

5 Reply not printed.

The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1213

[Document 1117]

The Ambassador in Chile (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Valparaiso, December 19, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

New neutrality regulations mentioned in my telegrams of November 18, 12 noon, and November 15, 6 p.m.,1 issued and will go into effect January 1.

Minister for Foreign Affairs has instructed Chilean Minister at Berlin to protest against the violation of Chilean neutrality by German naval division in having remained during five days at the port of Angarroa, Easter Island, and having there taken aboard undue amount stores; and also in having remained in the northeast bay of the island of Mas a Fuera more than seven days transferring in territorial waters coal and stores from the ships Valentine, French, Helicon, Norwegian, and Sacramento, American, and using same as naval base. He has also instructed Chilean Minister at London to protest against the capture by the Glasgow of 113 sacks of mail aboard British steamer Omegata destined to Chile.

Fletcher

1 Neither printed.

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State File. No. 763.72111/1251

[Document 1118]

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Quito, December 22, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received December 23, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

The Minister of Foreign Affairs has given me a copy of a telegram from Commander Chambers who was commissioned to investigate charges of use of Galápagos Islands by Germans as a naval base. He says that during the time from the middle of September to December 2 German, English and Japanese ships were at the islands; that they bought cotton and provisions but did not take coal. Full information by mail.

Hartman

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State File No. 768.72111/1267

[Document 1119]

The Minister in Ecuador (Hartman) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Quito, November 26, 1914.
[Received December 26.]

No. 84]

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegrams dated November 14, 1914, 7 p.m.,1 and November 16, 1914, 6 p.m.,2 relating to complaints of British and French Governments as to violation of neutrality by Ecuador, and to my telegram of November 19, 1914, 10 a.m.,3 in answer thereto, I have the honor to make the following report:

Immediately upon receipt of the Department’s November 14, 7 p.m., I sent a confidential telegram to our Vice Consul General at Guayaquil informing him of the substance of the Department’s telegram, and requesting him to investigate in Guayaquil, Bahia, and Esmeraldas, to use the code and observe the utmost caution, and to report by telegraph.

I considered it prudent to await an answer from the Consul General, and to have an interview with Mr. Jerome, the British Chargé d’Affaires, before calling on the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I had an interview with Mr. Jerome on November 17, and at that time he expressed it as the opinion of himself and the French Minister that the Ecuadorian Government had done and is doing all in its power to enforce the proclamation of neutrality. Since that interview I have learned from Mr. Jerome that information has been received by him tending to change that opinion somewhat. It appears that the wireless station at Guayaquil had been used by the German Consul in person, and Mr. Jerome says that very conflicting statements have been made to him and the French Minister in relation thereto, which make him very suspicious that it was done with the knowledge of the Government.

On November 18, I brought the matter informally to the attention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, but in the meantime I had received the Department’s telegram of November 16, 6 p.m., and an answer from the Vice Consul General to the telegram sent to him as above stated. In view of the fact that the morning newspaper El Comercio of November 18 contained a lurid and delirious article on the subject, doubtless based upon the newspaper misrepresentations originating in the United States, I regard it as extremely fortunate that I had not presented the subject to the Foreign Office until the Department’s second telegram on the subject was received. The gist of what was said between the Minister and myself at that interview appears in a statement (duplicate copies enclosed) which I prepared immediately afterward, and which was published in Spanish in El Día on the morning of the 19th in connection with a similar statement by the Minister, which was a substantial corroboration of mine.

The publication of these two statements resulted in a very decided modification in the tone of the comments of the various newspapers, and elicited two articles in El Día which were almost commendatory.

I am ordinarily opposed to rushing into print with these official questions, but I felt, and still feel that, in this case, it was the proper and expedient thing to do.

I have [etc.]

Charles Hartman

[Enclosure]

Statement of the American Minister published in “El Día” November 19, 1914

I have received information by cable from my Government to the effect that the British and French Governments had complained that the Galápagos Islands had been used by the Germans during the present war as a naval base, and that the United States Government had been requested to use its moral influence to prevent the violation of neutrality by her sister Republic of Ecuador. I was instructed to inquire as to the facts, and report to Washington, and to assure the Government that my Government has no thought of attempting to control the action of other governments and that the British and French Governments have made no such requests. On the contrary they only asked our moral influence; and that our inquiries and attitude in the matter were of the most friendly character. In full compliance with those instructions, I presented the matter this afternoon to his excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who received my inquiry and message in the same friendly spirit in which it was tendered. The answer of his excellency to my inquiry was open and frank and indicated the purpose of the Ecuadorian Government to do all in its power to maintain perfect neutrality in the existing European war.

1  Ante,. p. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092]

2 See footnote, ante, p. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099]

3  Ante, p. 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of state File No. 763.72111/1271

[Document 1120]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of state

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, November 24, 1914.
[Received December 28.]

No. 377]

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence respecting Argentine neutrality in the European war, I hazve the honor to inform the Department that a report has been received by the Foreign Office from the Argentine Minister to Belgium concerning the execution of the honorary Vice Consul of the Argentine Republic at Dinant, which fact was mentioned in my No. 356 of September 30.1 According to this report the testimony of the Belgian witnesses and the relatives of the deceased is highly conflicting and it is impossible to present a diplomatic claim to the German Government until its testimony is furnished to the Minister at Berlin. The latter has been instructed to hasten his report. From the Belgian testimony it appears that, although the consular shield was untouched, the Argentine flag was torn down by the German troops. La Nación, the Government organ, has published a long letter on this subject from its correspondent in Belgium, according to which the execution was entirely unwarranted and that no consideration whatever was extended to the consular capacity of the man. This subject continues to be used in the press to increase the anti-German feeling existing in Argentina, but no official action will be taken by the Government until the promised report from Berlin is received.

In the last paragraph of my No. 362 of October 24,2 I stated that the Federal Court of Buenos Aires had declined to grant naturalization to former subjects or citizens of the belligerent nations during the war. This decision has now been reversed by the Supreme Court which holds that such refusal would be contrary to the Constitution which grants naturalization after two years continued residence in the country irrespective of whether the person applying for naturalization is a native of a belligerent country.

With respect to neutrality provisions governing navigation, there is no change in the situation. Recently steamers in the coastwise trade, owned by a German company but flying the Argentine flag, have disappeared and they are believed to be conveying coal and provisions to the German warships and commerce destroyers now cruising in the South Atlantic. Ten private wireless telegraph plants have been located in different parts of the coast and shut down.

Sir Reginald Tower, the British Minister, has, so I am informed, been rather insistent in his representations to the Foreign Office respecting Argentine neutrality with the result that the relations between him and Dr. Murature are somewhat strained. It is clear that the Argentine Government is desirous of maintaining strict neutrality, but the control over minor and distantly located officials is so lax and corruption has been so cleverly employed by German agents, as well as by the members of the powerful German colony, that the instructions of the different ministries have not always been obeyed. The German naval attaché, who is of semi-Argentine descent and is thoroughly conversant with customs and methods here, has undoubtedly given great assistance, both officially and privately, toward supplying the German war vessels on the high seas and keeping them informed of the movements of the enemies’ war and merchant vessels.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard

1  Ante p. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092].

2  Ante, p. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106].

The Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Embassy at Washington File No. 763.72111/1304

[Document 1121]

The Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the Chilean Embassy at Washington 1

Washington, December 21, 1914.
[Received in the Department of StateDecember 22, 1914.]

[Telegram]

The following supreme decree has been issued and is to be communicated to the American Government:

Whereas the Convention XIII of The Hague, relating to the rights and duties of neutral powers in the event of war, establishes in Article 19 that belligerent warships may supply themselves with fuel in neutral ports to an extent sufficient to enable them to reach the nearest port of their country, and adds in Article 20 that the said warships may not renew their supply of fuel in a port of the same power before the lapse of three months; and

Whereas this and other dispositions of the convention cited manifest the primary purpose of preventing neutral powers from cooperating directly or indirectly in the action of belligerents and of removing warships from neutral ports by allowing them only such elements as are necessary to enable them to reach the coast of the country to which they belong; and

Whereas the application of these rules in the ports of the Republic is producing results clearly contrary to the spirit of all the dispositions of the said convention, because owing to the great distance between our coasts and the belligerent countries the supply of coal furnishable to their warships is very considerable, and because the said warships have profited by this facility to continue their warlike operations in American waters instead of proceeding to the coast of their own country; and

Whereas the dispositions cited thus tend in practice to encourage naval warfare in the Pacific, contrary to the desire and interests of Chile; and

Whereas for the same reason the consequences of the European conflict are becoming more serious in our country, since in addition to the disturbance of her international commerce and her economic and industrial life she must endure the anxieties consequent upon the fulfilment of her duties as a neutral and upon the watching of our coast line, which absorb the energy of our maritime authority and entail upon the treasury expenditure of no inconsiderable magnitude; and

Whereas the said Convention XIII, in the fifth of the consideranda which precede its dispositions, reserves to the signatory countries the faculty of modifying their rules in the course of a war when experience acquired demonstrates the necessity of so doing in order to safeguard their rights; and WHEREAS the difficulties occasioned by the application of Article 19 would be greatly diminished if the rule regarding the delivery to warships of the coal necessary to enable them to reach a port of their nation were substituted by a rule to supply in every case no more fuel than may be sufficient to allow them to reach the nearest port of the nearest neutral country; and

Whereas the warships supplied to such limited extent could not venture upon warlike operations, save by running the risk of becoming motionless upon the high seas; and

Whereas the circumstance that our country is a producer of coal induces belligerent vessels to supply themselves with that fuel at our ports in preference to ports of countries which are not in the same position (a consideration which entails upon the Government of Chile more particularly the moral obligation to prevent the improper use in future of supplies of coal in her ports); and

Whereas it is necessary to adopt for cases of breach of neutrality by merchant vessels a penalty which by its severity shall oblige the shipping companies to take a direct interest in the strict fulfilment of the rules prescribed by the Government and also necessary to decide upon some measure for the diminution as far as possible of the burden imposed upon the state by the necessity of watching the vessels interned at ports of the Republic for violations of neutrality or voluntarily detained by their owners.

I DECREE:

Firstly, that hereafter the supplies of coal which may be furnished to warships of the belligerent nations at Chilean ports shall be reduced to the quantity necessary to enable them to reach the nearest coaling-port of the neighboring nation;

Secondly, that in the event of the violation by a merchant ship of any of the rules bearing upon the observance of neutrality, adopted by the Government of the Republic, no fuel shall be supplied in Chilean ports to any vessel of the company to which the ship so offending may belong;

Thirdly, that the vessels interned by order of the Government by reason of violation of neutrality and also those whose owners state their intention to maintain them in Chilean ports until the end of the war, shall be concentrated in such Chilean ports as in each case the administrative authorities may determine;

Fourthly, that the quantity of coal that may be supplied in ports of the Republic to merchant vessels be limited to the capacity of their ordinary hunkers, unless they desire to sail direct to European ports, in which case they may be supplied with the quantity of coal necessary for the voyage, provided always that the company to which they may belong furnish a sufficient guarantee in the opinion of the Government that the fuel shall be used exclusively in effecting such voyage.

The foregoing dispositions shall apply throughout the territory of the Republic reckoning from the first day of January next.

Let it be noted, communicated, published and inserted in the Boletín de las Leyes y Decretos del Gobierno.

Barros Luco

1 Communicated to the Department of State by Manuel Salinas, Secretary of Embassy.

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1336

[Document 1122]

The Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) to the Secretary of State

Ecuadorian Legation,
Washington, December 25, 1914.
[Received January 2, 1915.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary: Referring again, and perhaps for the last time, to the papers which the Ambassadors of Great Britain and France saw fit to file in the Department of State of the United States, and of which your excellency deigned to give me an account in your favor of the 8th instant,1 it becomes my duty to inform your excellency:

That the Minister of Foreign Relations of Ecuador has cabled me that the commission which was sent to the Colon Archipelago (Galápagos) has returned and reported that no violation or neutrality was committed on the said Ecuadorian islands.

So we have reached the following final conclusions: (a) Ecuador has neither permitted nor witnessed any violation of neutrality within its territory.

(b) Therefore the charges directly or indirectly brought against Ecuador on that score have been found to be groundless, as my Government through its chancelleries averred from the moment the thing was made public.

I renew [etc.]

G. L. Córdova

1  Ante, p. 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111/1332

[Document 1123]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Bogotá, December 11, 1914.
[Received January 4, 1915.]

No. 120]

Sir: In reference to previous correspondence and in continuation of my despatch No. 117 of the 27th ultimo,2 regarding the complaint made by the British and French Governments against the Colombian Government for failure to maintain strict neutrality, I have the honor to report that the answer given by the British Foreign Office to questions in the House of Commons on or about November 27 reopened a discussion of the whole matter, after the charges against Colombia had seemed to be successfully refuted by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Under date of November 28, Dr. Suárez addressed a note to the British Chargé, quoting a telegram received that day from the Colombian Legation at London. According to this report the statement made in the House of Commons was based upon information from the British Legation in Bogotá and from Captain Gaunt, to the effect that the wireless station at Cartagena was in operation under German influence and that wireless outfits on interned German merchantmen though apparently dismantled were being operated with “mufflers.”

After expressing his surprise at this new complaint, the Minister asked for an explanation. He also requested information regarding the use of mufflers and an assurance that in future the charges made by Captain Gaunt be presented directly to the Colombian Government for such defense or explanation as it might be prepared to make.

It was by no means easy for my British colleague to give a satisfactory reply and instructions are still awaited from Downing Street.

The newspapers of December 1 published telegrams from London to the same effect. This caused considerable ill feeling against the British Legation, which was then open to a charge of duplicity after having expressed its appreciation of the prompt attention given to its requests, as reported in my despatch No. 117.

Further documents regarding Colombian neutrality were published on December 3 and amongst them it was curious to see a reply made by Dr. Suárez to a formal complaint presented by the German Minister against an alleged anti-German attitude on the part of the local press.

Mr. Percy C. Wyndham, the British Minister, arrived on the 4th instant after several months leave of absence. A polite request on the part of several newspapers that he would lose no time in explaining the protest of his Government, did not make things easier for the British Legation.

The matter was in this unfinished and rather unsatisfactory status both for the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the British Minister, when apparently of his own volition and simply as an act of disinterested friendship, so as to free the Colombian Government from all further embarrassment, Dr. Kracker von Schwartzenfeldt, the Imperial German Minister, in a formal note dated December 5 asked that the German wireless station at Cartagena be closed until the end of the war and gave an assurance that no claim for pecuniary losses would be presented by the Telefunken Company.

This astute and well-timed act of the German Minister has entirely wiped out any ill feeling engendered by his former protest and has turned to his own account the difficult impasse with which his British colleague was faced, besides placing the Colombian Government very much in his debt.

As the German employees had been excluded from the station, it would seem as if the German intelligence department was not depriving itself of much assistance and as regards the Telefunken Company, their receipts from private and commercial messages can not amount to any large sum.

It may be that the Germans have the use of another station, perhaps at San Andres, which from the latest information obtainable may now be in operation. I understand that Dr. Suárez is sending a gunboat to make sure.

In this connection and in confirmation of my telegram of December 1, 5 p.m.,1 I have the honor to enclose a copy with English translation of Dr. Suárez’ note of the 1st instant, and also of my note in answer dated the 5th idem, conveying the reply as instructed in your telegram of December 3, 6 p.m.1

There are also enclosed clippings1 from El Nuevo Tiempo containing the telegraphic report from Washington on which the Minister’s inquiry was based, with English translation; the telegram from London regarding the statement in the House of Commons; from El Liberal further documents relative to wireless telegraph, the circular to the newspapers regarding the German Minister’s protest against the press, and also the exchange of notes1 regarding the closure of the German wireless station at Cartagena.

I have [etc.]

Leland Harrison

[Enclosure 1—Translation]

The Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs (Suárez) to the American Chargé d’Affaires (Harrison)

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Bogotá , December 1, 1914.

Mr. Chargé d’Affaires: To-day’s papers publish a telegram in which it is stated, with reference to officials of the Department of State at Washington, that in the event of European nations sending expeditions to South America to enforce strict neutrality on the part of those countries, the Government of the United States would thereupon adopt a certain line of conduct.

In view of the source attributed to this news, I beg you kindly to inform me if in your opinion it is worthy of credence.

I renew [etc.]

Marco Fidel Suárez

[Enclosure 2]

The American Chargé d’Affaires in Colombia (Harrison) to the Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs

F. O. NO. 53]
American Legation,
Bogotá , December 5, 1914.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the courteous note dated the first instant, in which your excellency, referring to a telegram from Washington published in the newspapers of that day, inquired as to the authenticity of a statement attributed therein to officials of the Department of State, who are reported as saying that the United States would go so far as to allow European nations to send expeditions to force strict neutrality on the part of South American countries, if this should be necessary.

In reply I beg to inform your excellency, in compliance with instructions from the Secretary of State, that neither the Department nor its officers have given any ground for the reported statements in the press.

Please accept [etc.]

Leland Harrison

2  Ante, p. 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 1116]

1  Ante, p. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

1  Ante, p. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109].

1  Ante, p. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

1  Ante, p. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) File No. 763.72111/1336

[Document 1124]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)2

Department of State,
Washington, January 13, 1915.

No. 610]

Excellency: In your note No. 380 of November 7 last,2 you bring to the Department’s attention the complaint of your Government, made to the Government of Ecuador, that the Galápagos Islands were being used as a base of operations by German men-of-war; and you state that the Ecuadorian Government had, itself, informed His Britannic Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires at Quito that German men-of-war in the Pacific Ocean were converting the Galápagos Islands into a naval base and had landed there the crews of the British ships which they had sunk.

In a note dated the 3d ultimo, the Minister of Ecuador, after referring to interviews which he had with me on December 1st and 2d, on the general subject of the neutrality of the American countries during the present European war, said:

I likewise desire to put on record the explanation I offered to your excellency of the manner in which the words of the Minister for Foreign Relations of Ecuador spoken at an interview with the Chargé d’Affaires of Great Britain at Quito had been distorted in London. And as the explanation was founded on a cablegram I received on the 30th of November last from the Minister for Foreign Relations of my Government, I deem it proper to state its substance hereinbelow:

Upon a statement of the American Minister that the Ambassadors of France and Great Britain complained of Germany’s using some of the Galápagos Islands for a naval base, I declared to the British Chargé d’Affaires that our Government had no knowledge of what was supposed to have occurred in the Galápagos, for want of communications; I may perhaps have given him some indication that I feared some infringement of our neutrality might have been consummated by any one of the nations at war on account of the lack of Ecuadorian forces in the archipelago; but I never asserted that Germany had made actual use of the Galápagos as a naval base. This the British Chargé d’Affaires admits and he so declared to me to-day. On the other hand I persist in asserting that there has been no wireless communication of any kind in our country in the cause of any one of the belligerents. Deny through the press any false report that may in any way hurt the good name of Ecuador and the propriety of its proceedings in the present European war.

In his second note, dated December 25, 1914, the Ecuadorian Minister says:

The Minister for Foreign Relations of Ecuador has cabled me that the commission which was sent to the Colon Archipelago (Galápagos) has returned and reported that no violation of neutrality was committed on the said Ecuadorian Islands.

So we have reached the following final conclusions: (a) Ecuador has neither permitted nor witnessed any violation of neutrality within its territory.

(b) Therefore the charges directly or indirectly brought against Ecuador on that score have been found to be groundless, as my Government through its chancelleries averred from the moment the thing was made public.

I have [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

2 The same, except the first paragraph, to the French Ambasador (No. 1423)

2 The same, except the first paragraph, to the French Ambasador (No. 1423).

The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova) [Document 1125]

The Secretary of State to the Ecuadorian Minister (Córdova)

Department of State,
Washington, January 13, 1915.

No. 16]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 25th ultimo, in further relation to the representations that have been made by France and Great Britain to Ecuador in regard to the alleged violation of neutrality by Ecuador in permitting German men-of-war to use the Galápagos Islands as a base of supplies and observation.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that the Department has communicated to the French and British Embassies the substance of your note, and the substance of that part of your note of December 3, 1914,1 which treats of the violation of Ecuadorian neutrality in the Galápagos Islands.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1  Ante, p. 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State [Document 1126]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Argentina (Lorillard) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Buenos Aires, December 22, 1914.
[Received January 18, 1915.]

No. 383]

Sir: In continuation of my No. 377 of November 24, 1914,2 respecting Argentine neutrality, I have the honor to report that the Foreign Office has issued a statement to the effect that it has received the German version regarding the execution of the Argentine Vice Consul at Dinant and, after a careful examination of the various testimonies which are highly conflicting, has decided that the matter should be declared closed, especially as no indignities were committed against the flag and shield. While this statement does not meet with general approval, it is clear that no other decision could have been taken under the circumstances.

The battle of the Falkland Islands has considerably improved the situation from the point of view of Argentine neutrality as there does not appear to be any further occasion at present for acts on the part of Germans which might infringe the country’s neutrality. On the other hand that battle has once more brought to prominence the long drawn out question of the sovereignty over those islands. As the Department is probably aware, the Argentine Government at the end of every year has addressed a protest to the British Government against the occupation of the islands which are considered a part of Argentine territory. These annual protests have always been drafted in a formal manner and no replies or even acknowledgements to them have ever been received or were expected. It appears that the protest which will be made the last week of this year will be of a slightly different character and will ask that the British Government agree to compensate Argentina in case the German Government should demand an indemnity from this Government for allowing the British Fleet to violate the neutrality of its territory (Falkland Islands). It is stated in some quarters that the British Government will also be asked to return the islands to Argentina at the close of the war. I do not believe, however, that such a request is contemplated.

There has also been some slight friction between the Argentine and Chilean press owing to the presence of Argentine war vessels in the Straits of Magellan for the purpose of protecting the neutrality of Argentine territory. It is alleged that a small detachment of Argentine marines were landed on a Chilean island and that the Argentine flag was hoisted thereon during the passage of the British Fleet. If any such act did take place the two Governments concerned have decided to let the matter drop and both have issued official statements denying flatly the alleged facts.

The only other recent event of importance concerning neutrality has been the escape of some officers and men of the German auxiliary cruiser Cap Trafalgar who had been interned on Martin Gracia Island (see despatch No. 356, of September 30, 1914).1 The representatives of the Allies have vigorously protested and the guard on the island has been doubled.

I have [etc.]

George Lorillard

2  Ante, p. 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120].

1  Ante p. 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092].

Observance of neutrality by LiberiaObservance of neutrality by Liberia

[1127] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, July 28, 1914. [Received August 6.]

File No. 763.72111W74

[1128] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 8 p.m.

[1129] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914.

[1130] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 8, 1914. [Received August 9, 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/1

[1131] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

Paris, undated. [Received August 11, 1914, 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/2

[1132] The Minister in Liberia (Buckner) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, August 14, 1914, 6 pm. [Received 11 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/3

[1133] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 17, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 10:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/5

[1134] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner)

Department of State , Washington, August 18, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 763.72111W74/3

[1135] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72111W74/5

[1136] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Washington, August 21, 1914.

File No. 763.72111W74/5

[1137] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 21, 1914. [Received August 22, 6:50 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/7

[1138] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 24, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 9:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/9

[1139] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 24, 1914. [Received August 25, 4:05 a.m.]

File No. 763.72111W74/8

[1140] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 29, 1914.

[1141] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 29, 1914.

File No. 763.72111W74/12

[1142] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

Washington, October 8, 1914.

[1143] The Minister in Liberia (Buckner) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Monrovia, September 4, 1914.[Received October 9.]

File No. 763.72111W74/121/2

[1144] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner)

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/1368a

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74

[Document 1127]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, July 28, 1914.
[Received August 6.]

No. 394]

Sir: The Liberian Minister, Mr. J. P. Crommelin, called on me yesterday and wished to know if I would transmit to my Government a statement of the danger that Liberia might possibly be placed in, in case of war in Europe, by reason of the French and German cable stations which are situated on Liberian territory. The Minister fears, of course, that one or both these Governments might send men-of-war there to protect these cable stations, and the Liberian Government has a certain fear lest the presence of these warships might be used to Liberia’s disadvantage. I therefore transmit herewith a copy of a letter that the Liberian Minister has written me clearly stating the case.

I have [etc.]

Walter Hines Page

[Enclosure]

The Liberian Minister in Great Britain (Crommelin) to the American Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Liberian Legation,
London , July 27, 1914.

Your Excellency: Referring to the interview your excellency was good enough to grant me this morning, I have the honor to submit to your excellency the points on which the Liberian Government are anxious to have advice and help from the Government of the United States.

There is in Monrovia a cable station of the German-South American Cable Company as well as a cable station of the French Société des Câbles Sud Americains, and in the event of a war breaking out in which these powers should take part, the Liberian Government are anxious not to be in any way involved in it.

If the United States Government would once more give their good offices by requesting of the powers not to interfere in Liberia, the Liberian Government would be extremely grateful.

I am instructed by the Secretary of State of Liberia, Mr. King, who is now in London, to beg of your excellency to draw the attention of the United States Government to these facts, even in case peace was maintained, as it is considered most important that the Liberian Government should know now to act at any other time.

I avail [etc.]

J. P. CROMMELIN

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 1128]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Say to Foreign Office that Government of United States is deeply interested in welfare of Republic of Liberia for historical and philanthropical reasons and feels confident that the neutrality of the Republic will be respected by the Government of Great Britain but would like to give to the Government of Liberia the official assurance of the British Government to that effect. Similar telegrams have been sent to Paris and Berlin.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France and Germany.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner) [Document 1129]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

Strongly recommend to Liberian Government that President issue neutrality proclamation at once if he has not already done so.2 Department has asked British, French, and German Governments to give assurance that neutrality of Liberia will be respected.

Bryan

2 The proclamation was issued August 10, 1914 (File No. 763.72111N39/21).

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/1

[Document 1130]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

Berlin, August 8, 1914. [Received August 9, 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

German Government will observe neutrality of Liberia.

Gerard

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/2

[Document 1131]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

Paris, undated.
[Received August 11, 1914, 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

French Government agrees respect neutrality Liberia.

Herrick

The Minister in Liberia (Buckner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/3

[Document 1132]

The Minister in Liberia (Buckner) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, August 14, 1914, 6 pm. [Received 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

French Government demands that German wireless be closed or neutrality would not be observed according to the Hague Convention V, 1907, Articles 3, 5, and 25. French wireless still open. Liberian Government desires advice.

Buckner

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/5

[Document 1133]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 17, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 10:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

387. The following has been delivered to me for transmission by the Liberian Minister here:

We understand that the United States Government proclaimed Liberian neutrality 30th of August [sic].1 France now demands that the German cable company in Monrovia, Liberia, be closed. In case of refusal France will consider neutrality violated. France cites to support her demands Articles 3, 5, and 25 of the Hague convention of 1907, No. V. Liberian Government contends that Articles 8 and 9 of the same convention nullify the demands. French and German cable companies are in operation. Represent this to the American Ambassador, London. Great urgency.

President Howard Of Liberian Republic
American Ambassador

1 See telegram of August 21, 1914, from the Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain, post, p. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner) File No. 763.72111W74/3

[Document 1134]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner)

Department of State
, Washington, August 18, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 14. Department has been informed that neutrality of Liberia will be respected by German and French Governments. French Chargé here states that Liberian Government should observe the obligations prescribed to neutrals by international law and that French Government has asked Liberia to close German wireless station at Monrovia which is corresponding with German authorities for military and naval purposes. For information of President Howard in taking such measures as he may deem necessary to preserve neutrality, the text of President Wilson’s recent proclamation on subject of radio communication is given herewith:

Whereas proclamations having been issued by me declaring the neutrality of the United States of America in the wars now existing between various European nations; and whereas it is desirable to take precautions to insure the enforcement of said proclamations in so far as the use of radio communication is concerned;

It is now ordered, by virtue of authority vested in me to establish regulations on the subject, that all radio stations within the jurisdiction of the United States of America are hereby prohibited from transmitting or receiving for delivery messages of an unneutral nature, and from in any way rendering to any one of the belligerents any unneutral service, during the continuance of hostilities. The enforcement of this order is hereby delegated to the Secretary of the Navy, who is authorized and directed to take such action in the premises as to him may appear necessary.

The President of the United States has now under consideration what steps, if any, should be taken with regard to controlling cable stations in the territory of the United States.

No reply has as yet been received to the Department’s cable asking for assurances from British Government that neutrality of Liberia will be respected.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 763.72111W74/5

[Document 1135]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, August 20, 1914.

[Telegram—Extract]

Department has received following from President of Liberia:

[Here follows the telegram of August 17 from President Howard.1 ]

Inquire whether France has made such demands and, if the facts are as stated, you may ask the French Government upon what grounds it bases the demands.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 763.72111W74/5

[Document 1136]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Washington,
August 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 17, 2 p.m. United States has not proclaimed Liberian neutrality. On August 17 Department cabled American Minister at Monrovia regarding demand of French Government asking Liberia to close German wireless station.

Text of President Wilson’s recent proclamation on subject radio communication was also sent for information of President Howard in taking such measures as he may deem necessary to preserve neutrality of Liberia. Have asked American Ambassador at Paris to make inquiries regarding demands of French government violation of neutrality by Liberia.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/7

[Document 1137]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 21, 1914.
[Received August 22, 6:50 a.m.]

[Telegram]

446. Your August 7, 8 p.m., and my August 20, 425.1 Foreign Office informs me that British Government have no hesitation in giving you every assurance that they will respect the neutrality of Liberia. They rely on the Government of the Republic to take all proper steps to protect their neutrality in any circumstances which may arise.

American Ambassador

1 Latter not printed.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/9

[Document 1138]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State 2

American Embassy,
Paris, August 24, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 20. French Government states that Liberian Government was requested to close German wireless station at Monrovia which was being used for military and naval purposes, as being the only certain means of preventing use to advantage of one of the belligerents. Liberian Government having justly observed that they were not authorized to take such step, French Vice Consul at Monrovia has been directed to ask Liberian Government to exercise censorship over operations of wireless station such as is exercised by other neutral powers. If Liberian Government, upon request of German Government, request similar censorship over French wireless messages, French Government will make no objection. No communication has been made to Liberian Government regarding German submarine cable company.

Herrick

2 Repeated to the Ambassador in Great Britain and the Minister in Liberia.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/8

[Document 1139]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 24, 1914.
[Received August 25, 4:05 a.m.]

[Telegram]

471. The Liberian Minister brings me a letter from the British Foreign Office saying that Great Britain supports the French request that Liberia close the German wireless station at Monrovia or prohibit its use for cipher messages or messages of an unneutral character. The Liberian Minister wishes me to ask the advice of the Government of the United States. The French also have a wireless station at Monrovia. Both France and Germany have also cable stations there. The Liberian Minister informs me also that a group of Liberian citizens were caught in Germany by the war and were prevented from securing money to go home. They are in London and need $2,000. He asks whether the United States Government will advance this sum on the Minister’s pledge that the Liberian Government will repay it through the receiver general. I fear the Liberians lean rather heavily on us.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 1140]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, August 29, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 24. See Department’s August 21, relative this Government’s position in censoring cables. Liberia should not discriminate in favor either French or German station. This Government has informed Liberian Government that it has now under consideration what steps, if any, should be taken by it as neutral power with regard to controlling cable stations in territory in United States. Department awaits reply to [from] Monrovia relative to authority for relief of stranded Liberians in London and Berlin.

Bryan

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/12

[Document 1141]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

memorandum

His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador is informed by Sir Edward Grey that the United States Ambassador in London has asked for an assurance from His Majesty’s Government that they will respect the neutrality of Liberia.

His Majesty’s Government are quite ready to give such an assurance and as a corollary thereto they have invited the Liberian Government to close the German radio-telegraphic station at Monrovia.

The Ambassador has the honour at the same time to say that His Majesty’s Government would be glad to learn what action the United States Government propose to take if any belligerent shipping takes refuge at Monrovia. It is the opinion of the British and French Governments that nothing less than the presence of a United States war vessel in Liberian waters would enable the Liberian Government to fulfil their obligations of neutrality.

The Ambassador has the honour to invite the Secretary of State to be good enough to give this suggestion his consideration and to enquire whether in his opinion it will be possible to give effect to it.

British Embassy,

Washington, August 29, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice) [Document 1142]

The Acting Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Spring Rice)

memorandum

The Acting Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the British Ambassador and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his memorandum of August 29, 1914, in which he suggests that the presence of an American war vessel in Liberian waters is necessary to enable the Government of Liberia to discharge its obligations as a neutral.

In reply the British Embassy is advised that the suggestion made in its memorandum is receiving the Department’s consideration.

Department of State,

Washington, October 8, 1914.

The Minister in Liberia (Buckner) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72111W74/121/2

[Document 1143]

The Minister in Liberia (Buckner) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Monrovia, September 4, 1914.[Received October 9.]

No. 59]

Sir: Referring to the Department’s telegrams on the subject of neutrality of wireless stations in Liberia, I have the honor to report that the Liberian Government has met the situation here by closing both the German and French stations. I understand this was done by mutual consent on the part of the management of each station.

I have [etc.]

George W. Buckner

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner) File No. 763.72111/1368a

[Document 1144]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Liberia (Buckner)

Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

French Ambassador informs Department that through influence of certain Germans in Liberia there is danger that Liberians near border may take action irritating French colonial authorities who might retaliate by sending punitive expedition into Liberian territory. The Department does not desire to comment on this information other than to impress upon Liberian Government the necessity of preserving utmost impartiality between belligerents and refraining from taking steps which might lead one belligerent to believe Liberia was acting in accord with enemy belligerent.

Bryan

Part IV: Other Problems and ResponsibilitiesPart IV: Other Problems and Responsibilities

Contents

New regulations governing the issuance of passports—Emergency PassportsNew regulations governing the issuance of passports—Emergency Passports

[1145] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914.

File No. 300.11/8a

[1146] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1914.

File No. 138.4/19a

[1147] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, undated. [Received August 11, 1914, 7:30 p.m.]

File No. 138.4/22

[1148] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries

Department of State, Washington, September 12, 1914.

File No. 138.4/27a

[1149] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 25, 1914. [Received, September 27.]

File No. 138.4/29

[1150] Executive order of November 13, 1914

November 13, 1914.

[Unnumbered]

[1151] The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Vienna, November 24, 1914. [Received November 26, 8 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/979

[1152] The Secretary of State to the American Diplomatic and Consular Officers

Department of State, Washington, December 21, 1914.

File No. 138/48a

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries File No. 300.11/8a

[Document 1145]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

You are authorized to issue emergency passports to American citizens who request them. Inform Department if additional blank passports are needed. May temporarily use typewritten forms if necessary. Direct all consular officers to advise American citizens within their districts to register and to give duplicate certificates of registration, with wafer seals attached, to all persons registered who do not bear passports. In case of emergency certificates of registration may be issued directly from consular agencies. Standing instructions concerning expatriation are to be observed. Afford protection to all Americans needing or requesting it. Communicate Department each request for financial assistance, with circumstances of case, and United States address of relatives, and whether consuls have difficulty in drawing on Department for funds deposited by relatives. Advise Americans to avoid remote places and unnecessary risks and to stay in capitals or large cities near sailing ports if they must remain abroad.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) File No. 138.4/19a

[Document 1146]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1914.

[Telegram]

In case consular registration certificates are not accepted by local officials for residence, travel, or exit in place of passports, direct consuls, except consul at Vienna, to issue emergency passports under their official seals and signatures until further notice, and for that purpose to have blank passports printed, Form No. 9. Applications should be taken in duplicate, and extra copies sent to the Department through Embassy. Caution consuls to require positive evidence of citizenship. Fees are not to be required for issuance of emergency passports or execution of applications therefor. Report doubtful cases with home address.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to other ambassadors and ministers in Europe.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 138.4/22

[Document 1147]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, undated.
[Received August 11, 1914, 7:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Earnestly request immediate instructions concerning granting individuals holding first papers certificate of identity to secure temporary permis de sejour pending opportunity to return to United States.

[File copy not signed]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 12, 1914.

Certificates of identity may be issued to persons holding first papers, provided seven years have not elapsed and residence of a permanent nature has not been acquired abroad since they were obtained. Inform Consulate General.

Bryan

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries File No. 138.4/27a

[Document 1148]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in European Countries

Department of State,
Washington, September 12, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

The Department is informed that many persons not American citizens apply for American passports and consular registration certificates to enable them to leave their native lands, or other European countries, and come to this country, some of them for the special purpose of evading military service. It is, therefore, especially important to observe standing instructions concerning the issuance of these documents. Regular emergency passports and consular registration certificates should be issued only to native and naturalized American citizens and citizens of the insular possessions. Native citizens can not be required to produce birth certificates, but should be required to submit satisfactory identification. In doubtful cases they should be required to give references to persons in this country of whom the Department may make inquiries. Persons claiming citizenship through naturalization should be required to submit naturalization certificates or old passports. If not provided with such documents, the Department should be informed by telegraph of name of court in which naturalization is alleged, and date, so that inquiries may be made.

Limited passports, under Section 1, act of March 2, 1907, may be issued by embassies and legations only to persons who have resided in this country three years, have made declarations of their intention to become American citizens, and have sojourned abroad for less than six months. They should not be issued in countries of which applicants are natives, and they should contain statements that they are not valid in such countries. They should be issued only to persons desiring to return immediately to the United States, and should not be issued to persons desiring to visit countries with which their native countries are at war.

Special consular registration certificates may be issued to wives of persons in the United States who have resided here for more than three years and have made declarations of their intention to become American citizens. Such certificates should not describe the holders as American citizens, but should set forth their exact status.

Other than the above, no formal documents should be issued by embassies, legations, or consulates of the United States to persons abroad. In cases of doubt, Department’s authorization should be obtained before passports or registration certificates are issued.

Repeat to consulates.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 138.4/29

[Document 1149]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 25, 1914.
[Received, September 27.]

[Telegram]

310. Your unnumbered, undated telegram re Karl Gudde.1 Acting under instructions in your number 44, September 13,2 Embassy has been issuing limited passports to persons who have lived in United States three years and have declared their intention to become American citizens and have sojourned abroad for less than six months. As Foreign Office here does not recognize consular registration certificates as equivalent of passports, Embassy has also issued passports to wives of persons of this class. Inform if this is approved.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , October 6, 1914.

338. Your 310, 25th. You should not issue passports to declarants of German birth. Law does not authorize issuance of passports to wives of declarants. Consuls may register and furnish them certificates specifying their status. Ask permission of German Government for their, departure with such certificates in lieu of passports.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

2 Erroneous reference; should be the foregoing telegram.

Executive order of November 13, 1914 [Unnumbered]

[Document 1150]

Executive order of November 13, 1914

RULES GOVERNING THE GRANTING AND ISSUING OF PASSPORTS IN THE UNITED STATES

1. By whom issued and refusal to issue. No one but the Secretary of State may grant and issue passports in the United States (Revised Statutes, Sections 4075, 4078) and he is empowered to refuse them in his discretion.

Passports are not issued by American diplomatic and consular officers abroad, except in cases of emergency; and a citizen who is abroad and desires to procure a passport must apply therefor through the nearest diplomatic or consular officer to the Secretary of State.

Applications for passports by persons in Porto Rico or the Philippines should be made to the Chief Executives of those Islands. The evidence required of such applicants is similar to that required of applicants in the United States.

2. Fee. By Act of Congress approved March 23, 1888, a fee of one dollar is required to be collected for every citizen’s passport. That amount in currency or postal money order should accompany each application made by a citizen of the United States. Orders should be made payable to the Disbursing Clerk of the Department of State. Drafts or checks will not be accepted.

3. Applications. A person who is entitled to receive a passport, if within the United States, must make a written application, in the form of an affidavit, to the Secretary of State. The application must be made by the person to whom the passport is to be issued and signed by him, as it is not competent for one person to apply for another.

The affidavit must be made before a clerk of a Federal or State Court within the jurisdiction of which the applicant or his witness resides, and the seal of the court must be affixed.

If the applicant signs by mark, two attesting witnesses to his signature are required. The applicant is required to state the date and place of his birth, his occupation, the place of his permanent residence, and within what length of time he will return to the United States with the purpose of residing and performing the duties of citizenship. He is also required to state the names of the foreign countries which he expects to visit, and, if any such country is at war, he must state the object of his visit thereto. The latter statement should be brief and general in form, thus: “commercial business”; “to attend to the settlement of an estate”; “to bring wife and children to this country”.

The applicant must take the oath of allegiance to the Government of the United States.

The application must be accompanied by a description of the person applying, and should state the following particulars, viz: Age, ———; stature, ——— feet ——— inches (English measure); forehead, ———; eyes, ———; nose, ———; mouth, ———; chin, ———; hair, ———; complexion, ———; face, ———.

The application must be accompanied by an affidavit from at least one credible witness that the applicant is the person he represents himself to be, and that the facts stated in the application are true to the best of the witness’s knowledge and belief. This affidavit must be made before the clerk of the court before whom the application is executed and the witness must be an American citizen who resides within the jurisdiction of the court. The applicant or his witness must be known to the clerk of the court before whom the application is executed, or must be able to satisfy such officer as to his identity and the bona fides of the application.

4. Native citizens. An application containing the information indicated by rule 3 will be sufficient evidence in the case of a native citizen.1

A person of the Chinese race, alleging birth in the United States, must obtain from the Commissioner of Immigration or Chinese Inspector in Charge at the port through which he proposes to leave the country a certificate upon his application, under the seal of such officer, showing that there has been granted to him by the latter a return certificate in accordance with rule 16 of the Chinese Regulations of the Department of Labor. For this purpose special blank forms of application for passports are provided.

Passports issued by the Department of State or its diplomatic or consular representatives are intended for identification and protection in foreign countries, and not to facilitate entry into the United States, immigration being under the supervision of the Department of Labor.

5. A person born abroad whose father was a native citizen of the United States. In addition to the statements required by rule 3, his application must show that his father was born in the United States, resided therein, and was a citizen at the time of the applicant’s birth. The Department may require that this affidavit be supported by that of one other citizen acquainted with the facts.

6. Naturalized citizens. In addition to the statements required by rule 3, a naturalized citizen must transmit his certificate of naturalization, or a duly certified copy of the court record thereof, with his application. It will be returned to him after inspection. He must state in his affidavit when and from what port he emigrated to this country, what ship he sailed on, where he has lived since his arrival in the United States, when and before what court he was naturalized, and that he is the identical person described in the certificate of naturalization. The signature to the application should conform in orthography to the applicant’s name as written in his certificate of naturalization, or an explanation of the difference should be submitted.

7. Woman’s application. If she is unmarried, in addition to the statements required by rule 3, she should state that she has never been married. If she is the wife or widow of a native citizen of the United States the fact should be made to appear in her application, which should be made according to the form prescribed for a native citizen whether she was born in this country or abroad. If she is the wife or widow of a naturalized citizen, in addition to the statements required by rule 3, she must transmit for inspection her husband’s certificate of naturalization or a certified copy of the court record thereof, must state that she is the wife (or widow) of the person described therein, and must set forth the facts of his emigration, naturalization, and residence, as required in the rules governing the application of a naturalized citizen.

(A married woman’s citizenship follows that of her husband so far as her international status is concerned. It is essential, therefore, that a woman’s marital relations be indicated in her application for a passport, and that in the case of a married woman her husband’s citizenship be established.)

8. The child of a naturalized citizen claiming citizenship through the naturalization of the parent. In addition to the statements required by rule 3, the applicant must state that he or she is the son or daughter, as the case may be, of the person described in the certificate of naturalization, which must be submitted for inspection, and must set forth the facts of emigration, naturalization, and residence, as required in the rule governing the application of a naturalized citizen.

9. A resident of an insular possession of the United States who owes allegiance to the United States. In addition to the statements required by rule 3, he must state that he owes allegiance to the United States and that he does not acknowledge allegiance to any other government; and must submit affidavits from at least two credible witnesses having good means of knowledge in substantiation of his statements of birth, residence and loyalty.

10. Expiration of passport. A passport expires two years from the date of its issuance. A new one will be issued upon a new application, and, if the applicant be a naturalized citizen, the old passport will be accepted in lieu of a certificate of naturalization, if the application upon which it was issued is found to contain sufficient information as to the naturalization of the applicant. Passports are not renewed by the Department, but a person abroad holding a passport issued by the Department may have it renewed for a period of two years upon presenting it to a diplomatic or principal consular officer of the United States when it is about to expire.

11. Wife, minor children, and servants. When the applicant is accompanied by his wife, minor children, or servant who would be entitled to receive a passport, it will be sufficient to state the fact, giving the respective ages of the children and the allegiance of the servant, when one passport will suffice for all. For any other person in the party a separate passport will be required. A woman’s passport may include her minor children and servant under the above-named conditions.

(The term servant does not include a governess, tutor, pupil, companion, or person holding like relation to the applicant for a passport.)

12. Titles. Professional and other titles will not be inserted in passports.

13. Blank forms of applications. They will be furnished by the Department free of charge to persons who desire to apply for passports.

14. Address. Communications should be addressed to the Department of State, Bureau of Citizenship, and each communication should give the post-office address of the person to whom the answer is to be directed.

Section 4075 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, as amended by the Act of Congress approved June 14, 1902, provides that “the Secretary of State may grant and issue passports, and cause passports to be granted, issued and verified in foreign countries by such diplomatic or consular officers of the United States, and by such chief or other executive officer of the insular possessions of the United States, and under such rules as the President shall designate and prescribe for and on behalf of the United States.” The foregoing rules are accordingly prescribed for the granting and issuing of passports in the United States.

The Secretary of State is authorized to make regulations on the subject of issuing and granting passports additional to these rules and not inconsistent with them.

Woodrow Wilson The White House,
November 13, 1914.

Note: An applicant who expects to go to Russia accompanied by wife and children should inform the Department to that effect and state the names of the wife and children so that they may be inserted in the passport, to conform with the Russian regulations.

1 But a person born in the United States in a place where births are recorded should submit a birth certificate with his application.

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/979

[Document 1151]

The Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Vienna, November 24, 1914.
[Received November 26, 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

305. Can passports issue and financially assist return children of tender years born in United States (1) of parents not naturalized, (2) of declarants?

Penfield

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (Penfield)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , December 3, 1914.

327. Your 305, 24th. Passports and financial assistance may be extended to American-born minor children of parents not naturalized or declarants.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the American Diplomatic and Consular Officers File No. 138/48a

[Document 1152]

The Secretary of State to the American Diplomatic and Consular Officers

Department of State,
Washington, December 21, 1914.

[Circular]

NEW PASSPORT REGULATIONS

Gentlemen: In confirmation of the Department’s recent telegraphic instructions1 to diplomatic and certain consular officers concerning the preparation of applications for Departmental and emergency passports, and the issuance of the latter, the following instructions are given for your guidance. These instructions are prescribed in pursuance of the passport regulations signed by the President November 13, 1914.

EVIDENCE OF CITIZENSHIP AND IDENTIFICATION

Conditions precedent to the granting of a passport are, under the law and rules prescribed by authority of the law, that the citizenship of the applicant, his identity, and, as a rule, his permanent residence in the United States and definite intention to return to it, with the purpose of performing the duties of citizenship, shall satisfactorily be established. (See circular instruction of July 26, 1910, entitled “Protection of native Americans residing abroad,”2 and circular instruction of April 19, 1907, entitled “Expatriation,”3 as amended by circular instruction of May 14, 1908.4 Exceptions to the later condition may be made in some cases by special direction of the Department, particularly in cases of persons residing abroad as representatives of American trade and commerce and as missionaries of American church organizations.

The applicant should, if possible, be introduced by a reputable person known to the office which takes the application, or, if this is impossible, he should be required to identify himself by satisfactory documentary evidence. In doubtful cases references to persons in this country should be required, so that the Department may make proper inquiries concerning the applicants.

Emergency passports and consular registration certificates should not be accepted as conclusive evidence of citizenship. In this relation it may be observed that in some cases such documents have been issued hastily and without proper examination into the citizenship and identity of the applicants, especially during the period immediately following the outbreak of the present European war.

NATIVE AMERICAN CITIZENS

In taking the passport application of a person alleging native citizenship, you should require the applicant to submit a birth certificate, if possible, or letters or other documents satisfactorily establishing his citizenship. The nature of the evidence submitted to you must be stated in the passport application.

NATURALIZED AMERICAN CITIZENS

A person claiming citizenship by naturalization must be required to submit his certificate of naturalization or a certified copy of the court record thereof, or an old passport issued by the Department, and his passport application must state the name of the court in which he obtained naturalization and the date thereof. If any such person is unable to submit such documentary evidence of his naturalization, you should inform the Department of the name of the court in which he alleges that he obtained naturalization and the date thereof, so that the Department may take steps to verify his allegation.

PHOTOGRAPHS OF APPLICANTS

Each applicant for a passport must submit triplicate unmounted photographs of himself on thin paper, not larger than three by three inches in size, one to be attached to each of his applications by the officer before whom they are executed, and the third to be attached to the passport and to be partly stamped with an impression of the seal of the issuing office.

An application forwarded to the Department for a regular passport must necessarily be accompanied by a loose photograph of the applicant in addition to the one attached to the application, so that the former may be attached to the passport, with an impression of the Department’s seal.

NAMES OF COUNTRIES APPLICANTS EXPECT TO VISIT AND OBJECTS OF VISITS

Each application must state the names of the countries which the applicant expects to visit and the object of the visit. The statement concerning the object of the applicant’s visit should be general in form, thus: “Commercial business,” “health,” “study,” “visiting relatives,” “recreation,” “settling an estate,” etc.

With reference to the statement, “commercial business,” you are instructed that no mention should be made of the exact nature of the business in which the applicant is engaged; that is, it would be improper to state the name or names of the concerns which the applicant represents or the nature of the goods which he expects to purchase or sell. (The form of the statement written upon the faces of the passports is quoted below.)

ISSUANCE OF EMERGENCY PASSPORTS

Diplomatic and consular officers authorized to issue emergency passports should exercise the greatest caution in doing so, and should require of each applicant unquestionable evidence of his citizenship and identity. A photograph of the applicant should be attached to the passport (in the upper left-hand corner) with an impression of the seal of the issuing office, which should be so placed as partly to cover one side but not the features. The following statement should be made upon the face of the passport (in the upper right-hand corner):

The person to whom this passport is issued has declared under oath that he desires it for use in visiting the countries hereinafter named, for the following objects: (name of country) (object of visit)

(name of country) (object of visit)

(name of country) (object of visit)

This passport is not valid for use in other countries except for necessary transit to or from the countries named.

Rubber stamps should be used in making the above form of statement.

When an American citizen, sojourning abroad and holding a passport limited for use in certain countries, finds it necessary to visit another country, not mentioned therein, he may turn in the passport which he holds at the American embassy, legation, or consulate authorized to issue emergency passports in the country where he is sojourning, and obtain an emergency passport limited for use in the particular trip which he has in view. Upon his return, he may surrender such emergency passport and recover the passport which he previously held. It is not proper for one person to hold two valid passports.

In the issuance of emergency passports under the conditions just mentioned the same rules should be observed as in the issuance of emergency passports in general.

AMENDMENT OF PASSPORTS ISSUED PRIOR TO THESE REGULATIONS

American citizens holding valid passports issued prior to these regulations should be notified, through the press or otherwise, to present themselves to a diplomatic or consular office within two weeks, if possible, so that their passports may be amended to conform with the new passport regulations. The Department has reason to believe that there are some persons abroad holding emergency, and perhaps Departmental, passports to which they are not entitled. Therefore, when a passport is presented to you for amendment in accordance with the new regulations, you should examine the holder carefully and require him to submit the same evidence of his citizenship and identity which would be required of him were he making an original application for a passport. If any holder of a passport appears to be not entitled to it, you should retain the passport, investigate the case, and inform the Department fully of the pertinent facts and your conclusions.

All holders of emergency passports who expect to continue their residence abroad for a considerable period, should be notified to apply forthwith for regular Departmental passports.

W. J. Bryan

1 Not printed.

2  Foreign Relations, 1910, p. 1.

3  Ibid., 1907, p. 3.

4  Ibid., 1908, p. 2.

Representation of belligerent governments in enemy countries—Protection of their interestsRepresentation of belligerent governments in enemy countries—Protection of their interests

[No extensive selection of papers on this subject is presented for the reason that the correspondence comprises mainly letters of transmission of communications from one belligerent government to another, where the American Government acts merely as an intermediary.1

The correspondence involved in taking over particular interests in various countries is likewise omitted, since it consists mainly of purely formal communications, except in the case of the exchange of telegrams, printed below,2 with the Minister in Belgium regarding protection of German interests there, significant because of the last sentence of the Secretary of State’s reply. It is not even possible to give a complete list of specific dates on which representation of particular governments was taken over in particular places, due to the number of steps involved and the fact that American officials were sometimes called upon to act in their representative capacities before these were completed—as in the case of protection of Austrian interests in Russia, correspondence regarding which is included below.3 A general statement as to the extent to which representation of belligerent governments had been taken over by the United States during the first month of the war is contained in the Secretary of State’s letter of September 3 to the Speaker of the House of Representatives.4 The other papers printed comprise general instructions on the subject, laying down principles of conduct for American officers charged with the representation of foreign governments and correspondence on certain particular cases which leads up to the statement of general principles or significant interpretations of them. In another section below5 are printed papers on the protection of British and French interests in Turkey, covering certain cases in which the action of the American Government, based on humanitarian considerations, went beyond the formal duties of representation of foreign governments.]

1 See Preface [Pg. III is part of Preface].

2  Post, pp. 735–6 [Pgs. 735–736 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162].

3  Post, pp. 736–8 [Pgs. 736–738 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, and Doc. 1166].

4  Post, p. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171].

5  Post, p. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195].

[1153] The Secretary of State to the German Embassy

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 704.6261/a

[1154] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 704.6261

[1155] The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy, Manchester, Massachusetts, August 1, 1914. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 704.6361/1

[1156] The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Newport, Rhode Island, July 31, 1914. [Received August 4.]

File No. 704.6200/1

[1157] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 5, 1914, 5 a.m. [Received 9 a.m.]

File No. 701.6261/6

[1158] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 5, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received August 6, 7 a.m.]

File No. 701.6261/7

[1159] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, August 4, 1914. [Received August 5, 9:30 a.m.]

File No. 704.6255/1

[1160] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 7, 1914, 9 a.m. [Received 11 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/212

[1161] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1914, 2 p.m.

File No. 701.6261/7

[1162] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 763.72/212

[1163] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 8, 1914, 10 a.m. [Received August 9, 11 a.m.]

File No. 701.6361/4

[1164] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State, Washington, August 9, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 704.6361/5a

[1165] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 12, 1914, 12 noon. [Received August 13, 12 noon.]

File No. 740.6361/6

[1166] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 13, 1914. [Received August 14, 10:30 a.m.]

File No. 704.6261/4

[1167] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, August 18, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received August 19, 7 a.m.]

File No. 763.72115/10

[1168] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 23, 1914. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72115/12

[1169] Instructions to diplomatic and consular officers of the United States of America entrusted with the interests of foreign governments at war

Department of State, Washington, August 17, 1914.

File No. 704.00/4a

[1170] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries

Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1914, 7 p.m.

File No. 763.72111/283a

[1171] The Secretary of State to the Speaker of the House of Representatives

Department of State, Washington, September 3, 1914.

File No. 704.00/4b

[1172] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 28, 1914. [Received 9 p.m.]

File No. 763.72115/83

[1173] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 30, 1914.

[1174] The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries

Department of State, Washington, October 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72114/21a

[1175] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 8, 1914. [Received 4:25 p.m.]

File No. 763.72114/32

[1176] The Minister in Persia (Caldwell) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Teheran, undated. [Received November 3, 1914, 1 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1162

[1177] The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 9, 1914. [Received November 10, 12 noon.]

File No. 763.72114/69

[1178] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 12, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received November 17, 8 a.m.]

File No. 125.0067/17

[1179] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 12, 1914. [Received November 17, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1226

[1180] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 17, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 125.0067/17

[1181] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 21, 1914.

File No. 763.72/1226

[1182] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 3, 1914. [Received December 4, 10:30 p.m.]

File No. 704.4167/18

[1183] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 13, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received December 15, 8:15 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1308

[1184] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Persia (Caldwell)

Department of State, Washington, December 19, 1914.

File No. 704.6291/6

[1185] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 15, 1914, 9 p.m. [Received December 21, 4:35 p.m.]

File No. 702.4167/15

The Secretary of State to the German Embassy File No. 704.6261/a

[Document 1153]

The Secretary of State to the German Embassy 1

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914, 9 p.m.

[Telegram]

Answering your telegram received to-day,2 this Government will, if conditions require it, be pleased to comply with your Government’s request and give diplomatic and consular protection to German interests in Russia with the understanding that such action will not prevent this Government’s rendering similar assistance to other governments under like conditions if such request is made.

Bryan

1 Repeated to the Ambassadors in Germany, France, and Great Britain.

2 Not filed; a marginal note states, “Delivered by messenger 6:30 p.m.” See the request received by mail on August 4, post, p. 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) File No. 704.6261

[Document 1154]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

[Telegram]

This Government in reply to a request from the German Government has consented to take over the German Embassy in Russia in case of war with the understanding that compliance with the request will not prevent the rendering of similar assistance to any other country that may require it. You will act accordingly. Employ temporarily such assistance as you may need and keep us informed as to extra help required so that we may send from here if local supply insufficient.

Bryan

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6361/1

[Document 1155]

The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian Embassy,
Manchester, Massachusetts, August 1, 1914.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

I am desired by Count Berchtold urgently to inquire whether Government of United States is disposed in case of rupture of our diplomatic relations to entrust protection of Austrian and Hungarian citizens and interests in Russia, France, Great Britain, and Montenegro, to the American missions and consulates in these countries. In case of an affirmative answer my Government would be obliged by urgent instructions given in this sense to the American missions in St. Petersburg, Paris, London, and Cetinje. The earliest possible answer is expected in Vienna.

Dumba

The Secretary of State to the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador (Dumba)1

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 1, 1914, 10:45 p.m.

Answering your telegram received to-day this Government will, if conditions require it, be pleased to comply with your Government’s request and give diplomatic and consular protection to Austro-Hungarian citizens and interests in Russia, France, and Great Britain with the understanding that such action will not prevent this Government rendering similar assistance to other governments under like conditions if such request is made. We regret to say we have no representative in Montenegro.

Bryan

1 Repeated to the Ambassadors in Russia, France, Great Britain, and Austria-Hungary.

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6200/1

[Document 1156]

The German Chargé d’Affaires (Haniel) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Newport, Rhode Island, July 31, 1914.
[Received August 4.]

[Translation]

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of the Imperial Government I pray the American Government to assume the protection of our interests in the event of warlike complications with Russia or other states and kindly to instruct American diplomatic and consular officers accordingly in the states above referred to. I should be under special obligation for the earliest possible answer to be addressed to the Imperial Embassy at Washington.

Accept [etc.]

Haniel

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 701.6261/6

[Document 1157]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)2 to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 5, 1914, 5 a.m.
[Received 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Unconfirmed report having spread that Russian Embassy, Berlin, had been destroyed by mob, large crowd attacked and completely wrecked German Embassy here. After it was dispersed the dragoman Kattnerladen apparently murdered, rest of staff safe. Safes with ciphers, money, and some archives saved but everything else completely destroyed though building itself stands. At first signs of disorder I demanded proper protection from the [Minister] of Foreign Affairs and continued to do so at intervals as matters grew worse. This was promised in each case. By the general opinion of unostentatious [unprejudiced] witnesses, the protection was absolutely inadequate and, such as it was, made the most feeble attempts to prevent outrage. Finally Minister of Interior arrived with sufficient force to disperse mob after all damage done. I went to Foreign Office 2 [o’clock], morning, unable to see Minister but registered protest, and have requested audience when I shall officially protest and demand adequate protection for German subjects as I now consider their situation precarious.

Wilson

2 Telegrams from the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia, August 2, 1914, 12 midnight; August 3, 3 p.m., containing brief reports with reference to the taking over of representation of German interests in Russia, printed ante, pp. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 701.6261/7

[Document 1158]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 5, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received August 6, 7 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Saw Minister for Foreign Affairs regarding wreck German Embassy and murder dragoman, stating I considered Russian authorities fully responsible for criminal negligence; that I reserved to my Government liberty to request formal apology and complete satisfaction and reparation for loss of life and property. I demanded precautions be taken to prevent repetition, as I did not consider German life or property adequately protected and that I felt sure that same thing would happen Austrian Embassy after departure of staff. Minister expressed regrets and did not try to evade responsibility of Government. He mentioned treatment of Russian Embassy at Berlin and said 132 rioters arrested, would be tried by martial law and severely punished. Intimated that full reparation would be made for loss of German life and property. Hope Department will impress upon Russian Ambassador serious view American Government takes of matter, as I fear repetition with Austrian Embassy. Hopes for Americans getting away towards end of week brighter. Proclamation forbidding all street demonstrations and police ordered to take strictest measures. City seems quiet to-night. Council of Ministers met to decide about Germans; nothing definite but understand that they will generally be allowed to remain in country if they wish. English declaration of war received with greatest relief. Consul at Riga says banks refuse to cash drafts on Department and he fears he will be without funds.

Wilson

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6255/1

[Document 1159]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, August 4, 1914.
[Received August 5, 9:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Belgian Government this afternoon handed German Minister his passports and he has left for The Hague. Before leaving, not having been able to communicate with Berlin, he asked me as [a] friendly act to take possession of his keys and seal and hold them provisionally until his Government could formally arrange for protection of German interests in Belgium. As stated in my telegram this morning,1 I had previously informed him of the requests of French and Russian Ministers but time was too short for him to make other arrangements. Accordingly, in view of friendly relations between my Government and Germany, and following implied instructions in your telegram regarding action for France,1 I consented provisionally to take charge of his keys and seal; but in a purely provisional character act was fully set forth and it was stipulated that, because of lack of authority from my Government, I assumed no responsibility for German Legation’s archives or protection of German interests or property, agreeing only to keep keys and seal pending instructions. At the time I advised our Consul to render what provisional aid he could to German Consul who departed with the Minister.

However, as under Department’s authorization I have already agreed to act for France in case of need, and inasmuch as Russian Minister has asked me to render similar service, and in view of the further fact that, as intimated to me this afternoon, I shall be asked in the same circumstances to assume protection of British interests, I deem it my duty urgently to request Department to arrange through German Ambassador for immediate designation of representative of some other power at Brussels, preferably one without a numerous colony of his own, to assume charge of German interests. My labors on behalf of our colony intensified by presence of American refugees in large numbers; British colony here has thousand or more persons; and with force at my command, laden as I may be with French and Russian interests, task will be extremely difficult. In addition, intense hostility in Belgium to Germans would largely nullify my efforts on behalf of our own and other interests. German Minister fully understood my position and expressed grateful appreciation. Having already shown our friendly disposition to Germany and inasmuch as other ministers here could easily and would gladly assume this responsibility, I ask that action in accordance with my recommendation be taken immediately.

Whitlock

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 5, 1914, 8 p.m.

Your August 4. We replied to German Government that we would take over their diplomatic and consular offices in Russia and elsewhere, upon request, with the understanding that such action would not interfere with compliance with similar requests from other governments. If Germany, under these circumstances, asks some other country to act for her, you will be relieved to that extent, but we can not refuse to act if she asks it. We appreciate the heavy burden it imposes upon our officials to look after the interests of all countries that have asked and may ask, but we will supply the needed help and make it as easy as possible. In this critical hour it becomes necessary for our Government to render every assistance that a neutral can render, not only as an international duty, but that we may be in better position to exert our influence for peace.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/212

[Document 1160]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 7, 1914, 9 a.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Urgent. Austrian Ambassador and staff have left. In view of destruction German Embassy and fearing same Austrian Embassy, am I authorized to raise thereon American flag if I judge it necessary to save Embassy premises and lives of occupants?

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) File No. 701.6261/7

[Document 1161]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1914, 2 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 5, 10 p.m. Department unable to take up matter with Russian Ambassador.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) File No. 763.72/212

[Document 1162]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 7, 9 a.m. You may inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs that at the request of the Austrian Government the Government of the United States consented to take over Austrian affairs in Russia, and you may inquire whether in these circumstances there would be any objection to temporarily raising the American flag over the Austrian Embassy. Your action in this matter should be guided by the decision of the Foreign Office. Cable result.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 701.6361/4

[Document 1163]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 8, 1914, 10 a.m.
[Received August 9, 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Summoned urgently to the Austrian Embassy 2 [o’clock], morning, being informed Russian officers and soldiers had entered. Upon arrival found them preparing to remove from the Embassy garage the automobiles belonging to members of Embassy. Protested on ground that nobody could enter premises without my consent, building being under protection of the Government of the United States. Reply given that they must obey orders Ministry War. I called Foreign Office by telephone and again protested. Finally Ministry War gave orders to withdraw without motors. Foreign Office states legal department will decide as to rights of Russian Government to take motors, but I feel unauthorized entrance of Embassy premises by Russian officers is grave matter, especially coming after destruction of German Embassy through negligence of Russian Government. Please wire instructions; also whether I shall surrender automobiles if requested through Foreign Office.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) File No. 704.6361/5a

[Document 1164]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

Department of State,
Washington, August 9, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

Your August 8, 10 a.m. Department approves your course in protesting against any molestation of embassies temporarily in our charge, but if after protest the Government insists upon taking automobiles, the matter will be dealt with by diplomatic correspondence. You should not use force to prevent an execution of the Government’s orders if it decides to remove automobiles.

Bryan

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 740.6361/6

[Document 1165]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 12, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received August 13, 12 noon.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 7, 9 a.m. [August 8, 7 p.m.], and August 9, 8 p.m. Russian Government will not admit that Embassy buildings of Austria-Hungary or Germany enjoy at present any extraterritorial privileges. Foreign Office thinks that raising American flag would only complicate matters and might cause unfortunate incidents. I do not consider building in danger at present. While protesting against molestation of embassies, I shall comply with Foreign Office request unless otherwise instructed.

Wilson

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.6261/4

[Document 1166]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 13, 1914.
[Received August 14, 10:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Practically all German and Austrian Consuls in Russia are being arrested and imprisoned. Have protested strongly both verbally and in writing but without slightest effect. Request instructions as to what further steps I shall take in matter.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 15, 1914.

Your August 13. Since you have protested both orally and in writing against the arrest and imprisonment of German and Austrian consuls in Russia, the Department is of opinion that you should do nothing more at the present time.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/10

[Document 1167]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, August 18, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received August 19, 7 a.m.]

[Telegram]

403. I have just received the following cipher telegram from Gerard at Berlin:

Please inform British Government that I advise them to allow no Germans to leave England or any British Dominions until I obtain leave British subjects to leave Germany.

This seems to me too important a subject to act on without explicit instructions from our Government. I hold awaiting instructions.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 19, 1914.

Your 403. Department deems it inadvisable to comply with suggestion of Ambassador Gerard as such compliance would be inconsistent with neutral attitude assumed by this Government. Department has cabled Ambassador Gerard.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 20, 1914, 3 p.m.

Department is informed by Ambassador at London that he has received following telegram from you.

Please inform British Government that I advise them to allow no Germans to leave England or any British Dominions until I obtain leave British subjects to leave Germany.

Department is of the opinion that such an exchange of communications should not be made through the good offices of the United States.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/12

[Document 1168]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 23, 1914.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your telegram of August 20, 3 p.m. My telegram to our Embassy at London was based on supposition that I was to safeguard British interests in Germany to the best of my ability and also on the ground of common humanity. As British Government was allowing Germans to leave England and as British subjects were without any grounds being held here, many under conditions of hardship, and as hundreds had appealed to me for release, the advisability of an early understanding regarding mutual exchange was transmitted. My hope was that our Embassy at London would be able to communicate my suggestion to the British Foreign Office in an informal and confidential manner. Nevertheless, in order avoid any possible indiscretion, I frankly told Foreign Office here that since British interests were confided to my charge I felt it my duty to make such a recommendation. My action has undoubtedly hastened action here as Germany has now consented to release all British subjects if England takes reciprocal measures, and I have informed our London Embassy to this effect.

Gerard

Instructions to diplomatic and consular officers of the United States of America entrusted with the interests of foreign governments at war File No. 704.00/4a

[Document 1169]

Instructions to diplomatic and consular officers of the United States of America entrusted with the interests of foreign governments at war

Department of State,
Washington, August 17, 1914.

To the American diplomatic and consular officers:

Gentlemen: You are instructed, in assuming charge of the subjects or citizens and the interests of a foreign power at war with the country to which you are accredited, to bear in mind the general usages of nations in relation to the functions exercised by you upon such occasions.

In the first place it is important to recall that the care and protection of foreign interests in both peace and war is based upon the consent of both foreign governments concerned. The consent, having been freely given, may as freely be withdrawn by either, and as a consequence you must exercise the extra duties imposed upon you with candid impartiality.

In the second place, the arrangement contemplates the exercise of no official function on your part, but only the use of unofficial good offices. You are not officers of the unrepresented government. A diplomatic or consular representative of the United States can not act officially as a diplomatic or consular representative of another power, such an official relation being prohibited by the Constitution of the United States. But apart from the fact of legal disability the relations of the foreign governments concerned necessarily imply personal and Unofficial action. The state of war existing between the country to which you are accredited and the country for which you are acting, is inconsistent with the continuance of diplomatic intercourse between them. Any suggestions on the part of either country for such intercourse should be referred to the Department for its consideration. It is expected that overtures looking to the resumption of diplomatic intercourse will, if made through the medium of the United States, be addressed to this Government for transmission to the belligerent concerned.

Your position, therefore, is that of the representatives of a neutral power whose attitude toward the parties to the conflict is one of impartial amity. In your interposition in behalf of the subjects or citizens of one of the belligerents you should use every care so that it will be regarded, not as an act of partisanship, but as a friendly office performed in accordance with the wishes of both parties. You should especially avoid any action which might compromise the United States as a neutral or affect the amicable relations between it and the country to which you are accredited. While you are thus exercising these unofficial functions with impartiality and discretion, you will, nevertheless, examine all complaints, which may be laid in behalf of foreign subjects or citizens under your protection, and give to them such assistance and make such representations to the authorities of the country to which you are accredited as may seem to be appropriate in accordance with these special instructions and the standing instructions of the Department.

In conclusion the Department anticipates that in some cases questions may arise regarding your authority over the buildings and other property of the foreign mission or consulate in your charge. You are advised, therefore, that your function in this respect is merely that of a custodian of the property and archives of the unrepresented government. Any interference on the part of private persons or officials with such property should be the subject of an unofficial representation or protest to the authorities of the government which is, by the rules of international law, charged with the security of diplomatic and consular premises and archives of foreign governments. If in connection with these duties you are requested or it appears desirable as a means of protection to raise the flag of the United States over the building of a foreign mission or consulate, you will bear in mind that this should not be done except with the consent of the authorities of the government to which you are accredited, and in strict compliance with the laws of the land.

As it may be desirable to hold a foreign government, of whose interests you may be in charge, responsible for the reimbursement of expenditures, which you may make as a result of such service, you will keep accurate account of all additional expense incurred in behalf of such government, its subjects or citizens, and their interests, rendering the same to this Department, when required, with such vouchers therefor as you may be able to obtain.

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries File No. 763.72111/283a

[Document 1170]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries

Department of State,
Washington, August 27, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Circular telegram]

Refer to the Department’s general instructions of August 17. To maintain the neutrality of this Government and of its diplomatic representatives during the present war and the proper observance and appreciation of the principle that the good offices which are being extended by American diplomatic representatives in behalf of any belligerent in a country hostile to it are entirely personal and unofficial, it is necessary that all messages that could be construed to relate to military or naval operations received by an American diplomatic official for transmission from a belligerent to another belligerent or from a belligerent country to any of its diplomatic or other officials should be transmitted through the Department of State.

W. J. Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Speaker of the House of Representatives File No. 704.00/4b

[Document 1171]

The Secretary of State to the Speaker of the House of Representatives

Department of State,
Washington, September 3, 1914.

Sir: At the request of the nations engaged in the conflict now existing in Europe and elsewhere, the Government of the United States has accepted the care of their interests and of those of their nationals. Throughout the British Empire, Russia, and France the American diplomatic and consular officers are charged with the care of German and Austrian interests; in Germany and Austria-Hungary they must care for British and French interests; while in Germany the interests of Japan and in Japan the interests of Germany have been entrusted to the United States.

The temporary suspension of banking facilities and the impossibility of making transfer of funds by the usual methods has placed upon the Government of the United States, as a result of its assumption of the duty of caring for the interests of other governments in the existing circumstances, the duty of advancing money in several countries for the current expenses of diplomatic and consular officers of the countries of whose interests it has assumed charge and the care and necessary relief of the nationals of those countries.

To some extent these conditions have been provided for by means of reciprocal advances of moneys to the credit of American diplomatic representatives in the respective countries but it has been found that this method is not, in all cases, practicable owing to the difficulty of making money available through direct transfer of credits.

Therefore, to meet many cases which are arising, it is requested that Congress provide a fund, against which drafts may be drawn by American diplomatic representatives or from which advances of funds may be made to foreign diplomatic representatives upon the understanding that reimbursement will be made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary of State may deem expedient.

The creation of this fund will not be in the nature of an expense to the Government of the United States but rather in the nature of an advance of money to meet drafts and cover outstanding balances until such time as banking facilities are restored and adjustments are made feasible, when it is expected that the amounts advanced from the appropriation will be reimbursed.

I have, therefore, to request that the Congress appropriate a sum of one million dollars, to be disbursed for the purpose indicated by and under the direction of the Secretary of State, and that provision be made by which payments by foreign governments may be credited to the appropriation and be made available for further expenditures of like nature as they may become necessary, and that all sums paid to the United States in reimbursement of the appropriation shall be paid into the Treasury of the United States.

I should greatly appreciate as early action as possible upon this request since a number of applications for transfers and advances of funds have already been received.1

I am [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1 By public resolution September 11, 1914, the sum of one million dollars was appropriated for the purpose requested.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/83

[Document 1172]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 28, 1914.
[Received 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

753. Foreign Office has requested this Embassy to keep it informed about arrangements being made in Berlin for repatriation of British subjects in Germany, particularly advance notice of the time of their expected arrival and the number coming. Have already transmitted this request to Gerard who has given me very meager information in reply. Foreign Office now informs me that Gerard has been telegraphing through American Minister Copenhagen to the mayors of Folkestone and Harwich and to the Lord Mayor of London giving information about the parties expected to arrive and asking them to organize relief. The Foreign Office adds that this has caused misunderstanding and confusion and dislocated its arrangements with the shipping companies for meeting these people and bringing them back and the hope is expressed by the Foreign Office that in future Gerard will communicate with any department of the British Government only through this Embassy and not direct with any local authorities in Great Britain.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 1173]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 30, 1914.

[Telegram]

297. Department is informed that you have been sending information regarding repatriation of British subjects in Germany direct to the mayors of Folkestone, Harwich, and London. Hereafter you should send all communications intended for any Department of the British Government only through the American Embassy in London. No communication of any information of any kind whatsoever should be made to another country except through the American Ambassador or Minister accredited to that country.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries File No. 763.72114/21a

[Document 1174]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassadors and Ministers in Belligerent Countries

Department of State,
Washington, October 5, 1914.

[Circular telegram]

In order that there may be uniformity in sending communications to and from the different missions in belligerent countries, you are instructed that lists of prisoners or subjects of a belligerent with whose affairs you are charged may be transmitted directly to the American Ambassador or Minister accredited to such belligerent, or by any route that in your discretion would be most feasible. All other communications must be sent through the Department.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/32

[Document 1175]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 8, 1914.
[Received 4:25 p.m.]

[Telegram]

800. Your circular telegram 5th regarding communications to missions in belligerent countries. I have hitherto made a practice of telegraphing through the Department all communications to the Embassies at Berlin and Vienna from the British Government of such a nature as seemed to me to require laying before the Department. Does the Department wish me to transmit inquiries and communications involving merely the details of carrying out relief work and repatriation of belligerent subjects and other routine work arranged for through the Department? I send weekly to Berlin and Vienna by messenger a number of written documents of a miscellaneous and comparatively unimportant character which would be very greatly delayed by transmission through Washington. May I continue to act on these lines?

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , October 9, 1914.

284. Your 800. Department’s circular instruction of the 5th contemplated that you might transmit by any route that in your discretion would seem most feasible, all communications relating to the subjects of a belligerent with whose affairs you are charged. This means that you may communicate in any manner which may seem best to you inquiries and communications involving merely the details of carrying out relief work and repatriation of belligerent subjects and other routine work connected therewith.

Referring to your request for instructions, you may continue to send weekly to Berlin and Vienna by messenger or otherwise any miscellaneous or comparatively unimportant documents which may relate to prisoners or subjects of a belligerent.

Lansing

The Minister in Persia (Caldwell) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1162

[Document 1176]

The Minister in Persia (Caldwell) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Teheran, undated.
[Received November 3, 1914, 1 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Russian officers have seized Turkish and Austrian Consuls and archives at Tabriz and sent them to Russia. Germans are threatened and Consul was feloniously assaulted. Paddock has extended temporary refuge and protection to panic-stricken German Consul and subjects. Russians will arrest, expel, and perhaps deport all Germans. Wire instructions.

Caldwell

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Persia (Caldwell)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , November 5, 1914, 10 p.m.

Your undated. The Legation should maintain the attitude of strictest neutrality in conformity with the proclamation issued by the President.

You will instruct the Consul at Tabriz that he should use the greatest care and discretion in extending protection to nationals other than American citizens.

Up to the present time the United States Government has not been requested to take charge of German or Austrian interests in Persia.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/69

[Document 1177]

The Ambassador in Germany ( Gerard ) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 9, 1914.
[Received November 10, 12 noon.]

[Telegram]

785. As negotiations regarding English and German prisoners involving questions of exchange, treatment, etc., have been seriously complicated by delays in transmission of telegrams, I would respectfully inquire whether I may not communicate such telegrams directly to London with request to repeat them to Department, instead of telegraphing Department for repetition to London. I would, however, submit doubtful questions to Department first.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , November 12, 1914.

624. Your 785. Department desires you to continue to act under circular instructions October 5.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 125.0067/17

[Document 1178]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 12, 1914, 3 p.m. 1
[Received November 17, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

21. Turkish authorities insist on searching all consulates and everything therein except archives. They desire our consular representatives to be present. I shall instruct consular representatives not to attend or be represented and shall inform authorities that they search at their own responsibility, and if they search I shall protest unless I receive contrary orders before Monday, until which day they promised to delay search.

American Ambassador

1 According to correction, dated November 18, 1914, this date should have been November 11, 7 p.m.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1226

[Document 1179]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 12, 1914.
[Received November 17, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

18. Turkish authorities are absolutely wild because they cannot find a wireless apparatus that is being used clandestinely to give information to Russia whenever any of Turkish war vessels enter Black Sea. Yesterday they, without even notifying me, entered the British and French Embassies and Consulates and Servian Legation, ostensibly to search for wireless apparatus. I immediately strongly protested orally to Minister of the Interior who apologized [for the] matter and stated the police had acted under orders from military authorities without his knowledge. He immediately sent for chief of police and made him apologize in his presence. I then protested to Minister of War who admitted giving order to find wireless but disclaimed all blame for entering diplomatic premises as he had not given any detailed directions, putting all blame on police. He said that he would call at Embassy to formally apologize. Police authorities sealed Russian Embassy. To avoid their attempting similar action with those in my charge I sealed them myself for one week only, because at the end thereof they should either have discovered the offender or be convinced that the embassies and consulates have not been used as stations. Unfortunately they found some firearms in British Consulate and only yesterday I was informed, when police wanted a locked room opened, that it contained 80 rifles, 90 pistols, 9,000 rounds of ammunition in [British Embassy]. I have informed chief of police of above fact without [stating quantity] and he has agreed that I should adjust matter with Minister of War. I fear that this [quantity] may create very bad impression. Perhaps I had better keep Embassy sealed [indefinitely. Kindly advise me.] Police seized two horses and three carriages from the British Embassy and six horses from the French Embassy. I have entered most emphatic protest against this. Italian Ambassador and I have prepared written protests similar in principle which we shall deliver to Grand Vizier to-day.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 125.0067/17

[Document 1180]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 17, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

37. Your 21, November 12, 3 p.m., received to-day. You may strongly protest against the Turkish authorities searching all consulates in charge of American representatives and everything therein except archives. You may, if not too late, instruct American consular representatives to be present unofficially in order that they may later give testimony as to the acts of the Turkish authorities.

Bryan

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72/1226

[Document 1181]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 21, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your 18. Department approves your action,. Please keep Department fully informed as to situation.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 704.4167/18

[Document 1182]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 3, 1914.
[Received December 4, 10:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

108. American Consul Aleppo telegraphs that local officials, stating that they acted upon instructions from Constantinople, notwithstanding Consul’s refusal, broke American consular seal on door of room containing archives of British and French Consulates and took them away. As day after day Ottoman officials are becoming bolder, do you approve that I demand immediate return of archives, punishment of guilty officials, apologies from the Sublime Porte and assurances that such violations will not be repeated?

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , December 5, 1914, 6 p.m.

110. Your 108, 3d. You should request immediate return of archives and explanation from the Sublime Porte and assurances that such violations of the seal of the United States will not be repeated.

In presenting this urgent request use discretion, remembering that we use only moral persuasion in our efforts to give protection to other nationals and are not under obligation to use force. Our ability to serve other nations depends upon our maintenance of cordial relations with the Ottoman Government.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1308

[Document 1183]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 13, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received December 15, 8:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

155. Italian Embassy informed that Ottoman authorities at Hodeida after arresting French Consul attempted November 11 to arrest British Vice Consul who took refuge in Italian Consulate. Thereupon Ottoman military forces [?] surrounded Italian Consulate, police forced Consulate, discharged revolvers, wounded kavass, refused Italian Consul time to obtain instructions from his Government. British Vice Consul surrendered. The Governor General Hodeida informed Italian Consul that he would no longer be recognized as such, accused him of firing at Ottoman troops, which the Consul emphatically denies. Italian Consul prevented from leaving his house and deprived of all communication until December 3 when Italian war vessel Guiliana arrived, prevented his trial fixed for that day and took him on board. Instructed by its Government Italian Embassy upon extraterritoriality of the Consulate General demanded public reparation in such shape as it will determine, and that Italian Consul return to his post unmolested; that wounded kavass receive indemnity; that British Vice Consul be released and permitted to go to Aden; that postal and telegraphic communications between Consul and Italian Government be assured.

Italian Ambassador requests my cooperating in securing release of British Vice Consul.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , December 16, 1914.

Your 155, 13th, 11 p.m. Department approves your cooperation with Italian Ambassador for release of British Vice Consul Hodeida.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Persia (Caldwell) File No. 704.6291/6

[Document 1184]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Persia (Caldwell)

Department of State,
Washington, December 19, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department’s November 5.1 German Ambassador here states you have assumed protection Germans in Persia owing to urgency. Department approves action and at request of Ambassador desires you also when necessary take charge German interests in parts of Persia occupied by Russian forces.

Bryan

1  Ante, p. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 702.4167/15

[Document 1185]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 15, 1914, 9 p.m.
[Received December 21, 4:35 p.m.]

[Telegram]

My 155. Italian Ambassador and I called together at the Sublime Porte to-day; thereupon Italian Ambassador was handed telegram, as now there is no telegraphic communication with Hodeida, to Governor of Hodeida who was therein directed to immediately arrange return of English Vice Consul from the interior. Italian Ambassador had also received telegram directing Governor Hodeida to permit Italian Consul to reinstate him at Hodeida Consulate. Apparently Sublime Porte will give satisfaction to Italy.

Your 1351 communicated to Grand Vizier who thereafter informed me that French consuls are on their way to Constantinople and will be permitted to leave for France. Grand Vizier expects after their departure Prince Omar will be released.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

Activities of the United States in regard to prisoners of war and interned civiliansActivities of the United States in regard to prisoners of war and interned civilians

[This topic really constitutes one aspect of the representation of belligerent governments in enemy countries (see above headnote on that subject1 ), and is not fully covered because the correspondence consists mainly of communications from one belligerent government to another, transmitted by the American Government without comment or other action on its part.]

1  Ante, p. 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 1152].

[1186] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, September 10, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received September 11, 7:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72114/3

[1187] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, undated. [Received September 17, 1914, 1:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72114/7

[1188] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 26, 1914.

File No. 763.72114/62

[1189] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 2, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received November 3, 10:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72115/198

[1190] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 3, 1914. [Received November 4, 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72114/59

[1191] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 16, 1914. [Received November 17, 8:40 a.m.]

File No. 763.72114/77

[1192] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 19, 1914. [Received December 21, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72114/122

[1193] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1914.

File No. 763.72114/432

[1194] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, January 2, 1915. [Received 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72114/151

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/3

[Document 1186]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, September 10, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received September 11, 7:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

11. Condition of Austrian’s and Germans arrested as prisoners of war and sent to interior very bad. According to advices from all sources, Government has done almost nothing to house and feed them properly, resulting in suffering and sickness. If something is not done soon before cold weather, conditions will become fearful. Am protesting daily at Foreign Office concerning this matter; improvement and investigation promised but conditions unchanged. As Russia desires greatly to securer favorable opinion of America, word to Russian Ambassador this matter might have good effect.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , September 16, 1914.

11. Your August 26, 6 p.m.,1 and No. 11, September 10, 5 p.m. As no instructions seem to have been sent to you, please explain as to protests and discontinue same until otherwise instructed.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/7

[Document 1187]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, undated.
[Received September 17, 1914, 1:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

22. Department’s September 16, 6 p.m. My protests have consisted in urging the Foreign Office verbally to take steps to improve conditions of prisoners sent to interior and who are without food or shelter. In accordance with Department’s wishes shall take no further steps in their behalf without exact instructions.

Wilson

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72114/62

[Document 1188]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 26, 1914.

[Telegram]

498. Department has received copy of your letter to Page, London, dated October 2,1 and Anderson’s letter to you, dated October 14,1 regarding condition of prisoners of war. Anderson says there is confusion and misunderstanding between Embassies London and Berlin with regard to repatriation, relief funds and treatment of prisoners, which seems to be confirmed by your 595 and 603 of. October 23.1 Anderson suggests advisability of his going to Berlin with a view to reporting to Berlin the true condition of German prisoners in England and to visit detention camps in Germany in order to report to the British authorities the condition of British prisoners in Germany.

Department would not desire to authorize such a step without the approval of the German Government. Please discuss the matter informally with the authorities and cable your views.

Lansing

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/198

[Document 1189]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 2, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received November 3, 10:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

689. Department’s 532, 20th.1 Schwarzschild has been working as volunteer here. Is naturalized American but served one year in German army. He went to London to close up some German branches, discharge employees, etc. For that reason I purposely gave him no credentials and I am sure he is careful to act only so far as English laws will permit. He also took to London [?] an English lady named Wild expelled from Germany by the police and believed by me to be insane. Of course I did not send him to inspect camps but if he is permitted to look at camps it may do good, as he knows many people in Berlin and there is a fixed belief here that German prisoners are barbarously treated in England. Have received Anderson’s report on German prison camps in England. This covers only three camps. I expressly asked for report on Newcastle and others. German Government perfectly willing (see your 498, 26th) to have Anderson from American Embassy, London, inspect camps here but desires that some one from this Embassy shall inspect camps in England and also in Russia and France.

Gerard

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/59

[Document 1190]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 3, 1914.
[Received November 4, 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

718. Suggest that there should be an international agreement if possible as to just what each nation should give its prisoners of war, nature of food and clothing; for instance. British claim they give overcoats, suits, underclothes, socks, shoes, etc:, and three blankets to all prisoners, civil and military, while here I have had to buy clothes etc., for English prisoners and they have only two blankets, and our Ambassador, Paris, telegraphs Germans in French camps badly in need of clothes. Many Russians here, I am told by Spanish Ambassador, have no blankets. Authorities here have refused to allow me to give seven marks a week to civil prisoners to allow them to get extra food.

Gerard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , November 5, 1914.

572. Your 718. Department will be glad to submit any proposals that the German Government may care to make to other belligerents, looking to an arrangement as to what should be given prisoners of war in nature of food and clothing. Department can do nothing unless requested by the belligerents.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/77

[Document 1191]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 16, 1914.
[Received November 17, 8:40 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Bitterness has developed between the British Government and the German Government about treatment of prisoners of war and interned non-belligerents. Anderson, just returned from Berlin, reports that German Government wishes me and in fact expects me personally to visit the prisons and detention camps in England and report upon them, and expend from the German Government for clothing and other comforts for these war prisoners and interned German subjects. Anderson visited several interned camps and carried report to Berlin. This only partially satisfied German Government, which insists on my personal examination and report.

I am, of course, ready to undertake such work if you think it wise to authorize me to do so, and if British Government consent. I shall not approach British Government till I receive your instructions. Your general instructions for the conduct of other embassies do not cover this point. British Government will assent, I am sure, in case German Government agree to reciprocal actions by Gerard.

British Government a little while ago gave me $15,000 to send to aid British prisoners in Germany. Now German Government has put in my hands $15,000 for reciprocal use.

I suggest for your consideration the possibility of instructing me to undertake this work as an act of grace not as a duty, not incurring responsibility for the condition of prisoners nor any other responsibility whatever, except an accurate accounting of expenditures. There are now about 20,000 Germans interned and prisoners in Great Britain.

Anderson reports that German Government have feeling that American Embassies here and in Berlin are pro-British. They feel that any people who are not for them are against them. German Government is greatly disappointed that American public opinion is not pro-German. I need not say that this Embassy has acted with as rigid neutrality as the Government at Washington itself, and has served the German interests within your instructions with the utmost zeal and care.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)1

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , November 20, 1914.

577. In view of the reports which have already been made by the several American representatives it would seem inadvisable to go further into the matter at this time. Should, however, the German Government request that an investigation of some designated prison or detention camp be made by an expert American representative other than yourself, it should only be done by and with the consent and approval of the British Government.

It appears to the Department that such investigations and reports are futile and might afford opportunity to one belligerent or another to charge the American Government with partiality or prejudice in favor of some one belligerent. The Department, therefore, deems it inadvisable to make at present a fresh general investigation or report as to conditions in the prisons and detention camps in England. Department is to-day sending similar instructions to Berlin and Paris.

You may, of course, expend moneys from funds furnished by the German and Austrian Governments for clothing and other comforts for the war prisoners and the detained subjects of those countries and at all times lend your personal assistance and the assistance of the entire Embassy staff in any way and manner that may tend to the amelioration of the discomforts of those interned.

Lansing

1 The second paragraph, with necessary explanation and changes, to the Ambassadors in Germany and France.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/122

[Document 1192]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 19, 1914.
[Received December 21, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1148. In your cable to me of October 27, 498, you suggest the advisability Chandler Anderson going to Germany to visit detention camps in order to report the condition of British prisoners in Germany to British Government. I answered November 2, 689, to Department, that German Government was willing that Anderson should come but wished that delegate from this Embassy should visit English and other camps where Germans were detained. Anderson came and was given every facility but when I attempted to name some one from this Embassy to inspect the detention camps in England I am met by Department’s orders of no further inspection. Anderson and Hale have sent in a report saying inspection was made some camps in England but they were not named by me or the German Government. The whole object of allowing Anderson to come into my jurisdiction was to allow the British to see that prisoners were well treated in Germany but he came on condition that some one named by me from here should visit the camps in England. I most respectfully urge that if it was necessary for Anderson to come here to convince the British, it is just as necessary that some one from here should go to England to convince the Germans; and besides, Anderson having been admitted under an understanding, the other side of the understanding should be carried out. The German Government feels, to put it mildly, that the issue of the order under these circumstances was not quite fair. This I have been given verbally to understand, and in addition I have received a note which refers to the fact that it is reported from Hanover that the United States has forbidden its representative to visit or inspect detention camps, continuing:

Such an order would have the result that the interests of German prisoners of war or detained Germans in belligerent countries would not be sufficiently looked after. The Foreign Office therefore begs the American Embassy to inform it whether such an order really has been issued and if such is the case, on what grounds.

I must also respectfully urge that if we are to take charge of British interests here, it is part of such duty to see that the prisoners, civil and war, are properly cared for. The neutrality of the United States is at present so questioned here and the reports of the bad conditions in the camps in England so widespread, that I hope you will ask the British Government to allow me to name some one to visit the camps in England. Probably when the order was issued you did not know that some one named by me had not made the return inspection in England. I assure you this matter is of the utmost importance.

Gerard

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , December 29, 1914.

851. Ambassador Berlin informs Department that permission for Anderson to visit detention camps in Germany was given on understanding that representative from Embassy, Berlin, should visit English camps where Germans were detained. Gerard urges necessity of reciprocal investigation now. In view of Anderson’s visit and Germany’s desire for reciprocal treatment, the Department thinks you should make this request of the British Government. This telegram sent after consultation with Anderson.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72114/432

[Document 1193]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your 1148, 19th. Circular instruction, November 20, regarding reports on detention camps, issued because Department did not desire its diplomatic officers should be subject to charge of partiality, a probable result if diplomatic officers undertook generally, the responsibility of advising the countries at war regarding conditions of camps where their officers and men were detained.

In view of German Government’s request, the Department will inquire of the British Government whether there is objection to your appointment of some one to investigate German detention camps in England.

Your December 23, 1 p.m.1 With approval German authorities representative of Embassy may visit detention camp at Burg.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72114/151

[Document 1194]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, January 2, 1915.
[Received 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1386. Your 851. For Gerard, Berlin. Sir Edward Grey has just informed me that permission will be given to any impartial person from the American Embassy in Berlin for whom we make application to visit the camps in the United Kingdom where German prisoners are kept.

American Ambassador

Protection of American interests and institutions in TurkeyProtection of American interests and institutions in Turkey

[1195] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 5, 1914, 12 noon. [Received August 7, 11:40 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/165

[1196] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 11, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received August 16, 8:20 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/171

[1197] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 13, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 15, 4:46 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/173

[1198] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 15, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received August 16, 6 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/172

[1199] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 19, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received August 20, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/530

[1200] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914, 8 p.m.

File No. 367.11/185b

[1201] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, August 19, 1914, 9 p.m.

File No. 367.11/186

[1202] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, August 21, 1914, 9 a.m. [Received August 22, 10 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/571

[1203] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, August 22, 1914. [Received 12:30 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/186

[1204] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, St. Petersburg, August 24, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received August 25, 11:30 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/193

[1205] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, August 25, 1914.

File No. 367.11/186

[1206] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, August 26, 1914. [Received 7:20 p.m.]

File No. 367.11/194

[1207] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1914.

File No. 367.116/170a

[1208] The Vice Consul at Smyrna (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Smyrna, August 10, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 867.00/643

[1209] The Consul General at Beirut (Hollis) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Beirut, August 15 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 867.00/644

[1210] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 5, 1914. [Received September 6, 12:45 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/795

[1211] The Consul at Mersina (Nathan) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Mersina, August 15, 1914. [Received September 14.]

File No. 867.00/652

[1212] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 14, 1914. [Received September 15, 4 p.m.]

File No. 867.00/662

[1213] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, September 20, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received September 21, 1:30 a.m.]

File No. 711.673/42

[1214] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 1, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received October 2, 8:15 a.m.]

File No. 711.673/45

[1215] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, October 16, 1914, 2 p.m. [Received 5:40 p.m.]

File No. 711.673/50

[1216] The Acting Secretary of State to the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (Barton)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 367.116/219

[1217] The Secretary of State to G. T. W. Patrick

Department of State, Washington, November 9, 1914.

File No. 367.116/228

[1218] The Consul General at Beirut (Hollis) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Beirut, October 8, 1914. [Received November 9.]

File No. 867.00/705

[1219] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 18, 1914, 1 p.m.

File No. 763.72/1255a

[1220] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 20, 1914, 11 a.m.

File No. 763.72/1234a

[1221] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 17, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received November 21, 3 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1239

[1222] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 24, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1259

[1223] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 21, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received November 25, 11:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/126

[1224] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 22, 1914, 9 p.m. [Received November 26, 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1263

[1225] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, November 30, 1914.

File No. 763.72/1239

[1226] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, December 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

File No. 867.00/722

[1227] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 5, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received December 11, 430 p. m]

File No. 367.116/248

[1228] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 4, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received December 13, 6 p. m]

File No. 763.72/1305

[1229] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 12, 1914, 12 noon. [Received December 15, 8:15 a.m.]

File No. 867.00/723

[1230] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, December 15, 1914.

File No. 367.116/248

[1231] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, December 20, 1914.

File No. 367.116/261a

[1232] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 22, 1914, 9 p.m. [Received December 25, 9:30 a.m.]

File No. 367.116/262

[1233] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople , December 16, 1914 . [Received January 13, 1915.]

File No. 763.72/1384

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/165

[Document 1195]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 5, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received August 7, 11:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Consul General at Beirut telegraphs as follows:

In the absence of all European cruisers on the Syrian coast public opinion clamors for the presence of some American vessels to prevent anarchy. Please arrange Secretary of State. Urgent.

Scorpion absolutely necessary here. If Beirut request is granted, I wish to warn you Smyrna and Black Sea similar demand.

Morgenthau

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

[Telegram]

Department of State,
Washington , August 8, 1914, 5 p.m.

Cannot send ships to Beirut, Smyrna, and Black Sea. Scorpion will remain at Constantinople.

W.J.Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/171

[Document 1196]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 11, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received August 16, 8:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Consul Jackson telegraphs to-day that owing to critical situation and financial crisis fears exist for public safety and for the preservation of American lives and interests and also as an act of humanity American ships should be sent to Syrian ports.

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/173

[Document 1197]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 13, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 15, 4:46 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Glazebrook telegraphs Americans at Jaffa request war vessel. Authorities, taking advantage of present lack of concerted action of powers, are disregarding capitulations. They threaten to board foreign ships for the purpose of requisitioning their cargoes. When Italian Embassy appealed to Secretary of the Interior the latter said, “It is a shame to talk of capitulations now.”

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/172

[Document 1198]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 15, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received August 16, 6 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to my cable of this morning,1 Smyrna also has requested presence of war vessels.2

Morgenthau

1 Not printed. See ante, p. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], for the telegram from Ambassador Morgenthau) transmitting pleas for the despatch of warships from the Consul General in Beirut and from President Bliss) of the American College there.

2 Requests for the despatch of warships to Smyrna for the protection of American commercial interests were also addressed to the Department on August 17 by two large companies interested in the importation, respectively, of tobacco and licorice root (File Nos. 367.11/188,189).

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/530

[Document 1199]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 19, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received August 20, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Have received following telegrams from Smyrna and Jerusalem respectively:

Governor General has stated to Greek Metropolitan in case of bombardment or occupation he would burn city and massacre foreigners. Christians and Europeans greatly frightened. Number British families have left. Americans repeatedly calling Consulate for protection. Tension British-Turkish relations contains gravest possibilities. Repeat request for war vessel.

Military authorities seizing supplies of foreigners. Protests unavailing. Violation of domicile continues. Sixteen thousand troops concentrated Nablouse without visible support. Reign of military terrorism. Great distress prevails. American Jewish community beseeches financial aid and food from America. Will you transmit appeal? Urgent.

Have obtained through cooperation of Vice Consul Heizer equivalent of $57,850 in Turkish gold for which I gave my draft on you as owners would not part with it for anything else. This furnishes help for everyone and relieves you from sending gold. I have distributed the same as follows: Scorpion $8,900, for which I shall send their draft on the Secretary of the Navy; $17,800, which amount on your demand will be deposited with you by Frank H. Wiggins, 14 Beacon Street, Boston; Bible Society $4,450, which amount will be deposited with you on your demand by Foulke Bible House, New York; College for Girls $4,000, for which I shall forward check on Boston; Kendall, contractor of the same, the sum of $2,675, as collateral for which he gave me Boston check on Girls College for $5,000, which I am forwarding, and when check paid, I desire to advance him the rest; Robert College $5,000, Which will be repaid to you on demand by their treasurer at 99 John Street, New York; Consul General $1,856.55, for which I am forwarding you his drafts. The rest I am retaining for myself and to help stranded Americans. My New York office will, when requested by you, send you a check for the shortage which may exist when the drafts are presented. As the urgency the situation compelled my acting without authority, I shall personally assume all responsibility. Situation here extremely critical. The Grand Vizier assures me no danger and Governor General’s conduct will be investigated.

Morgenthau

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 367.11/185b

[Document 1200]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914, 8 p.m.

[Telegram]

United States Government is considering sending warships to Turkish waters, but before doing so deems it advisable to sound European powers as to such action.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 367.11/186

[Document 1201]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 19, 1914, 9 p.m.

[Telegram]

American Ambassador at Constantinople in a number of telegrams has urged United States to send war vessels to Turkey for protection of lives and property of Christians. He states Turkish authorities are taking advantage of present conditions to disregard capitulations and it is feared Turkish Government will abrogate capitulations. Reports that when Italian Embassy went to Turkish Secretary of Interior latter replied, “It is a shame to talk of capitulations now.” Ambassador quotes telegram from Consul General at Beirut: “In the absence of all European cruisers on Syrian coast public opinion clamors for presence of some American vessels to prevent anarchy.” He also states that presence of warships have been requested in telegrams from Americans at Smyrna and Jaffa. Turks are threatening to board foreign ships for purpose of requisitioning provisions. Ambassador and American consuls all report anti-Christian propaganda very active throughout Turkey. Under existing conditions United States Government may be compelled to consider it necessary to send one or two American battleships to Turkey for the sole purpose of protecting the lives and property of Christians. You will present these facts to the French Government and ask if they can suggest any other method for the protection of Christians in Turkey. A similar inquiry is being made of all other interested belligerent powers. You will forward this telegram mutatis mutandis to American Ambassadors at London and St. Petersburg.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassador in Germany to be forwarded to the Ambassador in Austria-Hungary (File No. 367.11/315b).

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/571

[Document 1202]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, August 21, 1914, 9 a.m.
[Received August 22, 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Your cipher telegram August 19, 9 [8] p.m. When you inform me of decision to send ships, shall I spread the information? Unrest is constantly increasing due to fears of war with Russia and expected internal trouble. Russians have already placed in our Embassy some of their valuables. British Ambassador greatly agitated about safety of his staff and their families in case war should be declared and British ships force Dardanelles. Have arranged with Robert College that if emergency arises I take possession of it and provide quarters and food for entire American colony and English and French diplomatic families. Russian Ambassador will it that case leave on his stationnaire. Shall have Scorpion anchor in front of college. Have worked out all details of protection with Commander McCauley and military attaché of British Embassy. Am personally not in the least alarmed and feel that I can protect the colony. Making these provisions has already quieted everybody. Am communicating these details so that if shock comes and communications are cut of, you can reassure all inquirers.

Morgenthau

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/186

[Document 1203]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, August 22, 1914.
[Received 12:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Substance of your telegram of August 19, 9 p.m., presented to the Foreign Office. They have refused suggestion your proposals.

Gerard

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/193

[Document 1204]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
St. Petersburg, August 24, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received August 25, 11:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s August 21, 4 p.m.1 Minister for Foreign Affairs says personally he thinks the idea of sending American ships to Turkish waters excellent and the more the better. Before gives a definite official answer wishes to confer with English and French Governments.

Wilson

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 367.11/186

[Document 1205]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, August 25, 1914.

[Telegram]

In order that the Department may be informed, please explain more fully the attitude of the Foreign Office in regard to the Department’s August 19, 9 p.m.

Bryan

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.11/194

[Document 1206]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, August 26, 1914.
[Received 7:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

In reply to the Department’s representations regarding conditions in Turkey, French Government replies as follows:

As the Government of the United States must certainly be aware, the really disquieting situation of the Christians in the Orient is due in large measure to German agitation which tends to provoke an awakening of Mussulman fanaticism. Consequently the despatch of French warships to certain points on the Turkish coast and notably to Smyrna might give rise to serious complications, especially in view of the present war, and might aggravate the lot of the Christian population whose protection the French Government has ever considered a duty. Therefore, the generous initiative of the Federal Government, which seems fully justified by the exceptional circumstances, cannot fail to meet with the most favorable reception on the part of the Government of the Republic.

Herrick

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 367.116/170a

[Document 1207]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1914.

[Telegram]

The North Carolina now at Falmouth has been ordered to start to-morrow for Turkish waters with $150,000 gold relief fund.1 Department has notified Straus, Schiff, and other interested parties to this effect who will probably send additional funds.

Bryan

1 The Tennessee was sent later under similar orders.

The Vice Consul at Smyrna (Morris) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/643

[Document 1208]

The Vice Consul at Smyrna (Morris) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Smyrna, August 10, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith copy of a letter which I have sent to the Embassy at Constantinople, concerning the political situation in Smyrna. I have [etc.]

Leland B. Morris

[Enclosure]

The Vice Consul at Smyrna (Morris) to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

American Consulate General,
Smyrna , August 8, 1914.

Sir: Following upon my telegram of the 4th instant, I have the honor to report upon the local situation brought about by the outbreak of war in Europe.

The immediate effect of the declaration of war by Germany was the stoppage of almost all exportation and the cessation of cash payments by the banks. Many people were caught unawares and to-day people of wealth are unable to obtain enough money for daily living expenses. Fortunately an exception was made by the banks in favor of the consulates and up to the present United States Government drafts are honored without question. From a business viewpoint the outbreak of war at this time means heavy loss to Smyrna. The fruit exportation was just about to commence. This fruit exportation is the principal source of wealth to Smyrna, and its loss will have disastrous consequences.

The closing of business houses has naturally thrown many persons out of employment, particularly Turks of the hamal class, who, if left in idleness, might become a serious problem for those charged with the peace and quiet of the city. This would be particularly the case if a stringency in the staple articles of food came about, a state of affairs which seems far from improbable, However, the one good feature of the Turkish mobilization is that it is absorbing a large percentage of this class. Otherwise the order for a general call to arms has had a most deplorable effect. Leaving aside the material losses, caused by the requisitioning of horses, carts, and other military requisites and the preemption by the army of all public service utilities, the moral effect upon the population has been of the worst. This effect is particularly pronounced amongst the foreigners, and especially the large English colony. No one will believe for an instant that this mobilization is not intended to end in an open declaration in favor of Germany and Austria. The fact that the German officers of the mission did not sail with the German reservists, strengthens this belief. The entire, English colony is in a state of anxiety and fear, which has a More or less sympathetic reaction upon the members of the American colony. I feel that this state of mind is absolutely unjustified at present. There is no hostility displayed towards any foreigners to-day; the attitude of to-morrow will depend upon events. Every day, almost every hour, the most alarming rumors spring from nowhere and rush from Mouth to mouth, and are discussed with bated breath until a new rumor claims attention. These rumors fabricated by malicious minds naturally are keeping the people in a state bordering on hysteria. Many people have left and more would go but for the lack of steamers. The few traveling Americans caught here at the beginning of this week have all managed to get boats for southern European ports judging the situation as best I can, I am convinced that so long as Turkey remains neutral, the foreign population has nothing to fear here. But, as I tried to make clear in my telegram of the 4th instant, if Turkey enters the conflict on the side of Germany, the situation will suddenly contain elements of the gravest danger to the entire Christian population. Therefore, I respectfully reiterate my opinion, as expressed in my telegram of the 4th instant, concerning the advisability of having a warship here. I am pleased to learn that the Embassy has referred my request to the Department, which I hope will see its way clear to act without delay, Practically every member of the American colony has asked that a warship be sent. I, in conjunction with the British Vice Consul, have used my best efforts to convince the Anglo-American colony that their present alarms are unjustified, not however with much success. There is a tendency on the part of the lower-class natives to disregard the various little acts of respectful consideration which they usually show towards the chelibi, or foreign employer. The officials also are showing a desire to disregard the privileges enjoyed by the franks. Since last Sunday; there have been several flagrant breaches of capitulatory rights, which surely would not have occurred before the out-break of this awful conflagration. Even though the intervention of the consulates concerned was effective it is clear that the prestige of Europe has been sadly diminished in the eyes of the Ottomans. The mobilization and requisitioning of all sorts of supplies continues. The Governor General yesterday attempted to seize all the coal of the Archipelago American Steamship Company in consequence of the order prohibiting the exportation of oil, petroleum, and coal from the country, Without this coal the company’s steamers would have been left idle in port. The Consulate managed to secure its release though with some difficulty. There have been many cases of the authorities entering upon foreign property and seizing horses, carriages, and automobiles by force and giving no receipt for them. The English residents have suffered most from this manner of action no cases of Americans so far. In general the officials show a scant lack of consideration towards foreigners. So far the price of foodstuffs has not gone up, but flour will do so soon, and will probably be followed by other staples.

Postal communication is most irregular and uncertain with Constantinople, and has quite ceased with Europe. I will keep the Embassy informed telegraphically and by despatches as the situation develops here.

I have [etc.]

Leland B. Morris

The Consul General at Beirut (Hollis) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/644

[Document 1209]

The Consul General at Beirut (Hollis) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Beirut, August 15 1914.
[Received September 4.]

No. 774]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the week drawing to a close here has been one of kaleidoscopic changes in the political situation: During the previous week the attitude of the vali towards all foreigners had been exceedingly offensive; and it culminated in the beginning of the week with his threatening to hang the French Consul General because the latter protested against the unlawful seizure by the vali of merchandise belonging to French protégés; but during the latter part of this week his manner has undergone a change and he even has sent to me and politely notified me that he would like-to commandeer certain benzine belonging to an American corporation. In the matter of commandeering, practically all of the Consular Corps here are standing firmly upon the provisions of the note verbale identique of February 22, 1913, by the embassies to the Sublime Porte, which we now construe to cover all merchandise, as well as horses, and a copy of which is annexed to this despatch.1

It appears that the Turks have also suddenly changed their plans. Where two weeks ago the watchword was “On to Batum,” it is now “On to Egypt.” From what I have been able to learn, it appears that the troops and recruits which have been sent north to the Aleppo district will not be sent further north, but that the intention is to double quickly back, along the line of the Hedjaz Railway, and make a sudden dash for Egypt.

Already all of the railway lines here have been taken over by the military administration.

A significant requisition for 100,000 empty jute grain bags has been made by the vali, and the town and district is being scoured to discover and commandeer that quantity of empty sacks. These sticks it is stated, are to be filled with sand and thrown into the Suez Canal to block the same and form a causeway across.

It appears that the Egyptian proclamation of belligerency against. Germany has greatly provoked the Turks, as it is tantamount to a declaration of independence altogether from any vestige of Turkish suzerainty, and to the Turks the present moment seems opportune for a movement to secure their supremacy over Egypt.

To save themselves, however, as much as possible from any reprisals from the Ententists which are sure to come if they persist in carrying out their present plans, the Turks propose to evacuate all of their large coast towns and retire to the interior, quite indifferent to what may happen to the said towns.

It is reported in town that the archives of the local government are being taken into the interior, and reports come to me from various sources that the kaimakams of other coast towns have also received orders to send all of their archives into the interior.

If the Turks should carry out their avowed intention of evacuating Beirut under certain contingencies, a state of anarchy would surely reign here. Already many of the inhabitants are in a state bordering on panic, and the whole atmosphere is one of distrust and fear. Nobody knows whom to trust, every man seems to be afraid of his neighbor, and the Moslems feel as if they were between the devil and the deep sea; as, if they flee into the mountains, the Maronites will surely make it warm for them, while, if they remain in town, they fear that they will be made the scapegoats and will be made to pay and to suffer for any and all misdeeds which the disorderly elements may perpetrate here.

If this present tension continues, the arrival of any British or French men-of-war here might be construed as a hostile demonstration and cause a panic.

The only thing which can save the situation and preserve order and prevent anarchy is the prompt arrival of some American then of-war. With this end in view I telegraphed twice to the Embassy yesterday. My first telegram voiced the demand from the Consular Corps here for the presence of some of our vessels, while my second telegram forwarded a direct appeal to your honorable self from your good friend Dr. Howard Bliss, president of the American college here. Cipher telegrams can only be sent to the Embassy now as the telegraph authorities refuse to accept cipher telegrams for abroad. In the absence of any definite information concerning the American Government’s intention, a feeling of insecurity combined with nervous expectancy prevails, and not only would some definite news regarding the movement of American men-of-war be gratefully received by practically all classes of the population here, but the mere receipt of such authoritative information concerning the approximate arrival here of some American men-of-war would have a Wonderfully tranquilizing effect here.

As I reported in my telegrams of yesterday to the Embassy, all Americans are at present safe here; but one can never tell what will happen from one day to the next, and we ought to be fully and promptly prepared for all eventualities.

I have [etc.]

W. Stanley Hollis

1 Printed in Foreign Relations, 1913, p. 1342.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/795

[Document 1210]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 5, 1914.
[Received September 6, 12:45 a.m.]

[Telegram]

601: Your cables August 19 and 22.1 Sir E. Grey informs me that the reports he has received from Constantinople r and the British consuls in the Ottoman Empire are substantially identical with those which our Ambassador at Constantinople has furnished you. Sir Edward says he has good reason to fear that the spirit of unrest excited in Turkey by the present war, and fomented by outside influences may lead to anti-Christian risings and excesses. In view of this danger the British Ambassador at Constantinople has been instructed to state to Mr. Morgenthau that the British Government would welcome the presence of American warships on the coast of Asia Minor. Sir Edward asks me to repeat this statement to you.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Consul at Mersina (Nathan) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/652

[Document 1211]

The Consul at Mersina (Nathan) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Mersina, August 15, 1914.
[Received September 14.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that as a result of the European wars the local situation continues to be very distressing from a political and economic standpoint. About 15,000 troops have already been mobilized in this province but there appears to be a likelihood that no more calls will be made for the present, as an order was received not to take anyone who has not had previous military training. Requisitions of all kinds of goods that may be-needed for military purposes are being made. Christian merchants been the worst sufferers in regard to requisitions and the military exemption tax has been taken from them in some cases unnecessarily.

Foreign subjects liable to military duty in their respective countries have been departing in large numbers. Most of these were engaged in the construction of the Baghdad railroad, all work on which has now been suspended.

All banks continue to abstain from all business and even refuse to pay deposits. The scarcity of money is everywhere felt and all business of all kinds has practically ceased. The wheat crop is for the most part still in the fields and the lack of labor and the inability to pay laborers make all efforts to complete the harvest vain. The cotton crop which promised to be the largest in the history of the province of Adana will doubtless go to waste for the most part. The requisition of about 4,000 horses adds to the difficulties.

American citizens who are engaged in missionary work in this district are nearly all in a small mountain village near Mersina for the summer. I duly communicated to them the Department’s instruction to advise all Americans not to go to remote places but they decided to remain where they are for the present. The Governor of Mersina has assured me that they are in no danger but, if I should find conditions otherwise, I shall peremptorily order them to return. I have also succeeded in obtaining temporary exemption from requisition for the horses of the missionaries.

As all Americans who are entitled to registration, of whom the consulate has any knowledge, are already registered and have pass ports, I believe no further formalities are necessary in their case.

Thus far no American citizens in need of money who have been unable to procure same from other sources have come to the Consulate. I have however arranged with the director of a local bank to permit of the drawing of drafts on the Department for small sums in case same should be needed by some American citizen whose, relatives deposit same with the Department.

With the exception of the horse of an American citizen of Ottoman origin named Aram H. Tellalian and concerning the true ownership of which I am not convinced, no important requisitions of Americans property have yet been made. The authorities however intend either to requisition large quantities of American petroleum belonging to the Standard Oil Company and the Vacuum Oil Company or to control the prices at which it can be sold. I am acting under instructions from the Embassy concerning these matters, and the Embassy is being continually informed concerning the development of the local situation.

Should the Department decide to request of the Navy Department the sending of American warships to these waters I respectfully urge that a visit be made to this port.

I have [etc.]

Edward I. Nathan

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/662

[Document 1212]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 14, 1914.
[Received September 15, 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

148. German Foreign Office says that German Ambassador Turkey now thinks it would be a good thing if neutral warship should be sent to protect foreigners Turkish coast.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.673/42

[Document 1213]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, September 20, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received September 21, 1:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

I presented protest against abrogation1 to Grand Vizier. He and also Minister of War, who was at Vizier’s residence, assured me separately and voluntarily that the Ottoman Government has no intention of interfering with our schools and missionaries or curtailing their rights and privileges. Both were very solicitous of retaining the friendship of the United States. I stated that notwithstanding their promises the United States Government would have to stand on its rights. None of the other Ambassadors have taken any further steps since filing their protest.

Cruiser Breslau with two torpedo boats went into Black Sea this morning. German Ambassador informed me that they were sent there merely to demonstrate to Russia and Roumania that Turkey controls the Black Sea, and that there is no intention of attacking Russia. He also said that if Breslau is not molested the Turkish Government intends parading some other warships in the Black Sea within a few days. German Ambassador also told me that if Roumania attacked Austria, Turkey and Bulgaria would immediately move against Roumania. Russian. Ambassador yesterday sent about thirty cases from his Embassy to Odessa.

Morgenthau

1 Abrogation of the capitulations. For the instruction, September 16, to make this protest, see Foreign Relations, 1914, p. 1093.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.673/45

[Document 1214]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 1, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received October 2, 8:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

New law intending to abrogate capitulations went into effect today. All foreign post offices closed, custom duty increased without any incident here. We have received telegram from Aleppo stating that officials there threatened to arrest and imprison American citizen Brewster for offense committed in April. Minister of Justice to whom I appealed promised to prevent the reopening of the case.

This afternoon I took Minister of War to Robert College and arranged special class for his brother, two sons, Sheik ul Islam, and son of prefect of Constantinople, who are all below admission age. I think this is very significant and will greatly help our educational institutions. It is very remarkable that the man most feared should devote part of first day of Turkey’s freedom from capitulations arranging for his brother’s education in American College. I thought you might desire publishing this to quiet Americans interested in Turkey. Smyrna people are again requesting war vessel. They are justified in feeling somewhat alarmed as Turkish officials continue making threats in case of foreign invasion, yet I do not believe it advisable to have war vessel go there now contrary to the request of the Sublime Porte. North Carolina will pass there within ten days and can anchor outside of harbor and captain visit Smyrna by tugboat if circumstances demand it. Greater recognition and security of our institutions can be obtained by my methods than by defying Turkish Government as Smyrna committee [desire].

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 711.673/50

[Document 1215]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, October 16, 1914, 2 p.m.
[Received 5:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Although Turkish Government abrogated capitulations October 1 it is only now that it is arranging how foreigners are to be treated under the changed conditions. Minister of the Interior states that he has given instructions that no foreigners be arrested until the matter as been submitted to Minister of Justice and him. The Sublime Porte is also preparing regulations which are to govern the foreign religious, charitable, and educational institutions.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (Barton) File No. 367.116/219

[Document 1216]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (Barton)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

Sir: The Department is in receipt of your letter of October 241 quoting from several communications received by you from missionaries of the American Board in Smyrna with regard to conditions there and what they state to be the hostile attitude of the local authorities and the native population toward all classes of foreigners in that locality. You speak of the anxiety of the American colony in Smyrna and state that you feel sure that this Department will take “every necessary, wise precaution” for the protection of American life and property in Turkey at the present time.

In reply you are informed that the United States ships North Carolina and Tennessee are both in Turkish waters at the present time and will remain there for the time being. You are also advised that the Department has received encouraging advices from the American Ambassador at Constantinople informing the Department that the Secretary of the Embassy, who went to Smyrna recently to make a personal investigation, reports that he found conditions there much improved.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to G. T. W. Patrick File No. 367.116/228

[Document 1217]

The Secretary of State to G. T. W. Patrick

Department of State,
Washington, November 9, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your November 6.1 Personal telegram to James L. Barton, of Boston, dated November 7 and transmitted by American Ambassador at Constantinople reads as follows:

American Ambassador with hearty cooperation of Turkish officials has situation completely in hand. Missionaries and their work fully safeguarded. Everything proceeding as though normal conditions prevailed. You may safely reassure all friends.

Peet
W. J. Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Consul General at Beirut (Hollis) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/705

[Document 1218]

The Consul General at Beirut (Hollis) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Beirut, October 8, 1914.
[Received November 9.]

No. 857]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed to the Department three copies of a letter dated the 1st instant which I have received from Rev. James S. Stewart, the leading American missionary at Latakia (a village on the coast about 100 miles north of Beirut), and to report that his account of the state of affairs there was fully borne out by identical letters received by my British, French, Italian, and Russian colleagues from their vice consuls and agents there. Back of Latakia there is a large and savage tribe of totally uncivilized Moslem natives, known as the Nusariehs, who are the direct descendants of the notorious old tribe commonly known as the “Assassins,” and these people would like nothing better than an opportunity to attack and loot Latakia and massacre its non-Moslem inhabitants. I laid this state of affairs before the attention of Captain Oman of the North Carolina, and he decided to call in at Latakia on his way to Mersina and Alexandretta, for which ports he departed at sundown yesterday. All of the Consular Corps here are unanimously of the opinion that this visit will be of great benefit to all of the foreigners residing at Latakia, and to the peaceable and respectable native elements there as well.

I am reporting directly on this matter to the Embassy at Constantinople.

I have [etc.]

W. Stanley Hollis

[Enclosure]

The Reverend James S. Stewart to the Consul General at Beirut

Latakia , October 1, 1914.

Dear Sir: Our city has been in a state of excitement and fear for several days. Many of the better class Moslems have sent their families and their valuables back into the country, giving as a reason that some foreign power was about to sack the city. But within the last two or three days a plot has been unearthed which contemplated the destruction of the entire Christian population of the city by the Moslems. The Consuls have prepared a joint report to be sent to their superiors in Beirut by the Khedevial to-morrow, and I hope that you may have a chance to confer with them and see the report.

The mutaserrif and the commander of the troops were promptly informed of the situation, and it is said have taken steps to preserve order and life. We could scarcely believe the story at first, although we knew that the Christians were becoming terror stricken, but now there seems to be no good reason to doubt that such a diabolical plot was under way. In view of the situation, we would like to urge that the appearance of a foreign warship occasionally would be a very great blessing to us.

The Americans are all now at home in Latakia, and also our British associates. We are out of funds and have very little prospect of getting enough to enable us to open our boarding schools, or even to keep our employees from the poorhouse whither we are drifting ourselves. If you have any advice to give us, or better still if you can cash our checks, we would be very glad if you would write immediately, or send a kavass down to tell treasurer Dana.

The French post office here was closed to-day by order of the French Government, so we shall have to confine ourselves hereafter to family gossip. Late this evening I hear that the Moslems are still sending their families to the villages, and that many Christian families are going to sail by the steamer to-morrow for Larnaca, if the authorities will let them depart, which I very much doubt.

With kind regards, [etc.]

James S. Stewart

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72/1255a

[Document 1219]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1914, 1 p.m.

[Telegram]

39. Informed by Navy Department that launch of Tennessee was shot at by Turkish forts at Smyrna, which port was visited at your request. Please advise immediately as to facts and make proper representations to Ottoman Government asking explanation of an act which appears to be unfriendly.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72/1234a

[Document 1220]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 20, 1914, 11 a.m.

[Telegram]

53. In view of possible misunderstandings you should not request an American warship to visit any port in Turkey until you have obtained consent of the Ottoman Government to the intended visit and local authorities at the port have been advised by their government.

Grave apprehension prevails here as to the safety of Christian missionaries. Represent to the Ottoman Government the seriousness of the situation and urge in most solemn way upon them the necessity of preventing any loss of life or property of missionaries, stating the effect a failure to protect them would have upon the opinion and action of the United States.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1239

[Document 1221]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 17, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received November 21, 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

47. At 7 o’clock yesterday Minister of the Interior telephoned me that commander of Tennessee in his steam launch attempted to visit Smyrna passing through mine zone contrary to Turkish Government’s regulations and that they fired blank shots and that he then threatened, unless permitted to visit Smyrna to-day, he would bombard the fort. Minister of the Interior added that Governor General after incident offered to take the officer overland in automobile. I immediately sent following telegram:

Consul General of the United States at Smyrna for Commander of Tennessee. Have just been informed of a visit attempted by an officer by water to Smyrna and of his prevention and of his menace to bombard fortification. Kindly send me details promptly of the incident. Embassy was officially informed some time ago that the port of Smyrna is closed.

Morgenthau

Minister of War called me up later and told me same story and insisted that Tennessee immediately remove her wireless apparatus and requested that she leave Vourla. I then telegraphed as follows:

Decker, Commanding Tennessee, Vourla. Since I sent you telegram through Horton, Ottoman Minister of War has requested that Tennessee remove her wireless apparatus and leave Vourla in order to avoid any incident. I urgently request you to immediately leave for Chios without visiting Smyrna. Kindly acknowledge the receipt of this telegram.

This morning I received the following telegrams: (1) Your telegram 16th. Urgent. Am aboard cruiser Tennessee at Vourla. Commander Decker desires to give you following details. Commander was coming to Smyrna on his steam launch to make the usual visits. He knew that the port was closed to battleships and to merchant vessels but had no information that there was any objection to the launch of the Tennessee going to Smyrna. On the way three solid shots were fired on the launch. Upon this the officer left in command of the Tennessee telegraphed me to inform the Governor General that a repetition of this line of conduct would cause the Tennessee to advance to a place from which it could bombard the fortifications. No blank signal shots or other warning preceded the solid shots. After cessation of fire the commander communicated with authorities on shore. They informed him that it was forbidden to continue on to Smyrna and the commander thereupon returned to the Tennessee.

Horton

(2) Your telegram requesting me to leave for Chios received and shall go out at half past eight.

Decker

As I deem it absolutely necessary for the protection of all American interests here to avoid creating an incident, I sent second. telegram. Shall I consider matter closed or do you expect investigation made?

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1259

[Document 1222]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 24, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

58. Following letter has just been received from Minister of War:

November 24.

Excellency: Pursuant to our conversation a few days ago regarding the matter of the steam launch of the American cruiser, I asked details of the commander of Smyrna, and ascertained that after two blank shots of warning the sentinel was obliged after two minutes of waiting to fire a shot in a direction altogether different from that of the launch, and this only to prevent the helmsman from continuing his course which would lead exactly on the mines placed at the entrance of the port, and to save his life from a very certain danger. I regret very much that such an obligation presented itself to our sentinel at the port of Smyrna as a result of the indifference of the helmsman of the launch. I hasten to bring the case, such as it is, to the knowledge of [your excellency].

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/126

[Document 1223]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 21, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received November 25, 11:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

63. I sent explanation in No. 47. I had arranged with Minister of War to have ship stationed at Vourla because Americans and other Christians at Smyrna whose lives were endangered could reach her by land, Smyrna port being absolutely closed. It was most unfortunate that Decker should attempt to enter port closed by mines in his launch, that he did not stop after first or second shot, that the officer in charge of cruiser threatened to bombard the forts, the very thing that I have been requested to obtain assurances that English and French Governments would not do. Minister of War stated to me that sentinel at Smyrna and Turkish officers claim that their first shot was blank cartridge; Decker claims otherwise. Turkish officials will undoubtedly be severely punished if it is ascertained that their first shot was not blank. Governor General of Smyrna offered to call on Decker and apologize. I am protesting to Grand Vizier and demanding explanation. Vice Consul General Morris has not added anything to information in Horton’s telegram. Morris does not know how much time intervened between shots. I suggest that Tennessee patrol the Mediterranean, as she can be of little use at Chios to people of Smyrna when Smyrna is bombarded and until then there is no danger. On the 14th I telegraphed to Horton: “Armed sailors should not be landed except in absolute extreme urgency. I strongly recommend all at Smyrna to remain very cool and avoid creating incidents.”

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1263

[Document 1224]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 22, 1914, 9 p.m.
[Received November 26, 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

70. Your No. 53. Secured consent and approval of Minister of War for Tennessee to visit Vourla and also exceptional privilege to remain for wireless while there. Consul General had arranged with Governor General for Captain Decker’s visit. Difficulty arose as explained in my numbers 47 and 63. I believe that had Tennessee bombarded strongest forts evil results to Americans would have followed.

Have repeatedly made strongest possible representations to Ottoman Government that if any missionaries or other Christians were killed they would not only forfeit friendship but probably incur the enmity of the United States. No day passes without my seeing Minister of the Interior or Minister of War or chief of police and very often I see all of them and have frequently succeeded in restraining them from taking extreme steps against English and French and daily secure [modification of?] orders. So far our missionaries have been treated properly and I have the most solemn assurances of the head of the Government of the military and civil branches of Government that nothing will happen to the Americans and they admit that nothing can happen unless directed by them.

Have never deemed it necessary to send you, an account of my unremitting efforts on behalf of the missionaries nor to send an account of the great help I have rendered the. French nuns and monks and English teachers whose expulsion would have been resorted to except for my interference.

Morgenthau

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72/1239

[Document 1225]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, November 30, 1914.

[Telegram]

82. Your 47, 17th, 5 p.m. Department considers that the matter is closed, and therefore deems it advisable that no further investigation is [be] made.

Lansing

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 867.00/722

[Document 1226]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1914, 10 p.m.

[Telegram]

90. Your despatch 120, October 5.1 Department forwarded to the Navy Department copy of circular note verbale from the Sublime Porte and has received a reply from the Navy Department suggesting in view of the limitations placed upon the cruising ground of naval vessels in Turkish waters by the terms of this note, that the American Ambassador be asked his opinion as to whether under the circumstances one of the two United States warships now in Ottoman waters might be returned to the United States. Each vessel was sent to Europe hurriedly, and is in need of docking and repair.

Please report to Department.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.116/248

[Document 1227]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 5, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received December 11, 430 p. m]

[Telegram]

123. Had a long interview with Minister of the Interior and Minister of Public Instruction. They offered to treat American institutions the same as foreign institutions are treated in the United States and to delay enforcement of most of the objectionable instructions sixty days.1 They state that they principally desire to obtain supervisory control of and direct relations with foreign institutions without the guardianship of the Embassy.

American Ambassador

1 The instructions to provincial officials concerning private religious, educational and benevolent institutions, schools and medical institutions, transmitted by the Ambassador with his despatch No 142, December 5, 1914 (File No. 367.116/273), are printed in Foreign Relations, 1916, pp. 972–4.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1305

[Document 1228]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 4, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received December 13, 6 p. m]

[Telegram]

112. Your December 1, 10 p.m. As we are now entering most critical period, recommend leaving both ships here though Minister of the Interior and Minister of War assure me they intend to treat American institutions fairly. Methods employed by Minister of Public Instruction and chief of police [closing] schools, expelling monks, nuns, and teachers have convinced me that there is grave danger of their or provincial authorities misusing power in dealing with American institutions assumed under new written instructions affecting their rights among other things in regard to exemptions, tenure of property, opening of schools, complement, religious services, and providing strict supervision by Ottoman authorities practically in all branches of educational and charitable missionary work. Thus far German and Austrian Ambassadors have not been inclined to cooperate to have instructions modified or delay enforcement till after war, claiming that their few schools are not of sufficient importance to justify their antagonizing or aggravating Turkish officials or jeopardizing their rights under the capitulations. Austrian Ambassador frankly admits that there are no prospects of capitulations being reinstated. Austrian Ambassador said Minister of the Interior told him that they want no foreign schools at all in their country. Have arranged to meet Minister of the Interior and Minister of Public Instruction to follow up my demand that American institutions remain unmolested. Our consular agent at Dardanelles informs me that the Dardanelles are bombarded two or three times weekly. This report is confirmed by a foreigner arrived recently from there who states that some wounded Turkish soldiers have been brought from the forts after each bombardment. Cruisers Goeben and Hamildie [Hamidieh] have been injured and it is stated may be [disabled] for some time Should the English and French be able to force Dardanelles and Russians come through Bosphorus considerable excitement and possibly looting and even worse may result though some believe that the sight of defeat will subdue the Turks. Now frequently confer with Peet, Gates, Paulus, and Ravndal who are cooperating with me in Red Cross and other matters. I have succeeded in keeping all Americans reassured. Am not frightened but desire to explain actual conditions.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 867.00/723

[Document 1229]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 12, 1914, 12 noon.
[Received December 15, 8:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

148. Your 90, December 1, my 112, December 4, also my October 21, 11 a.m.1 Lately I am also apprehensive about Hollis he is very nervous owing to his inability to remedy the dreadful conditions at Beirut. He has incurred displeasure of Djemal, Minister of Marine and Commandant of Damascus, and that worries him. In a telegram to Djemal Hollis expressed astonishment at Djemal’s conduct and Djemal replied: “I never will allow you to write me that you are astonished by any of my decisions and I do not authorize you to meddle with my affairs. You have no official relation whatsoever with me. You are free to write what you desire to your Embassy.” Djemal is headstrong and very determined and next in importance to Enver and Talaat in Cabinet. On December 10 Talaat telegraphed Djemal to liberate all British and French citizens at Beirut unless he had some strong military reasons to the contrary, in which case he should report them to him. Talaat at the same time positively promised as a favor to Americans to leave unmolested at Beirut College three British professors and agent. French agents were yesterday sent to Damascus. Djemal has declined to obey Talaat’s order saying that he does not favor making any exceptions. As to professors, local authorities gave delay which expires this evening and I have Minister of Interior’s promise that he will telegraph again to-day. Minister of the Interior will not quarrel with Djemal for the sake of a few Englishmen. This Government is fast drifting into semianarchy, promises are made one day and recalled the next, there is no fixed policy and the, officials no longer rely on complete protection from Turkish Government. Time has arrived for Americans to consider their departure. I deem it my duty to inform you that some think two cruisers in Turkish waters add to American prestige and strengthen me. Peet thinks our safety lies in depending on Turkish Government, which up to the present time has given us ample protection and when we attempt to supplement Turkish police force we render our position absolutely hazardous, and that where we can unhesitatingly abstain altogether they reserve the right to change their mind and it will require great skill to avoid incidents. I fully agree that no change of consuls be made at present but recommend their not being entrusted with any power over the cruiser, and as I shall not assume the responsibility of sending cruiser to any port but Beirut you might recall one of them after the Tennessee has been to Alexandria and conveyed funds to Jaffa. In my opinion the chances of injuries that may result from misuse of cruisers are far greater than protection they may render. I strongly favor retaining one cruiser at Beirut but should like the captain instructed that he must not permit himself to become involved in any incident. . . and that cruiser is there for refuge and moral influence.

American Ambassador

1 Last named not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 367.116/248

[Document 1230]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, December 15, 1914.

[Telegram]

151. Your 123, December 5, 8 p.m. Please continue to protest to Turkish Government against any change or disregard of the original privileges or capitulations under which American institutions, both religious and educational, were established, pointing out that this Government can not accept any modification of capitulations without previous agreement.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 367.116/261a

[Document 1231]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, December 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

182. The President approves the suggestion that Americans should be advised to leave Turkey wherever you think it would be unsafe for them to remain, but he suggests that to avoid frightening friends in this country and attracting public attention it is better to handle the matter very guardedly and confidentially. Will you please, therefore, send private word to all the inland missions and advise them to retire from Turkey as soon as they can conveniently do so, if they feel that there are grounds for serious apprehension, stating that in giving this advice you have the approval of the President, but ask them to regard the advice as confidential and not to allow public mention to be made of it? If they send word to their friends at home they can simply state that they are intending to leave Turkey, without saying that they are advised to do so. In the case of Americans in Constantinople and Robert College and places near enough to be under the special protection of the Embassy, we assume that they will be constantly under your eye and guidance in such matters.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 367.116/262

[Document 1232]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 22, 1914, 9 p.m.
[Received December 25, 9:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

197. Your 182. Your suggestion therein communicated to inland missions by Peet as letters have to be sent unsealed. I am writing Hollis to communicate it to Hoskins and Bliss and their nearby associates.

In August we communicated with all interior missionaries your suggestion for them to go to seaports.1 Their response was that they will not desert their people in time of stress and danger but desire to share with those for whom they have labored many years whatever new dangers the present situation may create. Peet informs me that all agree that present conditions are no worse than those that existed several times before.

All American missions and institutions are still in active operation and an abandonment by the managers would likely cause panic among the people and would jeopardize properties which would be left without protection and terminate most disastrously the splendid work achieved through ninety years of patient labor.

Offer of thirteen American hospitals for Red Cross purposes was so appreciatingly accepted by Turkish authorities that all missionaries connected therewith are now receiving special protection. Usher Hospital at Van has its full capacity utilized by sick and wounded soldiers. From Sivas Doctor, Clark and Ladies Graffensenger and Sewny have at the request of its military commander with approval of Sivas’ governor, at Government expense, gone to Erzerum Mission Hospital which due to present exigencies has been enlarged by transformation of two mission school buildings into hospitals. Sivas hospitals under direction of [American? ] physician running full capacity for needs of military. Missionaries at Bitlis are confident that they are safe. At Marash sense of security not so strong as elsewhere. The large hospital is used by military. College and other institutions are in full operation and about twelve Americans there prefer to remain. Harput institutions operating normally. No feeling of insecurity prevails. Am sending you these details to indicate conditions prevailing generally so that interested parties can be tranquilized.

American institutions everywhere except at Smyrna and Beirut are absolutely pursuing even tenor of their way and a general sense of security prevails. Most of the missionaries are the only foreign residents at their several locations and have the respect and protection of the local authorities. I have some fear about safety of the Canadian missionaries connected with American institutions. Secured special permission for Mrs. Thomson, English woman connected with Girls College, to leave tomorrow, and at same time exacted renewed assurances from Minister of the Interior that all English connected with American institutions will receive special consideration. Owing to constant vacillation of Turkish authorities, I shall advise all these English people to leave when permission can be secured.

American Ambassador

1 See circular telegram, August 1, ante, p. 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 1145 and Doc. 1146].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1384

[Document 1233]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople , December 16, 1914 .
[Received January 13, 1915.]

No. 152]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith, in duplicate, copy and translation of a note verbale received from the Sublime Porte concerning the Tennessee incident.

As you informed me that the incident is considered closed, I at first thought it unnecessary to send the same to you—hence the delay. Upon reflection I deem it advisable to complete the record and show how slowly the Grand Vizierate works in these matters. Their answer came December 6, while the Minister of War’s explanation was received on November 24.

I have [etc.]

H. Morgenthau

[Enclosure-Translation]

The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Constantinople , December 6, 1914.

The Imperial Ministry of Foreign Affairs begs to acknowledge the receipt of the note verbale which the Embassy of the United States of America has addressed to them on November 21, No. 95, regarding the incident which occurred to the captain of the American cruiser Tennessee while on his way to Smyrna in his launch.

The investigation made with regard to this matter has proved that the competent military authorities had asked him twice, i.e., the commander of the above-mentioned cruiser, to quit the forbidden zone and to remove his wireless telegraphy but he declared, however, that he could not budge unless he received order to this effect from the American Ambassador at Constantinople.

The next morning the launch of the said cruiser was seen, by the fortresses of the seashore, steering on its way to Smyrna and passing thereby the zone of the mines without paying heed to the signals which had been despatched repeatedly from the shore; in order to stop him a projectile was shot by the fortresses. It is useless to add that this way of acting was simply to guard him and the said launch from the danger before it. Besides it is the rule, in all countries, to apply this method of stopping the crew from penetrating into forbidden zones when same persist to continue their way in spite of the warrants given to them.

On the other hand the Imperial Ministry having, by its circular dated November 10, last, informed the Embassy of the United States of America at the same time as all the foreign Missions of the closing of the port of Smyrna Captain Decker was expected to have full knowledge of the matter, especially since he himself has informed the assistant of the captain of the Smyrna port, sent to Ourla, that he had received communication on this subject by the American Government.

By bringing this matter to the knowledge of the Ambassador of the United States of America, the Imperial Ministry is fully aware of the fact that your just and clear appreciation of the matter will agree that the military Ottoman authorities had but done their duty in these circumstances in order to avoid a serious accident.

Special efforts in behalf of British and French nationals in TurkeySpecial efforts in behalf of British and French nationals in Turkey1

1 See despatch from the Ambassador in Turkey, No. 127, November 7, 1914 (ante, p. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]), for a general account of his efforts in assisting the departure of British and French nationals from Turkey during the first days of November and for another statement of the special threats contained in the following telegrams.

[1234] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthan) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 5, 1914, 5 p.m. [Received November 9, 11 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1188

[1235] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 8, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received November 9, 4 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1194

[1236] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 11, 1914. [Received November 15, 2:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1219

[1237] The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 14, 1914. [Received November 16.]

File No. 763.72/1222

[1238] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, November 23, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received November 26, 11:56 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1261

[1239] The American community at Beirut to the President

U. S. S. “Vulcan” (Port Said), December 5, 1914.

File No. 763.72115/299

[1240] The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State

Bordeaux, November 30, 1914, 11 a.m. [Received 12.15 p. m]

File No. 763.72/1269

[1241] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 7, 1914. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1284

[1242] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 8, 1914. [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72115/308

[1243] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

[1244] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 10, 1914, 12 midnight. [Received December 11, 8:15 a.m.]

File No. 763.72/1298

[1245] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 10, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received December 11, 7:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72115/315

[1246] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, December 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

File No. 763.72115/308

[1247] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 12, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received December 13, 11:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72115/323

[1248] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 18, 1914, 11 p.m. [Received December 19, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72115/332

[1249] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 18, 1914, 3 p.m. [Received December 19, 8:30 a.m.]

File No. 763.72115/335

[1250] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 19, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received December 20, 1:30 p.m.]

File No. 763-72/1325

[1251] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, December 22, 1914, 11 p.m.

[1252] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, December 21, 1914, 8 p.m. [Received December 24, 11 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1341

[1253] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, January 5, 1915.

File No. 763.72/1361

[1254] The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Constantinople, January 9, 1915, 5 p.m. [Received January 10, 9 a.m.]

File No. 763.72115/396

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthan) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1188

[Document 1234]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthan) to the Secretary of State2

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 5, 1914, 5 p.m.
[Received November 9, 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Had conference yesterday with German Ambassador, who is being constantly consulted by Turkish officials and controls German-Turkish Army officers, and obtained promise of his hearty cooperation of plan to have Turkish officials grant free departure to English and French as long as Turkish towns are not bombarded. As this morning French and English were again prevented departing by train, I telephoned Minister of War who thereafter called at Embassy and stated that this morning’s trouble was due to misunderstanding of order which required all travelers to register at police station twenty-four hours before leaving. Minister of War assured me that Turkish Government wish to conduct their war with greater consideration to non-combatants than any other nation but if England or Greece attack any more unfortified towns the Turks’ only possible reprisal is to detain all English and French subjects as they cannot send soldiers or ships to these countries. And as to Smyrna which is a fortified town but whose property is largely owned by foreigners, he is willing to reach some special arrangement. It would be most advisable to communicate this to English and French authorities. Americans are absolutely safe and have not been molested in the least. All leading Turkish officials are complying with my demands on behalf of our new protégés. They have so far released four English prisoners at my request.

American Ambassador

2 Repeated to the Ambassador in France November 10, No. 256, with instructions to repeat to the Ambassador in Great Britain.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1194

[Document 1235]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 8, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received November 9, 4 p.m.]

[Telegram]

4. I have just received the following telegram from our Consul General at Beirut:

I have just received an official communication from Damascus beginning as follows:

Consul General of the United States of America, Beirut: I have informed the French and British Consuls of the following: In case of the bombardment of an open town in Syria the subjects of these two countries will be prevented from leaving the town. For each Mussulman killed by the bombardment of an open town we will shoot three British or French subjects. The material damages which will be occasioned by the bombardment will be compensated by the property seized of the said subjects.

I decline all responsibility if the bombardment of an open town provokes a massacre of the Christians. Commander Army Corps, Colonel Jemal .

I visited Girls and Robert Colleges to-day and found everything there perfectly normal.

American Ambassador

1 Transmitted to the British and French Ambassadors November 11.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1219

[Document 1236]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 2

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 11, 1914.
[Received November 15, 2:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

16. Ministers of War and Interior to-day reissued [reiterated] to me and requested that British and French Governments be informed that unless Ottoman Government is promptly assured that unfortified seaports will not be bombarded they may hereafter prevent the departure of British and French consuls and subjects, and will either expel all or detain them at some safe place outside of war zone as hostages and probably for retaliation.

American Ambassador

2 Repeated November 16 to the Ambassador in Great Britain (No. 549) and the Ambassador in France (No. 272).

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1222

[Document 1237]

The British Ambassador (Spring Rice) to the Secretary of State

His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State of the United States, and with reference to the memorandum from the Secretary of State dated the 11th instant has the honour to transmit herewith copy of a telegram which he has just received from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in regard to the threat of a Turkish officer at Damascus of a possible massacre of Christians should an open town in Syria be bombarded.

Sir Cecil Spring Rice would be glad to learn whether it is possible to send instructions in the sense indicated to the United States Consul General.

British Embassy Washington, November 14, 1914.
[Received November 16.]

[Enclosure]

The British Foreign Office to the British Ambassador in the United States (Spring Rice)

His Majesty’s Government are at a loss to understand the threat of the Army Corps Commander at Damascus that he will shoot three British or French subjects for every Mussulman killed by the bombardment of an open town.

The British forces have not so far fired upon any open town and it is not their habit to do so unless they are attacking an armed force of the enemy. Should any massacre of Christians or killing of British subjects in cold blood take place, His Majesty’s Government will hold any individual Turkish or other officer who orders it responsible.

His Majesty’s Government would be grateful if the United States Government would transmit a message in the above sense to the United States Consul General at Beirut for communication to the Turkish authorities.1

1 Repeated to the Ambassador in Turkey November 21, No. 61.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1261

[Document 1238]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 2

American Embassy,
Constantinople, November 23, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received November 26, 11:56 a.m.]

[Telegram]

76. Your telegrams 61, November 21, 7 p.m., and 63, November 21, 5 p.m.3 Saw Minister of War and Minister of the Interior together. They state Acaba and Focei unfortified and protected only by few gendarmes performing police duty [who] should not be considered armed forces. If British Government will give assurances that in the future they will not bombard any unfortified port unless they are attacked by armed Ottoman forces, then the Ottoman Government will allow all British subjects to leave Turkey.

American Ambassador

2 Communicated to the British Embassy and to the Ambassador in Great Britain (No. 645) November 30.

3 Not printed.

The American community at Beirut to the President File No. 763.72115/299

[Document 1239]

The American community at Beirut to the President

U. S. S. “Vulcan” (Port Said), December 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

Large American community in Beirut, in close touch with Turkish situation, unable to communicate confidentially with Ambassador, keenly alive to grave dangers involved in announced Ottoman policy of holding non-combatants as hostages and apprehensive lest the sinister official declaration that such hostages would be held responsible for the consequences of attacks upon coast cities by belligerent powers should lead to terrible results, would appeal to the President to use every possible means to save British and French citizens now committed to American protection from such disastrous consequences. The gravity of the danger is greatly augmented by the recent proposal to remove these hostages to the interior. The Governor General says this order includes women and children. The possible results of this action we regard with horror.

The general danger for all non-Moslems has been greatly aggravated by the official declaration of the holy war, a proclamation which has been read in all mosques and printed in all papers and is already awakening the fierce fanaticism of the populace and may lead to movements which the Ottoman Government is powerless to control. Deeply appreciative of the tireless efforts of our Ambassador and Consul General, we would urge our Government to push to the uttermost these claims of humanity. This statement may be used at President’s discretion with foreign ambassadors.

Howard Bliss
Franklin Hoskins
Bayard Dodge
In behalf American community

The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1269

[Document 1240]

The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State 1

Bordeaux, November 30, 1914, 11 a.m.
[Received 12.15 p. m]

[Telegram]

Referring to your cables to the Embassy at Paris which were repeated here. The Embassy directs me to transmit following note from the French Minister for Foreign Affairs. Referring to Ottoman Government’s statement that French consuls and nationals would be expelled or kept as hostages etc., unless the Turkish Government is promptly assured that unfortified seaports will not be bombarded, Delcassé urgently requests you to inform Ottoman Government: (1) That the Government of the Republic has all the more reason to be astonished at this communication since Ottoman warships even before any declaration of war bombarded two unprotected towns, Odessa and Novorossüsk:

(2) That if a single French citizen is molested in the Ottoman Empire the Government of the Republic will find itself obliged to hold the present Ministers of the Interior and of War both personally responsible.

Referring to telegram regarding Ottoman officers arrested by a French warship and the threat of the Ottoman Minister of the Interior that unless these men were set at liberty at least two leading French citizens would be arrested and exiled in retaliation, the note goes on to say:

Eyoub Sabri and Fuaddibra captured on board the Italian steamer Forino by the French cruiser Waldeck Rousseau are evidently meant.

The French Government asks to inform the Ottoman Government—

That these two persons were arrested long before the rupture of relations between France and Turkey, not in their capacity of former Turkish officers but because they were bound for Albania to foment agitation there. The Government of the Republic therefore acted in the circumstances not as a belligerent but as one of the guarantee powers of Albania. It expects, therefore, that the two Frenchmen who are stated to have been sent to Ismid be immediately released and it will hold the Minister of the Interior, Talaat Bey, personally responsible if they are in any way whatever molested.

Garrett

1 Repeated to the Ambassador in Turkey December 1.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1284

[Document 1241]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 7, 1914.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1209. With reference to your telegram 549, November 16,1 I quote in full a note I have just received from Sir Edward Grey for communication to Constantinople:

In your note of the 17th ultimo your excellency was so good as to communicate to me the substance of a telegram from the United States Ambassador at Constantinople to the effect that he had been requested by the Ottoman Ministers of War and of the Interior to inform the British and French Governments that unless the Turkish Government received immediate assurances that non-fortified seaports will not be bombarded they would henceforth detain British and French Consuls and subjects and would either expel them or keep them as hostages in some fortress outside the zone of military operations for purposes of reprisals. I have the honour to state that I shall be greatly obliged if your excellency will be so good as to inform the Ottoman Government through the United States Embassy in Constantinople (1) that His Majesty’s Government are the more surprised at the Ottoman Government’s communication since Turkish warships bombarded before a declaration of war the two open ports of Odessa and Novorossiisk; (2) that if a single British subject is molested within the Ottoman Empire His Majesty’s Government will be obliged to hold the present Ottoman Ministers of War and of the Interior personally responsible.2

American Ambassador

1 See footnote 2, ante, p. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236].

2 The two concluding statements repeated December 8 (No. 124) to the Ambassador in Turkey, with instruction to “communicate without comment to the Turkish Foreign Office.”

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/308

[Document 1242]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 8, 1914.
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1222. Bryce suggests I transmit following telegram which he has received from bliss, president American Syrian College at Beirut:

British non-combatants including women ordered to interior as hostages pending release of detained Ottomans. Shall deeply appreciate any measures to avert this action made sinister by holy war proclamation.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) [Document 1243]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1914, 7 p.m.

[Telegram]

134. The Department in receipt of telegram addressed to the President from Doctor Bliss and others in Beirut and from Lord Bryce through the American Ambassador, London, to the effect that grave dangers are involved in the announcement of the Ottoman policy of holding non-combatants as hostages and are apprehensive lest the sinister declaration that such hostages would be held responsible for the consequences of attacks upon coast cities by belligerent powers [sic]. Gravity of the declaration is greatly augmented by the recent proposal to remove these hostages to the interior. The Governor General says this order includes women and children. The general danger for all non-combatants greatly aggravated by the official declaration of the holy war.

Please present the above facts to the Sublime Porte and urge that all non-combatant subjects shall be permitted to leave Turkish territory without delay. Department considers reported proposal of Turkish Government to send British and French non-combatants to the interior, would, if carried out, produce most serious consequences.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1298

[Document 1244]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 10, 1914, 12 midnight.
[Received December 11, 8:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

143. Your 124, 8th.1 Contents communicated to Minister of the Interior who is acting Minister of War. He seems absolutely indifferent to being held personally responsible.

American Ambassador

1 See footnote 2, ante, p. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/315

[Document 1245]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 10, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received December 11, 7:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

141. Minister of War has gone to Erzerum for an indefinite period. Minister of Interior, who is acting Minister of Finance, assumed posts Minister of War and Minister of Marine. Yesterday and today there has been wholesale deportation of French and English from Beirut to Damascus by order of Damascus commandant. Minister of the Interior promised me this afternoon to stop it as it is contrary to his orders. I obtained definite assurances from him [that all British] and French employed in American religious, charitable, and educational institutions, as well as many employed by American firms, shall remain unmolested as a favor to the United States.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72115/308

[Document 1246]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, December 12, 1914, 6 p.m.

[Telegram]

806. The Department has received information from the American community at Beirut to the effect that grave dangers are involved in the announcement of the Ottoman policy of holding noncombatants as hostages and are apprehensive lest the sinister declaration that such hostages would be held responsible for the consequences of attacks upon coast cities by belligerent powers [sic]. Gravity of the declaration is greatly augmented by the recent proposal to remove these hostages to the interior. The Governor General says this order includes women and children. The general danger for all non-combatants greatly aggravated by the official declaration of the holy war.

The Department has, communicated the above information to the American Embassy in Constantinople with instructions to say to the Turkish Government that this Government considers the proposal to send British and French non-combatants to the interior would, if carried out, produce most serious consequences. You may take up this matter informally with the Foreign Office and point out the dangers to Americans from any such action, owing to the difficulties of their being distinguished from other Christian peoples. The Department would be glad if the German Government could use its influence with the Turkish Government to modify their-reported attitude.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/323

[Document 1247]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 12, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received December 13, 11:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

149. Your 134, December 10, 7 p.m. Facts therein stated have been repeatedly presented to the Sublime Porte and results reported to you Ottoman officials are disappointed not receiving favorable answer to my 16, November 11; 30, November 14; 40, November 16; 76, November 23 104, December 2.2 Condition aggravated on account of notification that British and French intend holding Minister of War and Minister of the Interior personally responsible. Fearing worse treatment than is justifiable to detained belligerents, I have labored unremittingly for their repatriation and succeeded with over 1,700 from Constantinople, being practically all who desired to leave.

Positive promises of British and French Governments not to bombard unfortified towns and release of Ayoub Sabri and Zenun, Prince Omar, and Turkish Consuls at Bombay, Johannesburg, and Manchester [and] at Malta and their Turkish personnel may secure consent of Turkish Government for repatriation of belligerents now in the interior and at Mediterranean ports. There is unconfirmed report that many Armenians have been massacred near Erzerum by Arab troops connected with Turkish army.

American Ambassador

1 Transmitted to the Ambassadors in France and Great Britain December 14.

2 16, November 11, printed ante, p. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236]; 76, November 23, ante, p. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1237 and Doc. 1238]; others not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/332

[Document 1248]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 3

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 18, 1914, 11 p.m.
[Received December 19, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

183. In answer to my inquiry Hollis telegraphs deportation of French and British, Russian male subjects from Lebanon to Damascus has begun; approximately 200 French, English men deported from Beirut no women and children have been deported.

Have just been informed no trains permitted to depart to-morrow.

Why do your messages to me have to be relayed at Rome while mine go direct from here to Washington?

American Ambassador

3 Repeated December 19, with omission of last paragraph, to the ambassadors in Great Britain, France, and Russia, omitting in the telegram to Russia, “Approximately 200 French, English men deported from Beirut.”

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/335

[Document 1249]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 18, 1914, 3 p.m.
[Received December 19, 8:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

178. German Ambassador informs me he has received inquiry from his Government concerning deportation of British and French, Beirut. He considers measure justified by military needs and so advised Ottoman Minister of War before order was given and therefore will not exert his influence to have it changed.

On the 10th instant I had strongly advised Minister of the Interior to withdraw or at least considerably modify this order and urged him to communicate my views to Minister of Marine, now military commander at Damascus, who always professed great friendship for me. Minister of the Interior promised to do so and to recommend compliance with my request. Hollis telegraphed yesterday that orders have been issued allowing all belligerent females and males up to eighteen to leave Beirut within twelve days.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763-72/1325

[Document 1250]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 19, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received December 20, 1:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

187. Have read Bliss cable, to the President. It might produce good results if you were willing to warn German Empire of its responsibility if any Christian massacres occur in Turkey because Germany has absolute control of Turkish Navy their military mission almost controls Turkish Army. They have Von der Goltz in the palace and German Ambassador advising the Cabinet, and it was originally suggested by German officers that English and French be deported. Italian Ambassador stated that German Ambassador told him if British comply with request of Russians to force Dardanelles and enter Constantinople German Ambassador thinks massacre of non-Moslems inevitable. German Ambassador sent me similar message through his second secretary. I believe he makes these statements to induce Italian Ambassador and myself to exert our influence to prevent bombardment. Turkish officials and German Ambassador are much concerned about Dardanelles and they have sent soldiers and guns to the Princes Islands in Marmora and fortified [positions] on the Asiatic shore.

[Reported] Italian war vessel now before Beirut.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 1251]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, December 22, 1914, 11 p.m.

[Telegram]

867. Continuing Department’s 806.

Department in receipt of telegram from Constantinople stating that German Ambassador has informed Morgenthau he has received inquiry from his Government concerning deportation of British and French, Beirut; that he considers measure justified by military needs and so advised Ottoman Minister of War before order was given, and therefore will not exert his influence to have it changed.

Morgenthau reports also that Germany has absolute control of Turkish Navy; their military mission almost controls Turkish Army; that they have Von der Goltz in the palace and German Ambassador advising Cabinet.

Italian Ambassador told Morgenthau German Ambassador stated to him that if British comply with the request of Russians to force Dardanelles and enter Constantinople, he thinks massacre of non-Moslems inevitable. German Ambassador sent Morgenthau similar message through his second secretary.

You are instructed to say to the German Foreign Office that in view of the degree of control which Germany apparently exercises in Turkey, it will be difficult for her to disclaim responsibility if any general massacre should occur. We cannot believe that it is the desire of the Imperial Government to assume so grave a responsibility, and I, therefore, confidently hope that instructions will be sent immediately to Constantinople which will prevent the occurrence of a Moslem uprising or massacre of Christians.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1341

[Document 1252]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Constantinople, December 21, 1914, 8 p.m.
[Received December 24, 11 p.m.]

[Telegram]

191. Payas, near Alexandretta, was bombarded yesterday and a military train received considerable damage. This morning I received following telegram from Young, Damascus:

Commandant Syrian army communicates through you that all the Englishmen of this region are imprisoned Damascus and that if fire is opened on undefended city of Alexandretta to-morrow morning and Ottoman subjects are killed he will shoot a number of Englishmen to be decided by him. Communicate this immediately to Commandant of the British war vessel who has given ultimatum.

Young
American Consular Agent

Called on Minister of the Interior who read to me telegram stating that the British Commander had demanded release of French and British and surrender of war materials within eighteen hours otherwise he would bombard the Government buildings, telegraph office, customhouse and quays. Djemal, Ottoman Commandant at Damascus, telegraphed that if the British should bombard Alexandretta or any other unfortified [port] and the bombarding should cause the death of non-combatant Ottoman subjects then he will have British or French subjects shot also if any of the Government buildings or Ottoman institutions should be destroyed by that bombardment he will destroy some of the French or British institutions in Syria, and if subsequent bombardment excites the population to attack non-combatant belligerents or Christians of the Lebanon no responsibility will be accepted. Minister of the Interior then dictated following proposition: (1) The French and British Consuls can leave immediately after release of Omar Tousson has been promised without waiting for his departure.

(2) After assurances have been given that unfortified places will not be bombarded and after the release of Eyotym Sabri and Zinnoun all French and British subjects shall be left free. Those who choose to remain will be treated with respect and their property will be protected, otherwise the Ottoman Government will accept no responsibility.

Minister of the Interior requested me to telegraph to the British Commander at Alexandretta that negotiations for release of belligerents are pending and that bombardment be delayed until they could be concluded. To prevent shooting of non-combatants at Damascus I sent such a telegram but the Commander had left Alexandretta without bombarding. Minister of the Interior later informed me that the military authorities here had decided that if Alexandretta were bombarded they would intern all the French and English now in Constantinople as hostages. I strongly advised him against such a course and argued with him for over an hour. I also made very strong representations to the Grand Vizier who thoroughly coincided with my views but unfortunately has not the power to put them into force without cooperation of Minister of the Interior. Please see that I receive prompt answer.

American Ambassador

1 Repeated December 25 to the Ambassadors in Great Britain and France.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) File No. 763.72/1361

[Document 1253]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau)

Department of State, Washington, January 5, 1915.

[Telegram]

227. Your 191, December 21. From London Embassy, 2d. Grey requests expression of his gratitude conveyed to you.

Regarding specific demands Minister of Interior, Grey requests you to point out to Talaat Bey that, though railroad line was shelled for obvious military reasons, Alexandretta has not been bombarded. British Admiralty have no intention employing force for any purpose beyond recognized legitimate usages of war. Inform Ottoman Government release of Prince Omar Tousson and other Ottoman subjects mentioned will be accorded under certain reasonable necessary conditions. British Government hope therefore British subjects will be released and permitted to leave the country if they so desire.

You may communicate the above without comment.

Bryan

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72115/396

[Document 1254]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Morgenthau) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
Constantinople, January 9, 1915, 5 p.m.
[Received January 10, 9 a.m.]

[Telegram]

273. Your 240.2 Contents communicated to Minister of the Interior who says that statement of British Foreign Office in your No. 227 being construed by him as a promise not to bombard unfortified places the Ottoman Government gives assurances that all British subjects throughout the empire will be properly treated and receive full protection. He says belligerent subjects were sent from the seacoast to the interior as a military measure and in order to prevent all possibility of their giving information to the Anglo-French fleet. If conditions for the release of Omar Tousson and others mentioned prove acceptable he states the whole matter can be promptly arranged.

American Ambassador

1 Repeated to the Ambassador in Great Britain January 12.

2 Not printed.

Methods of warfare: Charges of illegal and inhumane conduct on the part of belligerent forces—Attitude of the United StatesMethods of warfare: Charges of illegal and inhumane conduct on the part of belligerent forces—Attitude of the United States

[No attempt is here made to include all the charges and evidence submitted to the Department relative to alleged violations of the Hague regulations of war on land and other agreements designed to reduce the inhumanity and destructiveness of war, nor the demands for protests addressed to it by American citizens. The following selection of documents is designed primarily to set forth the attitude taken by the American Government toward the subject.]

[1255] The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Stockholm, August 18, 1914. [Received August 19, 12:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72116/1

[1256] The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery)

Department of State, Washington, August 26, 1914.

[1257] The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Antwerp, undated. [Received August 26, 1914, 7:20 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/635

[1258] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Antwerp (Diederch)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/18

[1259] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, September 3, 1914. [Received September 4.]

File No. 763.72116/24

[1260] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 7, 1914. [Received September 8, 6:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72116/27

[1261] The President of France to the President of the United States

Bordeaux, September 10, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/31

[1262] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 11, 1914, 3 a.m.

File No. 763.72/838

[1263] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 15, 1914, 7 p.m. [Received 9 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/878

[1264] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 14, 1914, 4 p.m. [Received September 16, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72116/40

[1265] Remarks of the President to the Belgian Commission at the White House, Wednesday afternoon, September 16, 1914

September 16, 1914, noon

File No. 763.72116/44

[1266] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1914, 5 p.m.

File No. 763.72116/27

[1267] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 18, 1914, 12 noon.

File No. 763.72116/40

[1268] The President of the United States to the President of France

The White House, Washington, September 19, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/31

[1269] The President of the American Institute of Architects (R. Clipston Sturgis) to the President of the United States

Washington, September 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/79

[1270] The Minister in Belgium, (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

Antwerp, undated. [Received September 29, 1914, 1:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72116/57

[1271] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, September 30, 1914, 10 p.m. [Received October 1, 1:45 p.m.]

File No. 763.72116/63

[1272] The Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle (Thompson) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Aix-la-Chapelle, September 17, 1914. [Received October 3.]

File No. 763.72/1039

[1273] The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Antwerp, October 4, 1914. [Received 2 p.m.]

File No. 763.72116/73

[1274] The Secretary of State to the President of the American Institute of Architects (R. Clipston Sturgis)

Department of State, Washington, October 6, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/79

[1275] The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General, Antwerp, undated. [Received October 7, 1914, 3:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1061

[1276] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich)

Department of State, Washington, October 8, 1914.

[1277] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, October 10, 1914. [Received 4:50 p.m.]

File No. 763.72/1072

[1278] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, October 12, 1914.

[1279] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle (Thompson)

Department of State, Washington, October 20, 1914.

File No. 763.72/1039

[1280] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/88

[1281] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914.

File No. 763.72116/95

[1282] The Consul at Roubaix (Watson) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate, Roubaix, October 17, 1914. [Received November 23.]

File No. 763.72/1255

[1283] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, December 5, 1914. [Received December 6.]

File No. 763.72116/107

[1284] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Roubaix (Watson)

Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1914.

File No. 763.72/1255

[1285] The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State, Washington, January 6, 1915.

File No. 763.72116/107

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/1

[Document 1255]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Stockholm, August 18, 1914.
[Received August 19, 12:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

From German Minister here:

From German Minister here Please make by wire following communication to French Government:

Reports from the German troops show that contrary to international law a war in which the whole population is involved is being organized in France in numerous cases, members of the population wearing ordinary clothes have treacherously shot on German soldiers. Germany protests against such warfare incompatible with the rules of international law. The German army has been instructed to suppress in the most energetical manner any hostile attempt on the part of the population. Every person not belonging to the recognized armed forces who bears arms, who disturbs the communication in the rear of the German armies, who cuts telegraph wires, who handles explosives or who in any way takes part in the war without being entitled to do so will be immediately shot under martial law. If through these measures the war assumes a brutal character Germany declines all responsibility. France alone is responsible for the streams of blood which the war will cause.

Please communicate to the Belgian Government the following text:

The Royal Government of Belgium has refused Germany’s sincere offers which would have spared the country the terrors of war. Belgium wanted to have war as she opposed an armed resistance to the German forces who were forced to enter her territory because of the measures taken by Germany’s enemies. Although the Belgian Government has informed Germany in the note of the 8th instant according to the rules of war they will only allow troops in uniform to participate in the hostilities numerous civilians in ordinary clothes have taken part [in] the engagements around Liége. They have not only fired on German troops but they have even murdered the wounded in the most cruel manner and they have killed medical officers in the exercise of their functions. At the same time the mob in Antwerp has destroyed German property and has brutally assassinated women and children before the whole civilized world. Germany asks Belgium to account for the blood of these innocent persons and for her way of making war which defies all the rules of civilization if the entirely Belgians fault in view of protecting the German army against the fanaticism of the population every person not wearing a uniform who does not bear some clearly visible sign entitling him to participate in the war will be treated as having forfeited the privileges given by international law if he takes part in the hostilities disturbs the communications in the rear of the German armies cuts telegraph wires handles explosives or unlawfully commits any other hostile act he will be treated as a franc tireur and consequence he will immediately be shot under martial law [sic].

Please wire via American Legation, Stockholm, date when above communication has reached French and Belgian Governments.

Imperial German Foreign [Office],
Zimmermann
Caffery

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery) [Document 1256]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé d’Affaires in Sweden (Caffery)

Department of State,
Washington, August 26, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your August 18. Communication to French Government was read orally to Counselor of French Embassy to-day for his information. Communication to Belgian Government was read to Belgian Minister on the 22d instant. Copies were not delivered to either the French Embassy or the Belgian Legation, inasmuch as the Department prefers not to become the official medium of communications of such nature between belligerents.

Bryan

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/635

[Document 1257]

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Antwerp, undated.
[Received August 26, 1914, 7:20 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your cables 22, 23, 25 August, welfare.1 All communications Belgium save. Ghent, Bruges, and seacoast cut off. Gibson, after two days’ sojourn here, has started back to Brussels this noon. Hope he will get safely through firing lines. Antwerp very calm though almost completely isolated. At outbreak of war excitement was at fever heat and though many German women and children were made to endure cruel hardships by the perhaps too precipitate execution of the expulsion order no bodily harm or injury was done them. I know whereof I speak. In times like these stories of horrible atrocities will crop out everywhere but let Americans keep cool and remember audiatur et altera pars.

Diederich

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Antwerp (Diederch) File No. 763.72116/18

[Document 1258]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Antwerp (Diederch)

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your September 2.1 Please confine yourself to statement of facts. Our neutrality does not permit an expression of opinion by our diplomatic or consular officers.

Bryan

1 Not printed.

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/24

[Document 1259]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, September 3, 1914.
[Received September 4.]

[Translation]

I have the honor to communicate the following to your excellency:

My Government has informed me that a Belgian delegation has left for America to lay before the President of the United States documentary evidence of alleged German atrocities.

By direction of my Government I hereby protest against the contemplated representations which are groundless.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/27

[Document 1260]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 7, 1914.
[Received September 8, 6:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

53. I am requested to forward the following telegram from the Emperor to the President:

I feel it my duty, Mr. President, to inform you as the most prominent representative of principles of humanity, that after taking the French fortress of Longwy, my troops discovered there thousands of dumdum cartridges made by special government machinery. The same kind of ammunition was found on killed and wounded troops and prisoners, also on the British troops. You know what terrible wounds and suffering these bullets inflict and that their use is strictly forbidden by the established rules of international law. I therefore address a solemn protest to you against this kind of warfare which owing to the methods of our adversaries has become one of the most barbarous known in history. Not only have they employed these atrocious weapons but the Belgian Government has openly encouraged and since long carefully prepared the participation of the Belgian civil population in the fighting. The atrocities committed even by women and priests in this guerrilla warfare, also on wounded soldiers, medical staff and nurses (doctors killed), hospitals attacked by rifle fire, were such that my generals finally were compelled to take the most drastic measures in order to punish the guilty and to frighten the bloodthirsty population from continuing their work of vile murder and horror. Some villages and even the old town of Löwen, excepting the fine hôtel de ville, had to be destroyed in self-defense and for the protection of my troops. My heart bleeds when I see that such measures have become unavoidable and when I think of the numerous innocent people who lose their home and property as a consequence of the barbarous behaviour of those criminals.

William, Emperor and King
Gerard

The President of France to the President of the United States File No. 763.72116/31

[Document 1261]

The President of France to the President of the United States

Bordeaux, September 10, 1914.

[Telegram-Translation]

Mr. President: I am informed that the German Government has tried to impose upon Your Excellency with a claim that dumdum bullets were made in a French Government shop and used by our soldiers. This calumny is but a bold attempt to reverse the charges. Since the beginning of the war Germany has been using dumdum bullets and committing daily infractions of international law. As early as August 18, and repeatedly thereafter, we have had occasion to denounce outrages to Your Excellency and to the powers signatory of the Hague convention. Germany, aware of our protests, is now trying to confuse the issue and to lay up mendacious pretexts for indulging in fresh atrocities. In the name of flouted right and outraged civilization I send to Your Excellency an indignant protest.

Raymond Poincaré

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/838

[Document 1262]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 11, 1914, 3 a.m.

[Telegram]

644. Stories of horrors so naturally come with every war that for weeks I discredited the unspeakable tales that were brought from the Continent, and many are told which yet seem incredible. But American and other neutral witnesses of German atrocities in France and especially in, Belgium now make doubt impossible about some of the most barbarous acts in human annals. Man after man and woman after woman tell of very young girls whom they have seen that were violated by German soldiers. They tell of Belgian boys the tendons in whose arms and legs were cut with swords. I am told by two persons who have seen him, of a physician whose hand was cut off while he was dressing a Belgian soldier’s wounds. I am told by a trustworthy woman that there are wounded English soldiers now in English hospitals whose noses were cut off while they lay wounded on the field. Hundreds of such stories are told by apparently credible persons.

The violators of the Belgian treaty, the, sowers of mines in the open sea, the droppers of bombs on Antwerp and Paris to kill anybody they may hit, have taken to heart Bernhardi’s doctrine of the glorious enjoyment of war. It is impossible longer to doubt the wholly barbarous conduct of the Prussians.

This conviction is helping to increase the number of English volunteers enormously and is producing a silent, grim determination to make an end forever of the military system that has produced such men.

Page

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/878

[Document 1263]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 15, 1914, 7 p.m.
[Received 9 p.m.]

[Telegram]

No. 675]

Would it not be a fruitful idea if the Carnegie Peace Foundation1 should appoint a committee of inquiry of eminent Americans composed of men of international reputation to come to Europe immediately and investigate the alleged atrocities and the general conduct of the war upon a humanitarian point of view? Their report would become an historic document.

American Ambassador

1 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/40

[Document 1264]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 14, 1914, 4 p.m.
[Received September 16, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

141. Have sent by messenger, at the request of Government, specimens of alleged dumdum bullets. On reflection I think we had better keep out of controversy, if possible, as bitter feeling will be aroused in whatever country we decide against.

Gerard

Remarks of the President to the Belgian Commission at the White House, Wednesday afternoon, September 16, 1914 File No. 763.72116/44

[Document 1265]

Remarks of the President to the Belgian Commission at the White House, Wednesday afternoon, September 16, 1914

September 16, 1914, noon

Permit me to say with what sincere pleasure I receive you as representatives of the King of the Belgians, a people for whom the people of the United States feel so strong a friendship and admiration, a King for whom they entertain so sincere a respect; and to express my hope that we may have many opportunities of earning and deserving their regard. You are not mistaken in believing that the people of this country love justice, seek the true paths of progress, and have a passionate regard for the rights of humanity. It is a matter of profound pride to me that I am permitted for a time to represent such a people and to be their spokesman, and I am honored that your King should have turned to me in time of distress as to one who would wish on behalf of the people he represents to consider the claims to the impartial sympathy of mankind of a nation which deems itself wronged.

I thank you for the document you have put in my hands containing the result of an investigation made by a judicial committee appointed by the Belgian Government to look into the matter of which you have come to speak. It shall have my most attentive perusal and my most thoughtful consideration.

You will, I am sure, not expect me to say more. Presently, I pray God very soon, this war will be over. The day of accounting will then come when I take it for granted the nations of Europe will assemble to determine a settlement. Where wrongs have been committed, their consequences and the relative responsibility involved will be assessed. The nations of the world have fortunately by agreement made a plan for such a reckoning and settlement. What such a plan can not compass the opinion of mankind, the final arbiter in all such matters, will supply. It would be unwise, it would be premature, for a single government, however fortunately separated from the present struggle, it would even be inconsistent with the neutral position of any nation which like this has no part in the contest, to form or express a final judgment.

I need not assure you that this conclusion, in which I instinctively feel that you will yourselves concur, is spoken frankly because in warm friendship and as the best means of perfect understanding between us, an understanding based upon mutual respect, admiration, and cordiality. You are most welcome and we are greatly honored that you should have chosen us as the friends before whom you could lay any matter of vital consequence to yourselves in the confidence that your course would be understood and met in the same spirit in which it was conceived and intended.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72116/27

[Document 1266]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1914, 5 p.m.

[Telegram]

173. Please communicate to His Majesty the Emperor the reply which the President makes to his communication of the 7th.1

W. J. Bryan

[Enclosure]

The President of the United States to the German Emperor

I received your Imperial Majesty’s important communication of the 7th and have read it with the gravest interest and concern. I am honored that you should have turned to me for an impartial judgment as the representative of a people truly disinterested as respects the present war and truly desirous of knowing and accepting the truth.

You will, I am sure, not expect me to say more. Presently, I pray God very soon, this war will be over. The day of accounting will then come when I take it for granted the nations of Europe will assemble to determine a settlement. Where wrongs have been committed, their consequences and the relative responsibility involved will be assessed.

The nations of the world have fortunately by agreement made a plan for such a reckoning and settlement. What such a plan cannot compass the opinion of mankind, the final arbiter in all such matters, will supply. It would be unwise, it would be premature, for a single government, however fortunately separated from the present struggle, it would even be inconsistent with the neutral position of any nation which like this has no part in the contest, to form or express a final judgment.

I speak thus frankly because I know that you will expect and wish me to do so as one friend speaks to another, and because I feel sure that such a reservation of judgment until the end of the war, when all its events and circumstances can be seen in their true relations, will commend itself to you as a true expression of sincere neutrality.

1  Ante, p. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72116/40

[Document 1267]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 18, 1914, 12 noon.

[Telegram]

191. Just received telegram referring to dumdum bullets. While you could not refuse to send specimens if requested the Government will of course understand that no action will be taken by this Government in the matter. The President’s answer to the Emperor will cover all matters of this kind. He hears whatever is said but does not discuss the merits of the controversy and your action in refusing to be drawn into the discussion of such questions is approved.

W.J.Bryan

The President of the United States to the President of France File No. 763.72116/31

[Document 1268]

The President of the United States to the President of France

The White House,
Washington, September 19, 1914.

[Telegram]

I received Your Excellency’s communication of September 101 in which you protest against the claim that dumdum bullets were made in a French Government shop and used by French soldiers, and in which you charge on your part, that such bullets have been used and other breaches of international law committed by your adversaries. I assure Your Excellency that I am not unmindful of the honor done to the United States by you in turning to it at this time of crisis as to a nation which abhors inhuman practices in the conduct of a war. In this your confidence in the people and Government of the United States is not misplaced. The time will come when this great conflict is over and when the truth can be impartially determined. When that time arrives those responsible for violations of the rules of civilized warfare, if such violations have occurred, and for false charges against their adversaries, must of course bear the burden of the judgment of the world.

Woodrow Wilson

1  Ante, p. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261].

The President of the American Institute of Architects (R. Clipston Sturgis) to the President of the United States File No. 763.72116/79

[Document 1269]

The President of the American Institute of Architects (R. Clipston Sturgis) to the President of the United States

Washington, September 24, 1914.

Your Excellency: As president of the American Institute of Architects, and representing many of the leading men of the profession, and speaking, I believe, for all architects throughout the world, I desire to urge that every precaution be taken against the destruction of architectural monuments situated in the field of this terrible war. These buildings are the heritage and possession not only of the country in which they stand but of the whole civilized world. Every sentiment of loyalty to God and loyalty to the truth and beauty which underlie all art, should make these great monuments a sacred trust. They are at once the memorials of a vital faith and of an inspired imagination, and can never be replaced.

I am [etc.]

R. Clipston Sturgis

The Minister in Belgium, (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/57

[Document 1270]

The Minister in Belgium, (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

Antwerp, undated.
[Received September 29, 1914, 1:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The time has not come and the occasion will not permit me to report on the excesses of German soldiers in Belgium. While there may have been exaggerations in the published stories, they are in spirit true and at a later date I shall make a comprehensive report on this dreadful subject.

Whitlock

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/63

[Document 1271]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, September 30, 1914, 10 p.m.
[Received October 1, 1:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

The German authorities in Brussels have indicated a willingness to spare the historic monuments at Antwerp in the event of a bombardment of that city provided the Belgians will agree not to use those monuments for military purposes. I have been asked in conjunction with my Spanish colleague to arrange for such an understanding with the Belgian Government at Antwerp. In view of Department’s August 27, 7 p.m.,1 I have felt that I could not undertake to transmit this message from the German to the Belgian authorities otherwise than through the Department of State. If the Department is of the opinion that action should be taken in this matter, instruction to that effect can be sent direct to Gibson who is now in Antwerp.2

Whitlock

1  Ante, p. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171].

2 The first two sentences transmitted to Gibson October 2 for communication to the Belgian Government.

The Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle (Thompson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1039

[Document 1272]

The Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle (Thompson) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Aix-la-Chapelle, September 17, 1914.
[Received October 3.]

No 820]

Dear Mr. Bryan : Events have developed so rapidly since August 3 and so continuously, that one no more finds time to write of them before they seem trivial and ancient in comparison with the more recent occurrences.

I wish to report to the Department, however, my efforts and their results towards assisting representatives of the American press in getting over important statements to their respective papers and the people of the United States.

On August 29 John T. McCutcheon and James O’Donnell Bennett of the Chicago Tribune, Irving. S. Cobb of the Saturday Evening Post and Philadelphia Public Ledger, Roger Lewis of the Associated Press, and Harry Hansen of the Chicago Daily News came upon the consulate having been conducted by the German military authorities to Aix-la-Chapelle from the battle fields along the Belgian-French frontier. The commanding officer here declined to issue them passes to go into Holland or to return to Belgium but placed no restrictions on their passing further into Germany in the direction of Cologne and Berlin. They elected to remain in Aix-la-Chapelle from which point they could get mail articles to their publishers through the nearby frontier town of Vaals, Holland.

Their experiences and observations with and in the rear of the Germany army in Belgium from Brussels to Beaumont and from there to Aix-la-Chapelle, covered a period of ten days and will before this be published in their respective papers.

On arriving in Aix-la-Chapelle where the English papers were to be seen they were surprised to note the innumerable reports on the atrocities and brutalities committed by the German soldiers in the territory which they had just traversed.

These gentlemen at once prepared a joint statement which I advised them I would use my best efforts to have forwarded by the German wireless system near Potsdam to the Western Union Telegraph Company in New York for transmission to their several papers. The statement of these unprejudiced and keenly observant men is enclosed in this despatch. It seems to me that it is most important that the American people have as much of the truth as it is possible to convey to them on the one most terrifying feature of this great war. Nor were these well-known American journalists so much concerned by their sense of duty to their papers as they were moved by a sense of fairness to their fellow countrymen who were entitled at least to a clearer picture of things than they were receiving from an interested source controlling the sole means of communication between Germany and America. Hence I had their statement telegraphed to Berlin for submission to the German Reichskanzler for forwarding by wireless telegraphy to America.

It is observed that various appeals are being made to America to break its neutrality and join the opponents of Germany on account of the alleged inhuman conduct of the German military, its cruelty and drunkenness. I am here on the frontier where the Belgian reprisals began and am to some extent personally familiar with the circumstances leading to the commencement of their acts. In a broad sense it may be said that the German, and lastly the German soldier, does not get drunk. In support of the military law against supplying, soldiers with alcoholic drinks the Kaiser has issued a decree fixing a vigorous penalty for soldiers drinking intoxicants or for persons giving intoxicants to soldiers. There has been a terrific cry in Germany against the unexpected participation of the Belgian populace in the war.

On requesting a pass from the garrison commander at Aachen then General von Korpf, to send a messenger into a nearby Belgian village to investigate the shooting of a British subject, this gentleman related to me under great mental distress instance after instance of German officers and soldiers being shot or killed While at rest by farmers, even by young girls, shooting them while passing them a glass of milk or water. He gave me these details in order to impress me with the danger of sending a messenger into those districts, Baelen-Dolhain, at that time, August 17, and his inability to guarantee protection for my messenger.

The reprisals made by the German military have undoubtedly been extreme and beyond recorded precedent, but I am convinced that when the facts are well brought out they will expose causes which, under the circumstances, may have extenuated, if not as the Germans claim, justified their conduct.

In Liége I spent the night as guest at the Düsseldorfer Hospital, a temporary war hospital opened August 17 in the main university building there by three prominent ladies of Düsseldorf. The hospital was attacked on the 20th of August three days after it was opened and thirteen days after the entry of the German troops in Liége. According to my examination the building was subject to rifle volleys from two sides, the effect of the bullets showing in the walls and broken windows; as a result of this attack thirteen men, principally Russian, English, and Belgian students were caught and shot in the university square and twenty buildings from whence the shooting came, destroyed.

I hope to be able, if time permits, to investigate the charges of murder of Sleeping, wounded and defenseless German soldiers made against the Belgian villagers and farmers just over the frontier between here and Liége.

I am sending you from time to time some illustrated German papers.

You will pardon this semipersonal letter. I can write more freely in this manner.

With great respect and regards,

Robert J. Thompson

[Enclosure-Telegram]

September 3, 1914.

Western Union,

New York, for:

Associated Press, New York (Lewis),
Ledger, Philadelphia (Cobb),
News, Chicago (Hansen),
Tribune, Chicago (Bennett, McCutcheon).

In spirit fairness we unite in declaring German atrocities groundless as far as we were able to observe. After spending two weeks with German Army accompanying troops upward hundred miles we unable report single instance unprovoked reprisal. Also unable confirm rumors mistreatment prisoners or non-combatants. With German columns Landen, Louvain, Brussels, Nivelles, Binche, Buissière, Hautes-Wihériess, Merbes-le-Château, Soire-sur-Sambre, Beaumont, without substantiating single case wanton brutality.

Numerous investigated rumors proved groundless. Everywhere have seen Germans paying for purchases, respecting property rights of individuals, according civilians consideration.

After battle Buissière found Belgian women, children moving Comfortably about, day after Germans captured town.

In Merbes-le-Château we found one citizen killed but unable confirm lack provocation.

Refugees with tales atrocities unable supply direct [testimony].

Belgian burgomaster Solre-sur-Sambre voluntarily discounted reports cruelty in surrounding country.

Discipline German soldiers excellent as observed. No drunkenness.

To truth these statements we pledge professional personal word. Please repeat back last three words care American Consul, Vials, Holland.

Roger Lewis, Associated Press
Irvin S. Cobb, Saturday Evening Post and Philadelphia Public Ledger
Harry Hansen, Chicago Daily News
O’Donnel Bennett,
John T. Mccutcheon, Chicago Tribune

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/73

[Document 1273]

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State 1

American Consulate General,
Antwerp, October 4, 1914.
[Received 2 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Your October 2 for Gibson. Absent. Telegram from Whitlock to Department communicated Belgian Government who reports:

Belgian Government accepts proposition German military authorities Brussels relative protection historical monuments. None of these will be used for military purposes. American Consul will be authorized to verify the agreement. Impossible telegraph comprehensive list. German military authorities Brussels will receive delegate from American Consul who will hand them plan city indicating monuments to protect. German military authorities requested to make known to American Consul when and where these plans may be handed to military authorities. Belgian Government begs American Government to communicate the preceding to German authorities. Monuments to be protected will be given the distinctive sign provided by Hague convention.

Diederich

1 The message of the Belgian Government transmitted to the Minister in Brussels via Berlin, No. 24, October 5.

The Secretary of State to the President of the American Institute of Architects (R. Clipston Sturgis) File No. 763.72116/79

[Document 1274]

The Secretary of State to the President of the American Institute of Architects (R. Clipston Sturgis)

Department of State,
Washington, October 6, 1914.

Sir: The Secretary of State directs me to acknowledge the receipt, by reference from the White House, of your letter of September 24 protesting against the alleged destruction of architectural monuments in Europe, and in reply to inform you that your remarks have received the attention of the Department.2

I am [etc.]

Manton M. Wyvell)
Private Secretary

2 This was the phrase commonly employed in acknowledging the numerous letters from American citizens and organizations alleging inhumane or wantonly destructive acts on the part of belligerent forces and calling upon the Government to take some action in regard to them.

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1061

[Document 1275]

The Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate General,
Antwerp, undated.
[Received October 7, 1914, 3:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Immediate bombardment announced. Is there no hope intercession American Government to prevent carnage and destruction?

Diederich

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich) [Document 1276]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Antwerp (Diederich)

Department of State,
Washington, October 8, 1914.

[Telegram]

Your undated. Department has communicated the information regarding the monuments and public places in Antwerp to the American Minister at Brussels, via the American Ambassador at Berlin and is awaiting reply.1 Department also understands from press reports that all non-combatants have been warned to leave the city. It deeply regrets that at this time there appears to be no opportunity for this Government to intercede.

Lansing

1 Correspondence not printed.

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1072

[Document 1277]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, October 10, 1914.
[Received 4:50 p.m.]

[Telegram]

41. This morning Baron von der Lancken and Colonel von Leipzig of the German military authorities informed my. Spanish colleague and me that the bombardment of Antwerp was imminent and that in conformity with Article 26 of the Hague convention they wished to notify the local authorities at Antwerp of their intention. They said that parlementaires had been unsuccessful in their efforts to reach Antwerp, that they had no means of communicating with the local authorities than through us and therefore asked us to convey the message. The idea of doing this was naturally repugnant and we refused. Thereupon the German military authorities said they had exhausted all their means of apprising the local authorities of the situation and asserted that the responsibility for the result would be on us. While we could not of course accept this view as to the result, we thought that under the circumstances the time being too short to communicate with our respective Governments, it was at least due to the non-combatants at Antwerp that the information be given them. The Spanish Minister thereupon detailed his naval attaché to go to Antwerp and lay the facts before the local authorities without comment or suggestion. This was done by the naval attaché this afternoon and for his services he was thanked by the local authorities at Antwerp.

I took advantage of his going to convey to the Belgian Government the fact that I had communicated to the German military authorities your No. 24, Berlin, 5th,1 and told him to bring back list of buildings. He found that Gibson was already on the way with the list and German authorities have been furnished with it.

Whitlock

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) [Document 1278]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, October 12, 1914.

[Telegram]

34. Your 41, 10th. Your action approved by Department.

Bryan

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle (Thompson) File No. 763.72/1039

[Document 1279]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Aix-la-Chapelle (Thompson)

Department of State,
Washington, October 20, 1914.

No. 14]

Sir: The Department has received your communication of September 17, 1914, in regard to alleged acts of cruelty and reprisals in the present war in Europe.

You say that you hope to be able to make investigation of such charges.

You will at once discontinue any investigations which you may have begun and you will make no reports and will express no opinions in these matters. You are the Consul of a neutral nation and as such should not take any action in the interest of either of the countries at war which would subject you or this Government to adverse criticism.

Your communications to the Department in future should be in the form which the Department has prescribed.

I am [etc.]

For the Acting Secretary of State:
Wilbur. J. Carr

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 763.72116/88

[Document 1280]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 27, 1914.

No. 167]

Sir: The Department has received from the American Ambassador at London a despatch dated October 8, transmitting the enclosed communications 1 received from the following named societies in London: The National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty

Society of Antiquaries of London

The Art-Worker’s Guild

Royal Institute of British Architects

Royal Academy of Arts, London

All of these communications ask that this Government represent to the German Government that all old buildings which are of interest architecturally or historically should be respected by that Government in its military operations.

You may transmit copies of these letters to the German Foreign Office without comment.

Robert Lansing

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand) File No. 763.72116/95

[Document 1281]

The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Jusserand)

memorandum

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to his excellency the Ambassador of the French Republic and has the honor to transmit herewith at the request of the German Government copy of a White Book issued by that Government, regarding the alleged breach of the Geneva convention of July 6, 1906, by French troops and irregulars, which has been received from the American Ambassador at Berlin.

Department of State,
Washington, November 14, 1914.

The Consul at Roubaix (Watson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72/1255

[Document 1282]

The Consul at Roubaix (Watson) to the Secretary of State

American Consulate,
Roubaix, October 17, 1914.
[Received November 23.]

No. 6]

Sir: I have the honor to report that on account of the appearance of French and German troops in this vicinity and the danger of injury to the cities of Roubaix, Tourcoing, and Lille therefrom, I called on the mayor of Roubaix Monday morning, October 5, 1914, and made the following suggestion: That a delegation from the three cities be sent to the commanders of the opposing armies and try to bring about an agreement between them not to fire on these cities, or to enter or occupy them, while fighting was going on in the neighborhood. I offered to accompany the delegation. The mayor and his cabinet considered the suggestion and informed me the same afternoon that they approved of it, and it was arranged to lay the matter before the prefect of the department. Accordingly the mayor and myself called on the prefect at Lille the next day, October 6, 1914. The prefect thought that the plan was not feasible, but requested me to represent to the German commander that there was a large trade between the United States and these cities, as he thought that such a statement would have great weight in influencing him not to injure these cities. This I offered to do, if the French authorities would find out where the German headquarters were and provide an automobile for the trip.

On Friday morning October 9, 1914, the automobile was sent to the consulate and took me to the German headquarters. I informed the German general that the United States had a large trade with Roubaix, Tourcoing, and Lille which it was interested in preserving, and I hoped that these cities would not be injured. The general answered that he had no desire to harm these cities but claimed an indemnity on account of having been fired upon by civilians in Lille on October 4. The result of our conversation was that the general drew up a provisional agreement by which the French and German staffs agreed to eliminate these cities from the field of military operation, provided the cities would pay fifteen million francs to the German commander. I returned to Roubaix during the night and laid the offer before the prefect and the mayors of the several cities the next morning, October 10, 1914.

The French officials decided that there would be time enough to arrange about an indemnity when the German Army appeared at their gates, and advised the consul not to take up the matter with the French General Staff, because it would not consider such a proposition. For these reasons, the consul took no further steps in this matter.

I have [etc.]

John Watson

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72116/107

[Document 1283]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, December 5, 1914.
[Received December 6.]

[Translation]

J. No. 10107]

Mr. Secretary of State: Referring to your excellency’s kind note of the 30th ultimo,1 I have the honor to brine to your excellency’s kind attention fresh violations of the Geneva convention as well as of Section II, Article 23 (e), of the Hague convention 1 of July 29, 1899, by the British Government. The violation of those conventions consists in the use of dumdum bullets, proofs whereof are respectfully submitted in accompaniment.

1. The “soft-nose cartridges” enclosed in original were given up by a wounded soldier of the 88th Connaught Rangers Regiment on his return from France. They were distributed to the above-named regiment mixed with regular infantry ammunition before the battle of Mons. (See also Enclosure 1.) The dumdum cartridges contained in the cartridge belt, enclosed in original, were, according to the description in Enclosure 2 distributed on August 8 to the Duke of Wellington’s Infantry Corps Regiment.

Both kinds of dumdum cartridges were manufactured by Eley Brothers of Gray’s Inn Road, London.

2. It has come to the knowledge of the German Government that the British Government has ordered from the Winchester Repeating Arms Company 20,000 “riot guns”, Model 1897, and, 50,000,000 “buckshot cartridges” for the same. The buckshot cartridge contains nine shots. The use of this weapon and ammunition is as yet unknown to civilized warfare.

3. The Union Metallic Cartridge Company of Bridgeport, Connecticut, in October 20 took out through Frank O. Hoagland the enclosed patent for the manufacture of a “mushroom bullet.” According to information the accuracy of which is not to be doubted, 8,000,000 of those cartridges have been delivered to Canada since October of this year by the Union Metallic Cartridge Company for the armament of the English Army.

Cartridges made by that process, although cut through, cannot be distinguished by their external appearance from regular full-jacketed cartridges. The soldier in whose hands this kind of ammunition is placed by the British Government is not in position to know that he is firing dumdum bullets.

Whether the use of the mushroom bullet is contrary to the law of nations remains to be considered.

Even though there should be no intention to use the ammunition described under 2 and 3 on the theater of war in Europe, although such intention may be inferred from the magnitude of the order, it is very plain that the intention is to use it in the English colonies against the Boers, Hindoos, Turks, and Egyptians.

Against this method of warfare, which sets every rule of international law at defiance, the Imperial Government raises its protest.

It cannot be within the spirit of the neutrality repeatedly declared by the Government of the United States that American industry should supply the fighting forces of the Allies with arms and ammunition the use of which is contrary to international law and constitutes a violation of the above-cited conventions to which the United States is a signatory party.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

P. S. The enclosed five photographs were forwarded to me by my Government. The wounds were all received in battles against English troops.

1 Not printed.

1 Convention II.

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Roubaix (Watson) File No. 763.72/1255

[Document 1284]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Roubaix (Watson)

Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 1914.

No. 8.]

Sir: Referring to your despatch No. 6 of October 17, 1914, in regard to negotiations to safeguard Roubaix, Tourcoing, and Lille, you are instructed to avoid intervention in these matters in future and observe the President’s proclamation of neutrality.

I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Wilbur J. Carr

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff) File No. 763.72116/107

[Document 1285]

The Secretary of State to the German Ambassador (Bernstorff)

Department of State,
Washington, January 6, 1915.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 5th ultimo, calling attention to “fresh violations of the Geneva convention as weft as to Section II, Article 23(e) of the Hague convention of July 29, 1899, by the British Government,” in the use of dumdum bullets. I can assure your excellency that I am not unmindful of the spirit in which you bring to the attention of this Government the improper practices which are alleged to have occurred in the conduct of the present war. But while this Government may take these statements and charges under consideration it is, in its effort to maintain a strict neutrality in the present conflict, obliged to refrain from investigating their truthfulness or making any comment in regard to them. The time will come, however, when the truth may be impartially determined, and when the judgment of the world will be passed upon the charges made by the various belligerents of violations of the rules of civilized warfare.

Your excellency also states that the British Government have ordered from the Winchester Repeating Arms Company 20,000 “riot guns,” Model 1897, and 50,000,000 “buckshot cartridges” for use in such guns. This Department saw a published statement of the Winchester Company, the correctness of which the company has confirmed to the Department by telegraph. In this statement the company categorically denies that it has received an order for such guns and cartridges from, or made any sales of such material to the British Government, or to any other government engaged in the present war.

Your excellency further calls attention to “information, the accuracy of which is not to be doubted,” that 8,000,000 cartridges fitted with “mushroom bullets” have been delivered since October of this year by the Union Metallic Cartridge Company for the armament of the English Army.

In reply I have the honor to refer to the letter of December 10, 1914,1 of the Remington Arms-Union Metallic Cartridge Company of New York to your excellency, called forth by certain newspaper reports of statements alleged to have been made by you in regard to the sales by that company of soft-nose bullets. From this letter, a copy of which was sent to this Department by the company, it appears that instead of 8,000,000 cartridges having been sold, only a little over 117,000 were manufactured and 109,000 were sold. The letter further asserts that these cartridges were made to supply a demand for a better sporting cartridge with a soft-nose bullet than had been manufactured theretofore; and that such cartridges cannot be used in the military rifles of any foreign powers. The company adds that its statements can be substantiated and that it is ready to give you any evidence that you may require on these points. The Department is now in receipt from the company of a complete detailed list of the persons to whom these cartridges were sold. From this list it appears that the cartridges were sold to firms in lots of 20 to 2,000 and one lot each of 3,000, 4,000, 5,000. Of these only 960 cartridges went to British North America and 100 to British East Africa.

If, however, you can furnish the Department with evidence that this or any other company is manufacturing and selling for the use of the contending armies in Europe cartridges whose use would contravene the Hague conventions, the Government would be glad to be furnished with this evidence, and the President directs me to inform you that, in case any American company is shown to be engaged in this traffic, he will use his influence to prevent so far as possible sales of such ammunition to the powers engaged in the European war, without regard to whether it is the duty of this Government upon legal or conventional grounds to take such action.

In view of the publicity which has been given to your excellency’s complaint addressed to the Department in these matters it is taken for granted that there can be no objection on your part to equal publicity being given to this note and the letter of the Union Metallic Cartridge Company addressed to you on December 10, 1914.

Accept [etc.]

W. J. Bryan

1 Not printed.

Negotiations relating to the work of Belgian reliefNegotiations relating to the work of Belgian relief

[1286] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 6, 1914. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/1

[1287] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, October 17, 1914.

[1288] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 17, 1914. [Received October 18, 1:40 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/5

[1289] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the President

American Legation, Brussels, October 16, 1914. [Received October 19, 11 a.m.]

File No. 840.48/833

[1290] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, October 16, 1914. [Received October 19, 8 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/7

[1291] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914.

File No. 855.48/5

[1292] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1914.

File No. 855.48/7

[1293] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 20, 1914.

[1294] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State, Washington, October 20, 1914.

[1295] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 26, 1914. [Received October 27, 8 a.m.]

File No. 855.48/10

[1296] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1914.

File No. 855.48/17

[1297] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November, 3, 1914. [Received 11:30 a.m.]

File No. 855.48/24

[1298] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 3, 1914. [Received 11:15 p.m.]

File No. 840.48/890

[1299] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1914.

File No. 855.48/24

[1300] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, November 5, 1914 , [Received 11:45 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/28

[1301] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1914.

File No. 855.48/29

[1302] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 9, 1914. [Received 3 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/35

[1303] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, November 11, 1914. [Received 5:40 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/36

[1304] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, November 14, 1914.

File No. 855.48/40

[1305] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1914.

File No. 704.6741/3

[1306] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, October 20, 1914. [Received November 14.]

File No. 855.48/41

[1307] From the Imperial German Legation to Jonkheer J. Loudon, Minister for [Foreign] Affairs

The Hague, August 15, 1914.

[1308] From the Foreign Department to the German Minister

The Hague, August 17, 1914.

[1309] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, November 17, 1914.

File No. 855.48/28

[1310] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, November 20, 1914.

File No. 855.48/43

[1311] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, November 23, 1914. [Received November 24, 5:30 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/54

[1312] The Chargé d’Affaires’ in France (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, December 4, 1914. [Received 10 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/69

[1313] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, December 4, 1914. [Received December 5.]

File No. 855.48/79

[1314] The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy, Washington, December 5, 1914.

File No. 855.48/80

[1315] The Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, December 11, 1914. [Received December 26.]

File No. 855.48/116

[1316] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 26, 1914. [Received December 28, 8 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/126

[1317] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, December 28, 1914. [Received December 29, 8 p.m.]

File No. 855.48/125

[1318] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, December 28, 1914. [Received December 31, 8 a.m.]

File No. 855.48/130

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/1

[Document 1286]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 2

American Embassy,
London, October 6, 1914.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

783. A Belgian committee has been formed at Brussels under the patronage of the American and Spanish Ministers there for the purpose of importing foodstuffs for the poor of Brussels who, I am informed, are faced with famine. The German authorities in occupation have consented and the Belgian Minister here informs me that under instructions from his Government he has obtained permission of the British authorities for the export of supplies on condition that they be despatched by this Embassy and consigned to our Legation at Brussels. If you authorize me to take this step I believe it would be well to obtain a definite assurance from the German Government of their approval of this humanitarian project, the execution of which is in charge of an American citizen, Millard King Shaler, who is now in London purchasing supplies, and is strongly vouched for by Mr. Whitlock.

American Ambassador

2 Repeated to the Ambassador in Germany October 7, No. 356, with instructions to “take up informally with Foreign Office.”

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 1287]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, October 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

435. Department reminds you that it is awaiting the reply of the German Government to its request for information regarding admission of food into Brussels.1 You may say to the Foreign Office that for humanitarian reasons this Government would appreciate a prompt answer.

Lansing

1 See footnote to the above telegram of October 6 from the Ambassador in Great Britain.

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/5

[Document 1288]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 17, 1914.
[Received October 18, 1:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

541. The German Government approves of the plan to supply the population of Belgium with food.

Gerard

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the President File No. 840.48/833

[Document 1289]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the President

American Legation,
Brussels, October 16, 1914.
[Received October 19, 11 a.m.]

[Telegram]

21. The President, Washington: In two weeks the civil population of Belgium, already in misery, will face starvation. In view of this fact, and at the request of the relief committee, I venture to call your attention to my telegram to the Department dated 16th October in the conviction that your great heart will find some way by which America may help to provide food for these hungry ones in the dark days of the terrible winter that is coming on.

Whitlock

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/7

[Document 1290]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,1
Brussels, October 16, 1914.
[Received October 19, 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

As I have already reported to the Department, a committee of notable citizens of Brussels was appointed several weeks ago under the patronage of the Spanish Minister and myself to give food to the poor of this city. This work, which had the approval of the Belgian Government and of the German military authorities, has been carried on with excellent results but now a grave situation fronts the land: In normal times Belgium produces only one sixth of the foodstuffs she consumes; within two weeks there will be no more food in Belgium; winter is coming on and there are thousands who are without home and without hope; it is necessary to extend this relief work to the whole of Belgium. My Spanish colleague and I have been requested by the local Belgian authorities and by the German military authorities to permit the organization under our patronage of a committee that will undertake to revictual all of Belgium and we have secured from the German military authorities formal official assurances that all foodstuffs shipped into Belgium in the care of the committee and intended for the feeding of the impoverished civil population will be respected by the soldiery and not made the object of military requisition. It is now necessary to obtain permission from the English Government that foodstuffs may be shipped into Belgium. In view of this fact Gibson goes to London to-morrow with messages from the Spanish Minister and me to the respective Ambassadors of our countries to lay the subject before them. Baron Lambert and Mr. Franqui, representing the Belgian relief committee, will accompany him to acquaint the Belgian Minister in London with the situation and ask him to present the matter to the British Government. Our hope is that the Belgian Minister can arrange and, if there be no impropriety in their so doing, that the American and Spanish Ambassadors may assist him in arranging for the passage of the provisions which the committee is ready to buy. I trust the Department will approve this course and further it by instructions to London. It is not money but food that is needed. If some appropriate means can be found to call the attention of our generous people at home to the plight of the poor in Belgium I am sure that they will send succor and relief for the winter that is drawing near. It seems to me to be a work of mercy that will touch the hearts of those who are brought to understand it and give our people in America an opportunity to serve nobly in a high cause.

Whitlock

1 Sent via London under date of October 19, 10 a.m.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 855.48/5

[Document 1291]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914.

[Telegram]

341. Telegram from Embassy Berlin 17th instant states that German Government approves of plan to supply the population of Belgium with food. You are authorized therefore to proceed on lines of your 786 [783], October 6.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) File No. 855.48/7

[Document 1292]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1914.

[Telegram]

39. Your 548 [21],1 16th. The plan of the Belgian committee in Brussels to import foodstuffs for poor of Brussels has been approved by the German Government and the Embassy in London has been so advised.

Lansing

1 Telegram 21 of October 16 was transmitted through the Embassy in Germany as its No. 548.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 1293]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, October 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

358. Referring to Minister Whitlock’s telegram of October 19 [16] transmitted to Department through your Embassy relative to relief of people of Belgium, you may render all the assistance possible in obtaining from British Government permission that foodstuffs may be shipped into Belgium. Department understands that Gibson, Secretary of Legation at Brussels, will confer with you upon the subject.

Lansing

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) [Document 1294]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Belgium (Whitlock)

Department of State,
Washington, October 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

40. Your telegram October 19 [16], 10 a.m., transmitted via London regarding relief of Belgium. Department approves your action and has given instructions to the Ambassador at London to render you and your Spanish colleague every assistance.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/10

[Document 1295]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, October 26, 1914.
[Received October 27, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

910. Your 389, October 24.1 The Commission of Belgian Relief working under diplomatic guidance of Spanish Ambassador here and myself has the written assurance of the German military commander of Belgian territory held by the Germans that food sent them by this commission will not be confiscated. So far as I know this assurance has not been given to any one else who may send food. No food can be exported from England or Holland but the Netherlands Government has given this commission permission to distribute food landed at Rotterdam through our agents to people in Belgian territory. Since food cannot be bought on this side the world American committees should not send money but should confer with Hoover, chairman of this commission, care of this Embassy, regarding what kind of food to send and how to ship it. Commission has agents in every neighborhood in Belgium. It has in fact taken charge of practically all grocery stores. Money sent will be of no use. Food sent except through commission may never reach Belgium or may be confiscated.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 855.48/17

[Document 1296]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, October 31, 1914.

[Telegram]

221. At request of American Minister at The Hague you are instructed to ask whether France will give assurance of recognition of neutrality of goods shipped for American Commission for Relief in Belgium.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/24

[Document 1297]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November, 3, 1914.
[Received 11:30 a.m.]

[Telegram]

969. My telegram No. 940, 30th.1 Van Dyke telegraphs that French Minister, The Hague, threatens to protest against transit of foodstuffs through Netherlands unless French Government notifies their Minister at The Hague of its approbation.

American Ambassador

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 840.48/890

[Document 1298]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 3, 1914.
[Received 11:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

978. For the Secretary and Mr. House):

The International Commission for Relief of Belgium, of which Herbert Hoover here is active chairman, has diplomatic arrangements complete by all governments concerned and has written guaranty of German military commander in Belgium that food for starving Belgians shall not be diverted. It works under joint chairmanship of Spanish Ambassador here, myself, American and Spanish Ministers to Belgium and to Holland, and it has the only available transportation of food from Rotterdam to Belgian places of distribution and the only available machinery for universal distribution in Belgium. It handles a relief given by various European Governments and private subscriptions and help taken up in neutral European countries. The problem is practically insoluble to feed something like four million starving people.

The generous work of the United States seems to have many overlapping activities and organizations which to a degree defeat one another. It is desirable, if possible, that one central, wholly American committee be created through which all organizations may send food. I hear the President has been asked to appoint such a committee. If you think it wise advise such a course, concentrate all efforts. Hoover will send explicit directions how much food, what kinds of food, how to ship, in what quantities, and at what intervals so as to coordinate work done in United States with work done in Europe. Answer.

American Ambassador

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 855.48/24

[Document 1299]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

231. Department’s 221, October 31. Has French Government given assurance of recognition of neutrality of goods shipped for American Commission for Relief in Belgium? American Minister at The Hague informs Department that French Minister at The Hague threatens to protest against transit of foodstuffs through Netherlands unless his Government notifies him of its approbation.

Lansing

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/28

[Document 1300]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, November 5, 1914 ,
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

[Telegram]

248. Your 221 and 231, 31st and 4th respectively. This matter immediately referred to Bordeaux where Foreign Office replied that matter had already been taken up with British Government and would advise Embassy what decision the two Governments had reached. Garrett advises by telephone this afternoon has had no answer yet.

Herrick

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 855.48/29

[Document 1301]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1914.

[Telegram]

590. Belgian Commission requests that you secure from German Government unmolested passage for neutral food ships from United States to Holland for Belgium. This has been done by British Government.

Also inform Department whether German Government has placed embargo on importation into Belgium, in neutral ships, of thoroughly disinfected and cleaned second-hand clothing.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/35

[Document 1302]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, November 9, 1914.
[Received 3 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1027. The French Minister in Holland caused embarrassing situation regard forwarding of food to Belgium saying he lacked instructions from his Government; more cargoes will arrive forthwith.

Can French Government not send him instructions soon as possible to consent to transshipment through Holland as all other Governments consent?

American Ambassador

1 Forwarded to the Ambassador in France November 10, No. 253.

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/36

[Document 1303]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, November 11, 1914.
[Received 5:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

267. Your 253, 10th. Foreign Office states that instructions have already been sent French Minister at The Hague to offer no objection to transit of foodstuffs through the Netherlands from United States destined to Belgium. At Embassy’s request Foreign Office stated it would repeat instructions to Minister at The Hague.

Herrick

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/40

[Document 1304]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, November 14, 1914.

[Telegram]

1060. Since the report seems to be widely circulated in the United States that the German military authorities in Belgium are stopping food for the needy Belgians, it may seem to you wise to contradict the report. There has been no interference. In appearance, the German military authorities give useful assistance.

American Ambassador

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 704.6741/3

[Document 1305]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, November 14, 1914.

[Telegram—Extract]

540. . . . The President does not think it wise to appoint a committee.1 He believes it is better to have the Belgian relief managed by those not officially connected with the Government here. . . . The relief fund is likely to reach some magnitude and we take it for granted that you have examined into the record and standing of Hoover. . . .

Bryan

1 See last paragraph of the Ambassador’s No. 978, November 3, ante, p. 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298].

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/41

[Document 1306]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, October 20, 1914.
[Received November 14.]

No. 155]

Sir: I enclose herewith an article from the Gazette de Hollande bearing upon the prospect of a shortage of food in those portions of Belgium which have been already conquered by Germany. The publication of this diplomatic correspondence between the Netherlands Foreign Minister and the German Minister at The Hague, has been taken in the Netherlands as indicating an effort on the part of Germany to evade the responsibility of providing food for impoverished Belgium. For this reason the correspondence has aroused considerable indignation among the Dutch.

I have [etc.]

Henry Van Dyke

[Enclosure]

Extract from “La Gazette de Hollande,” October 19, 1914

Official Correspondence With Germany

The German Legation publishes certain correspondence which has passed between the German Minister and the Netherlands Minister for Foreign Affairs on the subject of the provisioning of Belgium. It claims at the same time that these documents prove—as opposed to Belgian official allegations—that the German Army authorities have done their best to prevent any distress in Belgium, and suggests that if their measures have not been so successful as expected it is no fault of the German Army authorities. The correspondence is appended:

From the Imperial German Legation to Jonkheer J. Loudon, Minister for [Foreign] Affairs [Document 1307]

From the Imperial German Legation to Jonkheer J. Loudon, Minister for [Foreign] Affairs

The Hague, August 15, 1914.

Your Excellency: It is to be foreseen that the war and its destruction will soon cause the keenest suffering amongst the inhabitants of the southern part of Belgium. Though deploring this possibility the chief German Army authorities will under the present circumstances be unable to render assistance.

The Imperial Government recognises that from a humane point of view it is its duty to do everything in its power to prevent this threatening misery. It therefore invites the Dutch Government to take the measures which shall seem necessary to it, in order to collect on the Meuse foodstuffs to feed the Belgian population. The German Army authorities on their part are prepared to furnish the railway transport as soon as they think such is available.

Bringing the above to the knowledge of your excellency, I avail myself [etc.]

Von Müller

From the Foreign Department to the German Minister [Document 1308]

From the Foreign Department to the German Minister

The Hague, August 17, 1914.

Your Excellency: By your note of 15th instant your excellency has been so kind as to inform me of the misery which the war and its ravages will bring over the inhabitants of a large part of Belgium, as well as of the relief which the Queen’s Government could give, at the proper moment, by means of sending food held in readiness for the purpose. At the same time, your excellency intimated to me that the chief German Army authorities are on their part prepared to furnish the means of transport for such supplies.

Limiting myself for the moment to notifying your excellency of the due receipt of the aforesaid note, I most emphatically assure you that the Queen’s Government received this communication with the greatest sympathy; it was struck by the careful endeavor to spare the Belgian population as much as possible the inseparable miseries of war.

Accept, your excellency [etc.]

J. Loudon

Both this note and the one appended hereunder were addressed to his excellency Von Müller, Extraordinary Ambassador and Minister Plenipotentiary of His Majesty, the Emperor of Germany.

The Hague , October 3, 1914.

Your Excellency: In my note of August 17 last I had the honor of interpreting to your excellency the feelings of lively sympathy with which the Queen’s Government had received your statement that the Imperial Government was prepared to furnish the railway accommodation for the eventual transport through the Netherlands of foodstuffs for the population of southern Belgium.

The Belgian Government, to whom I addressed myself on the subject, gratefully accepted our proposal to in case of need supply the rural population of the region between the Meuse and the French frontier with foodstuffs. It, however, pointed out that the duty of providing these foodstuffs rested on Germany. This remark was likewise made by France and Great Britain, who further opposed the execution of our plan, which in their opinion would endanger our neutrality, in connection with the fact that Germany, by evading the duty of supplying the population with foodstuffs, would dispose of so much the more for her own army.

Under these circumstances the Queen’s Government regrets to be obliged to renounce the aforesaid plan.

Accept, your excellency [etc.]

J. Loudon

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 855.48/28

[Document 1309]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, November 17, 1914.

[Telegram]

275. Your 248, 5th. Department is informed by Ambassador Page, London, that the British Government is cooperating with American Embassy in supplies for the Belgians. Department would be pleased to have some definite assurance from the French Government of its recognition of the neutrality of goods shipped for International Commission for Relief in Belgium.

Bryan

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 855.48/43

[Document 1310]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, November 20, 1914.

[Telegram]

677. At the request of the Commission for Belgian Relief, you may obtain if possible from the German Government safe passage of British as well as neutral ships bound for Rotterdam with food for starving Belgians. Such ships will fly the commission’s flag. Please ask German Government also whether permission of military authorities in Belgium may be obtained for Americans with automobiles to go from place to place engaged in food distribution. Such Americans will carry commission’s flag and have letters each with bearer’s photograph from the commission, countersigned by the Spanish and American Ambassadors at London.

Lansing

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/54

[Document 1311]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, November 23, 1914.
[Received November 24, 5:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

899. Your 590, 7th,1 and 677, 20th. German Government is entirely in sympathy with laudable work of American Commission for Belgian Relief. German naval forces cannot lawfully seize food on neutral ships bound for neutral ports. Germany will not interfere with any neutral ships bound for Holland with food from the United States even if food is destined for Belgium. Subject to revoke German Government agrees to permit unneutral ships also to carry food for Belgians to Dutch ports and will give same guarantee that food is put to intended uses as for neutral ships. German Government recommends that as precaution such unneutral ships carry certificate from competent American authority testifying that ship carries food for the Belgians to be brought to Belgium via Dutch ports by American Commission for Belgian Relief with the consent of the German Government and that unneutral ships also have pass which German Ambassador, Washington, will issue upon certificate above described.2 Inquiry made about distribution of food by Americans in automobiles.

Gerard

1  Ante, p. 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301].

2 Communicated to the German Ambassador December 1 with expression of the hope “that it will meet with your excellency’s approval.”

The Chargé d’Affaires’ in France (Bliss) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/69

[Document 1312]

The Chargé d’Affaires’ in France (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, December 4, 1914.
[Received 10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

345. Your 275, 17th. Foreign Office apparently unwilling to give definite answer at this time but states that it does not anticipate any trouble will be encountered from French authorities or representatives by American committee in sending supplies to destitute Belgians in Belgium.

Bliss

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/79

[Document 1313]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, December 4, 1914.
[Received December 5.]

[Translation]

No. 10078]

Mr. Secretary of State: In acknowledging the receipt of your excellency’s kind note of the 1st instant, I have the honor to reply to your excellency that I concur in the proposals therein made.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/80

[Document 1314]

The German Ambassador (Bernstorff) to the Secretary of State

German Embassy,
Washington, December 5, 1914.

[Translation]

No. 10106]

Mr. Secretary of State: Supplementing my note of the 4th instant I have the honor to inform your excellency that I have instructed the German consuls concerned to issue upon production of American testimony, safe-conducts to unneutral ships carrying victuals for Belgium.

Accept [etc.]

J. Bernstorff

The Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/116

[Document 1315]

The Chargé d’Affaires in the Netherlands (Langhorne) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, December 11, 1914.
[Received December 26.]

No. 177]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a statement of the work done by the Commission for Relief in Belgium, which was sent to me by Captain J. F. Lucey, the Rotterdam manager, and which may be of interest in connection with other information the Department may have on the subject.

This commission, which is usually spoken of as the “American Relief Commission,” attracts great attention in official and business circles in Holland, and high praise of its organization and efficiency is expressed on all sides. The Dutch Government has manifested the greatest interest in the work of the commission, and in response to the many requests made by it, has gladly rendered au possible aid and assistance.

I have [etc.]

Marshall Lanohorne

[Enclosure]

Report by Captain J. F. Lucey on the work of the American Commission for Relief in Belgium

On our arrival we established temporary offices with the Furness Shipping & Agency Company, who placed their entire staff at our disposal and attended to all the details of our work. The managers, who were exceptionally courteous, personally devoted a large part of their time to our interests, and rendered us much valuable assistance in arranging the necessary details of transshipment with the Dutch Government. Acting on instructions from London to establish permanent offices of our own, we investigated the building at 98, Haringvliet, and, on Thursday, November 20, moved into our present well-equipped offices.

The head offices of the American Commission are in London, where the commission was first formed under the supervision of Ambassador Page. There are branch offices in New York, working directly or indirectly through the various committees which have been formed to assist in this great work throughout the whole of the United States.

Organization. We have a very complete organization which consists of: General office management; receiving and shipping department; accountants’ department; stock department; cost department; stenographers; porters; and messengers.

In several of our departments we are employing Belgian refugees who were in great need of employment. The Furness Company has put several of its most capable men at our disposal. We have stationed efficient agents on the frontier, at Hansweert, Terneuzen, Maastricht, and at Eysden. The frontier representatives have been active in establishing lines of communications and now we are in touch with all the great centers of Belgium, and with the heads of the German Government at Brussels. These latter have placed Government lines at our disposal, thus enabling us to maintain fairly good connections with our representatives.

Arrival of food supplies. The first ship, viz., the S. S. Coblenz , arrived on November 1. As it was important that the first shipment should proceed without delay, we were instructed by his excellency, the American Minister at The Hague, to place the delivery of this shipment in the hands of the Secretary of the Legation at The Hague, which we did. On Wednesday morning, November 4, three days after the arrival of the Coblenz , her cargo was delivered to the American Minister in Brussels. The next ship, the S. S. Jan Blockx , arrived on Monday noon, November 9. Discharging of her cargo began at once and continued throughout the night. On the following morning a special train of 41 cars, escorted by Captain Sunderland of the United States Army, started for Liége and Limburg. On Tuesday evening, approximately 30 hours after the arrival of the Jan Blockx in the port of Rotterdam, her cargo was delivered to the burgomaster at Liége. The next ocean-going steamer to arrive was the S. S. Tremorvah from Nova Scotia. Her cargo was in part clothes, which have been distributed to Belgian refugees in Holland in about 500 towns and villages; and in part food supplies, which have been sent to Louvain, Brussels, Maline, etc., and redistributed from these cities to the outlying districts.

The first American steamer, the S. S. Massapequa , in charge of Captain McCarthy, arrived at 9 o’clock, Saturday night, November 21, and was met by the following committee:

Col. S. Listoe, American Consul General at Rotterdam; E. B. Elderkin, chairman of the Nova Scotian delegation, which presented the cargo of the S. S. Tremorvah ; H. C. Crowell, representative of the Halifax Morning Chronicle; P. Douglass, P. C. Jongeneel, managers of Furness Shipping & Agency Company, Rotterdam; J. F. Lucey; and on Sunday morning by—Marshall Langhorne, Chargé d’Affaires of the American Legation at The Hague; Captain Gherardi, Naval Attaché to the American Embassy at Berlin, Captain, U. S. Army; Capt. A. H. Sunderland, attached to the American Legation at The Hague, Captain, U. S. Army; together with a number of gentlemen from the American Commission.

Means of transportation. Our first work was to obtain facilities for delivering the food supplies which were to arrive in Rotterdam for transshipment into Belgium. You will appreciate the fact that all communications had been discontinued, trains were not running, many canals were not open, nor did we know whether we would be permitted to use those canals which were open. We are glad to inform you that we have reestablished sufficient communications to enable us to deliver supplies into the central points of Belgium.

Belgian cooperation. We are affiliated in Belgium with the Comité National de Secours et d’Alimentation, which has headquarters at Brussels with subcommittees in each province. Stationed at each province are one or two Americans, who receive the goods in the name of the American Minister and see to it that they are delivered to the proper offices of the provincial societies. The provincial committees make their requisitions at the head office at Brussels, which is under the supervision of the American and Spanish Ministers.

German authorities. The German authorities and German diplomatic officials have given us every assistance possible and have been uniformly courteous in the reception and treatment of our representatives. We desire specially to thank the German Consul here for the active interest and cooperation he has given us in our work.

Dutch authorities. The Dutch authorities have been extremely courteous and have placed every facility of their Government at our disposal. They have made up special trains for us at very short notice. The Foreign Minister, Mr. Loudon, paid us the unusual compliment of attending in person to many details of our work.

The American Legation at Brussels have rendered us every possible assistance, and we cannot endorse too highly the splendid work which Mr. Whitlock has done. He has earned, through his untiring efforts in the interests of this work, the universal respect of the Belgian people and of the German authorities.

Financial. The minimum requirements of the Belgian people for the next eight months are estimated at 80,000 tons of foodstuffs per month, which require about $5,000,000 per month to cover. Inasmuch as the men at the head of this commission are accustomed to the organization and management of large businesses, we are hopeful of coping successfully with this gigantic undertaking.

Accountancy. The auditing of the books of the commission is in the hands of Messrs. Deloitte, Pelder, Griffiths & Company, of London, New York, and Paris.

General. You will note from the necessarily brief report which we have given you what an extremely difficult work we are undertaking. We believe it has no parallel in history. In addition to what is being accomplished in Belgium, a great deal has been carried out indirectly in Holland through the Netherlands National Committee, which has made distributions throughout many of the cities and provinces of Holland. By the continued perseverance and cooperation of the various governments interested, and by the splendid response to the appeal made to the American people, what at first seemed to be an impossible task is gradually being accomplished. Though there will be much privation and distress in Belgium, which it is quite beyond the scope of human possibility to deal with, there is every prospect that the greater part of the suffering of the Belgian people will be relieved.

Were it not for the splendid services rendered us by your Legation, we would have been unable to accomplish even the small amount of work we have done.

Yours [etc.]

J. F. Lucey

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/126

[Document 1316]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 26, 1914.
[Received December 28, 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1195. Acting not officially but as one of chairmen Belgian Relief Commission, called to-day with Spanish Ambassador and Netherlands Minister on Undersecretary of State Zimmermann who gladly and without hesitation assured us that commanding general in Belgium will give assurance to American, Spanish, and Netherlands Ministers in Belgium that German military authorities will not make any further requisitions of food supplies in Belgium while the International Commission are sending in food and for a reasonable time after the last delivery.

Gerard

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/125

[Document 1317]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, December 28, 1914.
[Received December 29, 8 p.m.]

[Telegram]

1340. The Foreign Office informs me that the British naval authorities will undertake in the future to facilitate the voyage only of such charity ships to Rotterdam as contain whole cargoes of food for Belgian relief. It is important, therefore, that such ships should not contain other cargo, and to secure this protection all ships for Belgian relief must be reported by Lindon Bates, the commission’s representative in New York, to the British Ambassador in Washington. After conferring with Sir Cecil Spring Rice it might be advantageous to give this arrangement wide publicity because certain societies and committees continue to ship contributions of food in ships that carry other cargo.

American Ambassador

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 855.48/130

[Document 1318]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, December 28, 1914.
[Received December 31, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

1210. My 899, November 23.1 Foreign Office now request that special certificates of unneutral ships carrying food for Belgians contain following statements: (1) American express declaration that the ship carries solely food and clothing for Belgian population to be unloaded in a Dutch port; (2) an undertaking of the master of the vessel on his word of honor to abstain from any and all actions on outgoing or homeward voyage involving assistance to our opponents; (3) statements that certificate and pass are valid for single outward voyage only and must be delivered to German consul upon arrival in. Dutch port of destination or to German Minister at The Hague if there is no consul (similar papers for return voyage will be issued by German Legation at The Hague); (4) statement that the papers do not bar a search of the vessel and that cargo must be stowed so that search can be conducted quickly and easily; (5) statement that the date of departure from the United States is to he communicated to German Ambassador at Washington, the date of departure from Holland on return voyage to German Minister at The Hague; (6) statement that non-compliance with these provisions and obligations assumed works forfeiture of all rights to preferential treatment.

Gerard

1  Ante, p. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311].

Negotiations relating to the work of the Red CrossNegotiations relating to the work of the Red Cross

[The following documents represent but a small part of the Department’s activities in furthering the work of the American Red Cross in belligerent countries. It continued to transmit a great volume of routine correspondence concerning the despatch of personnel, supplies, and funds (which were handled through the Department’s fiscal system), and the administration of the units abroad.]

[1319] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 5, 1914.

File No. 811.142/232a

[1320] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1914.

File No. 811.142/265

[1321] The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador in NT Washington (Spring Rice)

August 29, 1914. [Received in the Department of State August 29.]

File No. 811.142/321

[1322] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, undated. [Received September 1, 1914, 1:15 a.m.]

File No. 811.142/266

[1323] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, September 1, 1914.

File No. 811.142/285

[1324] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, September 1, 1914.

[1325] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands ( Van Dyke )

Department of State, Washington, September 1, 1914.

[1326] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State, Washington, September 2, 1914.

File No. 811.142/266

[1327] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 811.142/336f

[1328] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1914.

File No. 811.142/336g

[1329] The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, The Hague, September 6, 1914. [Received 4:57 p.m.]

File No. 811.142/278

[1330] The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State

Bordeaux, September 6, 1914. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 811.142/277

[1331] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, September 6, 1914. [Received September 7, 9:10 a.m.]

File No. 811.142/281

[1332] The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State

Bordeaux, September 7, 1914, 6 p.m. [Received September 8, 10 a.m.]

File No. 811.142/283

[1333] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, September 10, 1914. [Received 7:06 p.m.]

File No. 811.142/292

[1334] The Secretary of State to whom it may concern

September 11, 1914

File No. 811.142/295

[1335] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, September 18, 1914. [Received 7 p.m.]

File No. 811.142/304

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 811.142/232a

[Document 1319]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)1

Department of State,
Washington, August 5, 1914.

[Telegram]

Under Article 11 of the treaty of Geneva American Red Cross expresses deep sympathy and offers to British Red Cross a unit consisting of three doctors and twelve nurses with hospital supplies. All medical officers to be men of practical army or navy experience. All nurses finest graduate trained American Red Cross nurses, two or three years training. Each member of unit ready to take oath of secrecy or assume whatever other obligations may be required. A like offer made to all countries involved and ship will be chartered by the American Red Cross sailing under Red Cross flag to forward personnel and supplies. Earnestly trust this offer will be accepted. Suggest unit give service at base or reserve hospitals. If necessary further personnel will be forwarded later. Communicate foregoing to British Red Cross and request early reply.2

W. J. Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France, Germany, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and the Ministers in Belgium and Servia.

2 Replies notifying acceptance not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 811.142/265

[Document 1320]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) 1

Department of State,
Washington, August 27, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department advised by American Red Cross that it has taken over the German S. S. Prinz Joachim of the Hamburg-American Packet Company under charter at the nominal charge of one dollar to be commanded by the courtesy of the Navy Department by retired naval officers and manned by crew of civilian Americans for the purpose of carrying units composed of three surgeons and twelve nurses each, together with hospital supplies, to all the countries involved in the war, which assistance has been accepted by their governments. This ship will probably enter English, French, and Dutch ports only. The ship will be painted the colors prescribed by the Hague convention, white with a red strake, and its name will be changed to the Red Cross and it will fly both the Red Cross and the American flags. Under the joint resolution of Congress approved the 20th instant authority is given to American Red Cross during the continuance of the present wars to charter a vessel of foreign register to carry the American flag for “transportation of nurses and supplies and for all uses in connection with the work of said society.” After futile efforts to secure an American or English ship the packet company tendered this ship as a free gift to assist the Red Cross work, the transaction being actually a loss to the company as the crew is left on its hands. The Red Cross obligated itself to deliver the ship back to the port of New York in the same condition as received within thirty days with the option, if the necessities of war demand it, to make a similar voyage under the same conditions.

As the belligerents have accepted the assistance of Red Cross units and as the object of the expedition is purely charitable and in the interest of humanity and for the amelioration of the sick and wounded of the armies in the field, you will bring the foregoing immediately to the attention of the British Government and press for assurances at the earliest possible moment that this vessel will not be hindered or molested during its voyage or its stay at belligerent ports.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia.

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador in NT Washington (Spring Rice) File No. 811.142/321

[Document 1321]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Grey) to the British Ambassador in NT Washington (Spring Rice)

August 29, 1914.
[Received in the Department of State August 29.]

[Telegram]

His Majesty’s Government have no objection whatever to an arrangement under American control to use any ship for the purpose to which it is proposed to put the Prince Joachim. On the contrary, they would readily and gratefully agree to such a plan.

E. Grey

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/266

[Document 1322]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, undated.
[Received September 1, 1914, 1:15 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Referring to the Department’s telegram of August 27. Following is literal translation of French reply:

In consideration of the purely charitable and humane purpose of the American Red Cross the Government of the Republic does not seek to ascertain whether the transfer of flag would not be questionable under the terms of the Declaration of London and it highly appreciates the generous sentiments of the promoters of this charitable expedition. It goes without saying, however, that this neutral hospital ship must satisfy the conditions enumerated under Article 3 of Convention X of The Hague, 1907, to wit: 1. She must be employed exclusively by a duly recognized society.

2. She must be authorized by the Government of the United States.

3. She must be placed under the orders of one of the belligerents who in this case would seem to be either France or Great Britain who is master of the seas and who alone could assure the liberty of movement of the said hospital.

4. She must be accepted by the belligerent who is to take control and who must notify the hostile belligerents of her name.

Herrick

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) File No. 811.142/285

[Document 1323]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State,
Washington, September 1, 1914.

[Telegram]

17. American Red Cross vessel sailing September 5 will stop at Southampton, Havre, and Rotterdam. Ascertain whether British authorities at Southampton will remit port duties. Vessel will coal United States for return journey and can bring home American citizens on condition that they pay to the Red Cross their passage money. Vessel named Red Cross, formerly named Hamburg of Hamburg-American Line; can accommodate 256 first-class, 129 second-class not counting 15 small beds for children, and 500 steerage. Red Cross Society feels that in absence of Hamburg-American office in London, American Express Company might be used as booking office. This use of Red Cross vessel on return trip would give much needed funds to society. Cable at once whether any objections would be seen to such arrangement for transportation.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) [Document 1324]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, September 1, 1914.

[Telegram]

17. The American Red Cross vessel will stop at Havre. Ascertain whether French authorities at that port will remit port duties.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands ( Van Dyke ) [Document 1325]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Netherlands ( Van Dyke )

Department of State,
Washington, September 1, 1914.

[Telegram]

6. The American Red Cross vessel will stop at Rotterdam. Ascertain whether Netherlands authorities at that port will remit port duties.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) File No. 811.142/266

[Document 1326]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Department of State,
Washington, September 2, 1914.

[Telegram]

25. Your undated telegram received September 1 regarding Red Cross ship Prinz Joachim. Red Cross does not consider vessel as hospital ship in any sense, and therefore not within Hague convention. The vessel is simply a supply ship carrying surgeons, nurses, and hospital supplies to the battle fields of Europe regardless of nationality. Moreover, as the vessel proposes to visit the ports of different belligerents it is obviously impracticable to place her under local control except while in port.

The vessel’s mission is to relieve suffering humanity from some of the horrors of war and therefore Department deprecates introduction by French Government of technicalities which tend to cripple vessel’s usefulness in its charitable and generous work. Department can see no valid basis for objection by one belligerent to the visit of such supply vessel flying the American flag and engaged in a neutral sacrificing service which has already been accepted by the belligerents. Present these views strongly to the French Government and press further for assurances that this vessel will not be hindered or molested during its voyage or its stay at French ports.

Bryan

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 811.142/336f

[Document 1327]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) 1

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

Department’s telegram of August 27 regarding Red Cross ship Prinz Joachim. Department is informed that S. S. Hamburg of Hamburg-American line has been chartered in place of Prinz Joachim and that the Hamburg will carry the name Red Cross. In order to insure neutrality of vessel authority has been given by special act of Congress for her to sail under American flag. As Hamburg is to sail for European ports next Monday, bring matter again to attention of Foreign Office, and obtain assurances at earliest moment that vessel will not be molested while on voyage or in German ports. Also request Government to grant all courtesies and waive formalities in order to facilitate issuance of clearance papers. Report immediately.

Bryan

1 The same, mutatis mutandis, to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Russia, and Austria-Hungary.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) File No. 811.142/336g

[Document 1328]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1914.

[Telegram]

55. Department’s telegram to-day regarding Red Cross ship Hamburg . Request Foreign Office to instruct German Consul, New York, to give up Hamburg’s papers so that she may dear. He refuses to give up papers without authority. Report immediately.

Bryan

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/278

[Document 1329]

The Minister in the Netherlands (Van Dyke) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
The Hague, September 6, 1914.
[Received 4:57 p.m.]

[Telegram]

13. Netherlands Government informs me there will be no port charges for American Red Cross vessel at Rotterdam.

Van Dyke

The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/277

[Document 1330]

The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State

Bordeaux, September 6, 1914.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

Regarding the Red Cross ship Hamburg. Government here disposed to do everything it can to aid. Hope to-morrow to be able to cable you that instructions for issuing safe-conduct papers have been cabled to French Consul at New York. Meanwhile owing to necessary delays due to process of getting settled here, Foreign Office suggests that sailing be postponed until Tuesday at earliest.

Garrett

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/281

[Document 1331]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, September 6, 1914.
[Received September 7, 9:10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

47. Extremely urgent. Department’s telegram No. 55, September 4. German Government approved American Red Cross plans as stated. Ship will not be molested by Germans so long as she adheres only to purpose of expedition. Please transmit following message to German Consul General, New York, at request of Foreign Office:

27. Imperial Chancellor and Hamburg-American Line authorize you immediately to issue ship’s papers to steamer Hamburg which has been chartered to American Red Cross and should sail for Europe September 7 under the American flag in name of Red Cross.

Foreign Office. Zimmermann
Gerard

The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/283

[Document 1332]

The Special Agent in France (Garrett) to the Secretary of State

Bordeaux, September 7, 1914, 6 p.m.
[Received September 8, 10 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Foreign Office informs me that instructions have been sent French Consul General, New York, to issue safe-conduct papers to Red Cross ship. Foreign Office states ship must come only to Brest and that she must not have on board in any capacity any Germans who are or were officers or official.

Garrett

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/292

[Document 1333]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, September 10, 1914.
[Received 7:06 p.m.]

[Telegram]

9. Russian Government is still waiting England’s action concerning Red Cross ship Hamburg. Papers report that ship detained at request British Ambassador, Washington, as most of crew discovered to be Germans. Request from beginning has caused bad impression at Foreign Office and in press.

Wilson

The Secretary of State to whom it may concern File No. 811.142/295

[Document 1334]

The Secretary of State to whom it may concern

September 11, 1914

To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting:

I certify that the steamship Hamburg of the Hamburg-American Packet Company has been chartered at the nominal charge of one dollar by the American Red Cross Society and is commanded by retired naval officers of the United States of America and manned by a crew of civilian Americans and neutrals,1 for the purpose of carrying surgeons, nurses, and hospital supplies to the battle fields of the countries unhappily involved in the present conflict in Europe; that this vessel has by the joint resolution of the Congress of the United States, approved August 20, 1914, been authorized to carry the American flag; and that while engaged in this employment the name of the vessel shall be changed to the Red Cross and the vessel will fly the flag of the Red Cross in addition to the American flag.

I certify further that the Ambassadors of His Britannic Majesty’s Government and of the Government of the French Republic, respectively, in Washington, on behalf of their Governments, have given assurances to the Government of the United States of America that the vessel Red Cross shall not be hindered or molested in its voyage on the seas or during its stay in the ports of their countries while engaged in this neutral and benevolent service for the relief of those suffering from the horrors of war.

In testimony whereof I, Robert Lansing, Acting Secretary of State, have hereunto subscribed my name and caused the seal of the Department of State to be affixed at the City of Washington, this eleventh day of September, 1914.

[SEAL]

Robert Lansing

1 The sailing of the ship was deferred from the 8th to the 12th of September, due to representations made by the British Consul General at New York to the effect that a number of German members of the crew would be subject to arrest and detention upon entering British or French ports. A new crew had then to be shipped.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 811.142/304

[Document 1335]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
London, September 18, 1914.
[Received 7 p.m.]

[Telegram]

700. Your telegram September 4. British Government will grant all courtesies requested for S. S. Red Cross .

American Ambassador

[The ship sailed September 12, carrying units and supplies, of which the American diplomatic representatives in the various countries were informed by telegraph on the 16th. She returned on October 24, bringing a number of American passengers.]

Proposal for the Exemption of Hospital Supplies From Seizure As Contraband of WarProposal for the Exemption of Hospital Supplies From Seizure As Contraband of War

[1336] The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Madrid, September 22, 1914. [Received September 23, 5:10 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/134

[1337] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard)

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1914.

[1338] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, London, October 6, 1914. [Received 8:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/146

[1339] The Acting Secretary of State to the American Red Cross

Department of State, Washington, October 8, 1914.

[1340] The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American Red Cross (Davis) to the Assistant Secretary of State

American Red Cross, Washington, October 8, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/203

[1341] The Acting Secretary of State to the Spanish, Ambassador (Riaño)

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1914.

File No. 763.72112/146

[1342] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

[1343] The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Petrograd, undated. [Received October 17, 1914, 11:40 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/181

[1344] The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation, Brussels, October 19, 1914. [Repetition received October 20, 8 a.m.]

File No. 763.72112/187

[1345] The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Berlin, October 29, 1914. [Received October 30, 9:30 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/269

[1346] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy, Paris, October 30, 1914. [Received 8:15 p.m.]

File No. 763.72112/268

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/134

[Document 1336]

The Ambassador in Spain (Willard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Madrid, September 22, 1914.
[Received September 23, 5:10 p.m.]

[Telegram]

In an interview yesterday morning His Majesty informed me confidentially condition of wounded soldiers, particularly in French hospitals where there are inadequate supplies, especially of bandages and absorbent cotton, was deplorable and expressed an earnest wish for our cooperation in relieving this situation. To that end he hopes that United States and Spanish Ambassadors accredited near various European courts now at war will make a joint request for arrangements between countries of hospital supplies and that such supplies in transit on the high seas may be considered by them neither contraband nor conditional contraband of war but free. Please telegraph whether Department can see its way clear to give to our diplomatic officers concerned the instructions necessary to realize His Majesty’s hope.

Willard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) [Document 1337]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) 1

Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1914.

[Telegram]

The Department has received from the American Ambassador at Madrid a request from the King of Spain for our cooperation in making a joint request that arrangements be made between the belligerent countries as to what constitutes hospital supplies and that such supplies in transit on the high seas may be considered by them neither contraband nor conditional contraband of war, but free.

The Department presumes that the country to which you are accredited would be willing to follow the rule in Article 29 of the Declaration of London maintaining the non-contraband character of hospital supplies, but you may confer with your Spanish colleague with a view to making a joint representation to the Foreign Office in the sense indicated.

Lansing

1 The same to the Ambassadors in Great Britain, France, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Japan, and to the Minister in Belgium.

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/146

[Document 1338]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) to the Secretary of State 1

American Embassy,
London, October 6, 1914.
[Received 8:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

789. Your unnumbered instruction September 24. The Spanish Ambassador having just received instructions, he and I had a conference with Grey. Grey heartily assents in principle and asks that our Government and the Spanish Government define exactly what constitutes hospital supplies and submit to all belligerent governments this definition and the proposal that they be neither contraband nor conditional contraband but be free and be expedited everywhere. The Spanish Ambassador here suggests that you take this up with the Spanish Ambassador in Washington to save time.

American Ambassador

1 Repeated October 9 to the Ambassador in Spain.

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Red Cross [Document 1339]

The Acting Secretary of State to the American Red Cross

Department of State,
Washington, October 8, 1914.

The Acting Secretary of State presents his compliments to the American Red Cross Society and informs it that a telegram, dated October 6, has been received from London stating that Sir Edward Grey, in response to a request of the American and Spanish Ambassadors, has asked that our Government define exactly what constitutes hospital supplies, to the end that such supplies may not be declared contraband or conditional contraband but be free and be expedited everywhere.

The Department would be glad to be informed as to what constitutes hospital supplies and will appreciate an early reply so that same may be transmitted to the belligerent governments.

The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American Red Cross (Davis) to the Assistant Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/203

[Document 1340]

The Chairman of the Central Committee of the American Red Cross (Davis) to the Assistant Secretary of State

American Red Cross,
Washington, October 8, 1914.

Sir: Responding to your verbal inquiry of this morning respecting the denomination of medical and hospital supplies as related to questions of contraband of war, the best I can do is to tell you of the shipments that the Red Cross has made and is making in response to requests from the Red Cross and hospital organizations in the belligerent countries (see List A herewith).

But this does not by any means exhaust the class of articles that belong to the category of medical and hospital supplies. In the former group should be included all pharmaceutical preparations, of which a summary is included, and another of articles for use in hospitals (see List B herewith):

There are certain articles used for medicinal purposes that are compounded of materials which in other forms would be contraband of war. For example, many hospital dressings are made of cotton in some form; so, too, as a basis for an explosive, cotton is also used, known as guncotton. The preparation of the two are entirely separate and distinct, and the one could never be taken for the other. The same remark applies to gauze dressings saturated with picric acid, used to alleviate suffering from burns; this same material in another form is a high explosive.

And I presume this remark, relating to these two articles, may have application to others.

Yours sincerely,

George W. Davis

[Enclosure]

LIST A

Articles which have been supplied by the American Red Cross

Hospital supplies, dressings, etc.: Stretchers; absorbent cotton; non-absorbent cotton; absorbent gauze; starched (crinoline) gauze; picric-acid gauze; gauze and muslin bandages; adhesive plaster.

Surgical instruments and accessories: Artery forceps; scissors; sutures for sewing wounds—silk, catgut, silkworm gut; rubber gloves; hypodermic syringes.

Medicines: Tincture of iodine.

Anesthetics: Chloroform; ether.

LIST B

Similar articles coming under same headings as in List A

Hospital equipment: Beds; bedding; pajamas and nightshirts.

Operating-room furniture: Sterilizers; instrument stands; instrument cases; operating tables and chairs; electric batteries.

Surgical supplies—dressings: Absorbent cotton; non-absorbent cotton; absorbent gauze; starched gauze; bandages; gutta percha tissue; oiled silk; adhesive plaster.

Surgical instruments and accessories: Instruments; sutures for sewing wounds; rubber gloves.

Medicines and chemicals: Iodine; cocaine; strychnine; calomel; phenacetin; trional; sodium bicarbonate; sodium salicylate; sodium bromide; potassium bromide; menthol; oil of mustard; camphor; sulphate [of] iron;carbolic acid; boric acid; citric acid; bismuth subnitrate; opium; morphine; codeine; quinine; antipyrin; salol; sulfonal; sodium phosphate; sodium sulphate; potassium iodid; potassium permanganate; oil of peppermint; bichloride of mercury; sulphate [of] copper; magnesia; lactic acid; phosphoric acid; tannic acid; bismuth subgallate; alcohol; petrolatum; sulphate [of] zinc; mustard; ergot; digitalis; oxide [of] zinc; protargol; belladonna; capsicum.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Spanish, Ambassador (Riaño) File No. 763.72112/146

[Document 1341]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Spanish, Ambassador (Riaño)

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1914.

My dear Mr. Ambassador: The Department has received a cable message from the American Ambassador at London informing, it that in compliance with instructions to cooperate with his Spanish colleague he and the Spanish Ambassador have had a conference with it Edward Grey regarding the suggestion of His Majesty the King of Spain that hospital supplies be declared neither contraband nor conditional contraband. Sir Edward Grey, who heartily assented in principle to the representations made by, them, asked that the Governments of Spain and the United States define exactly what constitutes hospital supplies and submit such definition to all belligerent governments with the proposal that those supplies be declared neither contraband nor conditional contraband but be free and be expedited everywhere. The Spanish Ambassador made the suggestion to Ambassador Page that the matter be taken up by the Department with your excellency in order to save time.

In compliance with the request of the Department, the American Red Cross Society has furnished a list of articles which have been supplied by that society and a list of similar articles coming under the same headings, copies of which lists are enclosed for your information.1

I should greatly appreciate a telegram from your excellency stating whether the enclosed lists meet with your approval, and, if not, an early conference with you on the subject.

I am [etc.]

Robert Lansing

1  Ante, p. 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 1340].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page) [Document 1342]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Page)

Department of State, Washington, October 14, 1914.

[Telegram]

307. Your 789 [of October] 6. The Spanish Ambassador here states that he has received no instructions and prefers that you cooperate with the Spanish Ambassador at London.

The Department has received from the Red Cross Society the following list of hospital supplies:

[Here follow Lists A and B, enclosed in the letter of October 8 from Chairman Davis of the Red Cross.1 ]

You will submit this list to the British Foreign Office and telegraph their decision as soon as possible.

Lansing

1 Ante, p. 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 1340].

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/181

[Document 1343]

The Chargé d’Affaires in Russia (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Petrograd, undated.
[Received October 17, 1914, 11:40 p.m.]

[Telegram]

69. Department’s circular telegram, September 24.2 Russian Government is happy to render homage to the noble initiatives of King of Spain and President of the United States. In response to their appeal, Russian authorities have been ordered to give the broadest application to Article 29 of the Declaration of London.

Wilson

2  Ante, p. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337].

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/187

[Document 1344]

The Minister in Belgium (Whitlock) to the Secretary of State

American Legation,
Brussels, October 19, 1914.
[Repetition received October 20, 8 a.m.]

[Telegram]

Department’s circular September 242 regarding agreement to consider hospital supplies as neither contraband nor conditional contraband of war was duly communicated to Belgian Government. No, reply has as yet been received.

Whitlock

2  Ante, p. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337].

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/269

[Document 1345]

The Ambassador in Germany (Gerard) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Berlin, October 29, 1914.
[Received October 30, 9:30 p.m.]

[Telegram]

662. Your circular September 24.2 The Foreign, Office replies to joint request that No. 28, paragraph 1, of the German prize ordinance of September 30, 1909, already provides that articles serving exclusively to aid the sick and wounded shall not be treated as contraband and may be requisitioned subject to payment compensation only in case of urgent military necessity and when their destination is to the territory of the enemy or to territory occupied by the enemy or to the armed forces of the enemy.

Gerard

2  Ante, p. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337].

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State File No. 763.72112/268

[Document 1346]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

American Embassy,
Paris, October 30, 1914.
[Received 8:15 p.m.]

[Telegram]

234. Referring to Department’s circular telegram of September 24.1 . . . The French Government replies in substance as follows:

While appreciating the humanitarian attitude of the United States Government, the French Government does not think the moment propitious for agreement between belligerents, even on a subject which by its character should be placed beyond reach of conflict. Experience of contempt which certain belligerents show for international conventions to which they have agreed gives grounds for apprehension that they would not observe a new agreement nor execute its provisions as soon as it was to their advantage not to do so. The French Government recalls that definition of objects mentioned in Article 29 of the Declaration of London was summarily made in the general report at the London conference by the drafting committee, and it was thus agreed that the immunity established under Article 29 applied to drugs and various medicines. The French Government adds that while it might be a delicate matter to be more precise and extend obligations of belligerents during war beyond where they were fixed in time of peace, nevertheless it would not refuse to study the suggestions of the American Government to draw up a list of drugs and medicines whose character as “articles serving exclusively to aid the sick and wounded” shall be closely defined. Full text follows by mail.2

Herrick

1  Ante, p. 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337].

2 Not printed. At this point the negotiation lapsed and was not revived again in 1914.

Index Index

Adriatic, armed merchant ship 605–607 [Pgs. 605–607 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Æolus, prize ship, landing of crew 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056]

African free-trade zone, neutralization: Proposal by Germany 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166] Transmission to Allied powers by U. S 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

Replies of— France 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Great Britain 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Aircraft: Belligerent, in Panama Canal Zone, rules 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 886]

Contraband status 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 355], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 416]

Alabama claims case: Tenders of warships, treatment in award 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 951]

Three rules of treaty of Washington on arming and fitting out belligerent ships 593–594 [Pgs. 593–594 include portions of Doc. 951, Doc. 952, and Doc. 953]

Albania: Difficulties with Greece 88–90 [Pgs. 88–90 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Italian landing reported 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Aleppo, Consul Jackson requests protection of American interests 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Alexandria. See Sacramento.

Alfred Nobel , meat shipments detained 350–351 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 536], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, appeal for protection of persons and property in Turkey 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

American Commission for Relief in Belgium 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311], 821–822 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 1315]

American Institute of Architects, appeal for averting destruction of architectural monuments 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

American Metal Co., protest against interference with copper shipments 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

American Mining Congress, protest against interference with copper shipments 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

American Smelting & Refining Co., protest against interference with copper shipments 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

American Trade Agency (Rome), protest against interference with cable communications 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

American waters, proposed neutralization: Advocacy by— Argentina 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Brazil 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Ecuador 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

Peru 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 445–446 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 693]

Comment of Chile 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 686]

Reference to Pan American Union 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 443–444 [Pgs. 443–444 include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 694], 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Amistà, merchant ship suspected of supplying belligerent warships 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

Anderson, Chandler P., special legal adviser to the Embassy in Great Britain 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 356–357 [Pgs. 356–357 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

Antares, detained neutral ship 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Archbold, Standard Oil tanker detained 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

Architectural monuments, arrangements to spare, in bombardment of Antwerp 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

Argentina: Flag, reported desecration in Belgium 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126]

Naturalization of subjects of belligerent states 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 1106 and Doc. 1107], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120]

Neutral rights, exchange of information with U. S. on defense of 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 438–441 [Pgs. 438–441 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]

Neutralization of American waters, advocacy 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, regulations and practice 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 690–691 [Pgs. 690–691 include portions of Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121]

Vice Consul at Dinant, execution of 682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 1091, Doc. 1092, and Doc. 1093], 690–691 [Pgs. 690–691 include portions of Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 703–704 [Pgs. 703–704 include portions of Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, and Doc. 1121], 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126]

Warships of belligerents in ports 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Wireless, regulation of 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Armament of merchant ships: Armed merchant ships in neutral ports 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960], 604–609 [Pgs. 604–609 include portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977], 611–614 [Pgs. 611–614 include portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, and Doc. 985]

Arming and fitting out in neutral ports 548–549 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 885], 599–603 [Pgs. 599–603 include portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, and Doc. 964], 609–611 [Pgs. 609–611 include portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, and Doc. 980], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1037 and Doc. 1038]

British ships 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960], 604–609 [Pgs. 604–609 include portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977] German protests 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

German ships 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 963 and Doc. 964] British protests 593–599 [Pgs. 593–599 include portions of Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, and Doc. 962], 609–611 [Pgs. 609–611 include portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, and Doc. 980], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

United States, rules and attitude 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 885], 595–597 [Pgs. 595–597 include portions of Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 599–604 [Pgs. 599–604 include portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972], 611–614 [Pgs. 611–614 include portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, and Doc. 985] Memorandum of Sept. 19 611–612 [Pgs. 611–612 include portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Armour & Co., shipments detained 349–352 [Pgs. 349–352 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Arms and ammunition. See Munitions of war.

Ascot, copper cargo detained 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521]

Asylum in diplomatic and consular premises 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 1183, Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, and Doc. 1186]

“Atrocities”. See Warfare, charges of illegal and inhumane methods.

Australia, embargoes on exports 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 421–424 [Pgs. 421–424 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

Austria-Hungary: Contraband list 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373] Cotton, assurance against inclusion 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Declaration of London, attitude 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 412]

Far East, severance of relations with Japan and participation in defense of Tsingtao 176–177 [Pgs. 176–177 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 328]

Interests in charge of U. S. in— France 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Great Britain 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Japan 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 328]

Russia 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157], 736–738 [Pgs. 736–738 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, and Doc. 1166], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Servia 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Mails, censorship 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

Mine laying in Adriatic Sea 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

War with Servia and the Allied powers: Serajevo assassinations 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 43], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Preparations against Servia 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33]

Ultimatum to Servia 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 102–103 [Pgs. 102–103 include portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Rejection of Servian reply 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 194], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Declaration of war on Servia 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 194]

General mobilization 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Uncertainty of relations with Russia 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Hostilities with Servia 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143]

Uncertainty of relations with Great Britain 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Declaration of war on Russia 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Declaration of war on Montenegro 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Severance of relations by France 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Declaration of state of war by Great Britain and France 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 64–65 [Pgs. 64–65 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

Declaration of war on Belgium 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172]

Popular dissatisfaction over reverses 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

Peace: Agitation for 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

Good offices of U. S., reply to offer 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, negotiations with U. S 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Avery & Lowry, request for release of hides from embargo 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

Barbarossa, suspected of preparation in U. S. port for conversion or for supplying warships at sea 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, and Doc. 964], 615–616 [Pgs. 615–616 include portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989]

Beirut: conditions in, and requests for protection 66–67 [Pgs. 66–67 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197], 763–765 [Pgs. 763–765 include portions of Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, and Doc. 1210], 769–770 [Pgs. 769–770 include portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

Belgium: American Legation retained in Brussels 45–47 [Pgs. 45–47 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 73–74 [Pgs. 73–74 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162] Representations against defense of city 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Architectural monuments, arrangements to spare in bombardment of Antwerp 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

“Atrocities” 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 1255 and Doc. 1256], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 1262 and Doc. 1263], 799–802 [Pgs. 799–802 include portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274] Commission to U. S 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 1264, Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, and Doc. 1267]

Neutrality, violation of: Belgian protests 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 71–72 [Pgs. 71–72 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]

British protests and ultimatum 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

French protests 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

German defense 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 184], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

U.S. attitude 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Relief work: Attitude of— France 814–816 [Pgs. 814–816 include portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

Germany 810–812 [Pgs. 810–812 include portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293], 816–820 [Pgs. 816–820 include portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, Doc. 1304, Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319]

Great Britain 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, and Doc. 1309], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

United States 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, and Doc. 1288], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295], 815–817 [Pgs. 815–817 include portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, Doc. 1304, Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

Organization and operations 809–815 [Pgs. 809–815 include portions of Doc. 1285, Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, Doc. 1295, Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307], 821–822 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 1315]

Ships engaged, safe conduct 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, negotiations with U. S 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

War with Central powers: German demands rejected 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 39–40 [Pgs. 39–40 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

German invasion 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 184]

British assurances 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

State of war recognized 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Further German proposals rejected 51–53 [Pgs. 51–53 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 170], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

Declaration of war by Austria 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172]

German occupation of Brussels and Antwerp 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Severance of relations with Turkey 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267]

Bennett, J. O’D. (correspondent) statement on atrocities in Belgium 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Bergensfjord, neutral ship detained 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Berwind, merchant ship supplying belligerent warships 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

Birkenfels, German ship captured carrying American cargo 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

Björnstjerne Björnson, meat shipments detained 350–351 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 536], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

Bliss, Dr. Howard (pres., American College, Beirut), appeals in behalf of foreigners in Turkey 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, and Doc. 1244]

Blockade 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 264–265 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410]

“Blockade” of the Central powers. See Contraband of war; Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes; Mine laying; North Sea, military area.

Boden, A., statement regarding difficulties of cotton exportation 291–292 [Pgs. 291–292 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, and Doc. 446]

Bombardment. See Architectural monuments.

Brazil: Bases of naval operations, measures against maintenance 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Neutralization of American waters, advocacy 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, regulations and practice 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships, attitude 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 783]

Wireless telegraphy, regulation 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Breslau, German cruiser sold to Turkey 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Brindilla (Washington), Standard Oil tanker, flag transferred 325–326 [Pgs. 325–326 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500]

“Bryan treaties.” See United States: Treaties for the advancement of general peace.

Bulgaria, attitude toward the war 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 182], 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 155–156 [Pgs. 155–156 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

Cablegrams, censorship by belligerents: Addresses and signatures, rules 503–508 [Pgs. 503–508 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 805, Doc. 806, and Doc. 807], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Commercial code messages, rules 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 520–521 [Pgs. 520–521 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 523–525 [Pgs. 523–525 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 527–529 [Pgs. 527–529 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

Cotton messages obstructed 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 523–527 [Pgs. 523–527 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

France, rules and practice 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Great Britain, rules and practice 504–513 [Pgs. 504–513 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 520–525 [Pgs. 520–525 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 527–531 [Pgs. 527–531 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Neutral countries, interference with messages between 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810], 513–520 [Pgs. 513–520 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852], 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Non-delivery, information of, withheld 504–505 [Pgs. 504–505 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 524–531 [Pgs. 524–531 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Official neutral messages, interference 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and Doc. 810], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812]

Porto Rico, communication with U. S 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

Switzerland, protests 513–517 [Pgs. 513–517 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826] Joint action with U. S 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849]

Cables, cutting by belligerents VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 1077 and Doc. 1078]

Caloria (Standard), Standard Oil tanker, flag transferred 499–502 [Pgs. 499–502 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789]

Campanello, diverted to England with wheat cargo at outbreak of war 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Camperdown, detained with cotton and cottonseed cake cargo 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 435], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Cap Trafalgar, German merchant ship converted at sea 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Cape Town, prize court cases 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

Capitulations: In Egypt, revision postponed 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

In Turkey, abrogated 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 281], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197], 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Cardiff, naval preparations 57–58 [Pgs. 57–58 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132]

Carlsruhe, warship in wireless communication with U. S. territory 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068]

Carnegie Steel Co., license for manganese refused 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Catherine Elizabeth, armed merchant ship (case cited) 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975]

Censorship. See Cablegrams; Mails.

Certificates of identity and registration, consular 721–724 [Pgs. 721–724 include portions of Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, and Doc. 1150]

Ceylon, embargo on plumbago 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

Charles Francis Joseph, Archduke: report on, as heir to Austrian and Hungarian thrones 22–23 [Pgs. 22–23 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45]

Chatham. See Montano.

Chemical products conference at Washington 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Chile: Neutrality rules, changes by American states proposed 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698] Comments by Great Britain 693–696 [Pgs. 693–696 include portions of Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, Doc. 1113, and Doc. 1114]

Comments by Peru 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 693]

Neutralization of American waters, attitude 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 686]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, regulations and attitude 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 1121]

Warships of belligerents in ports 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1114 and Doc. 1115], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 704–705 [Pgs. 704–705 include portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121]

Chilean (Gladstone), merchant ship suspected of intention to supply warships 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032], 649–650 [Pgs. 649–650 include portions of Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040]

China (see also Far East, neutralization proposals; Kiaochow; Shantung Railway): Armed forces of U. S., augmentation and use 161–165 [Pgs. 161–165 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Integrity and independence: Declarations by U. S 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Pledges of belligerents 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 170–172 [Pgs. 170–172 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

Neutrality: violations, protests, declarations of inability to prevent 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335], 186–189 [Pgs. 186–189 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339], 192–201 [Pgs. 192–201 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, signature with U. S 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Christian Knudsen , detained with oil cargo 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 689], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]

Clan, C. T., Danish commercial negotiator in England 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615]

Coaling. See Supplying belligerent warships.

Cobb, I. S. (correspondent), statement on atrocities in Belgium 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Colombia: Supplying belligerent warships, regulations 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

U. S. representations on neutrality 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099], 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109], 699–701 [Pgs. 699–701 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1123 and Doc. 1124]

Wireless telegraphy: Charges of unneutral use 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, Doc. 1091, and Doc. 1092], 685–687 [Pgs. 685–687 include portions of Doc. 1093, Doc. 1094, Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, and Doc. 1099], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 1116], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Regulation 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 1115], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 1123]

Colonies and foreign interests of Germany. See African free-trade zone; Kiaochow; Pacific Islands; Shantung Railway.

Communications, interference. See Cablegrams; Cables; Mails.

Compañia General Tabacos Filipinos, protest against interference with cablegrams 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852]

Congo Act of 1885. See African free-trade zone, neutralization.

Congress. See under United States.

Consolidated Metals Co., protest against interference with copper shipments 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

Continuous voyage doctrine. See under Contraband of war.

Contraband of war (see also Munitions of war): Aircraft, status 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 355], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 416]

Confiscation 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 276–277 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 422], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

Continuous voyage IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 220–222 [Pgs. 220–222 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 396], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 328–329 [Pgs. 328–329 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 337–340 [Pgs. 337–340 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 342–343 [Pgs. 342–343 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544]. Conditional contraband 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 396], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Copper, status IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 278–284 [Pgs. 278–284 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

Cotton, status 284–293 [Pgs. 284–293 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448] Assurances against inclusion: Austria-Hungary 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

France 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Germany 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Great Britain 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442]

Cottonseed products, status 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

Declaration of London, definitions 215–216 [Pgs. 215–216 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 364], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 263–264 [Pgs. 263–264 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410] Additions admitted 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 240–244 [Pgs. 240–244 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 567]

Non-contraband articles 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, Doc. 1345, and Doc. 1346]

Definition, principles 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 275–276 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 422], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 567].

Destination, proof 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 228–230 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 375], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 251–254 [Pgs. 251–254 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 521], 342–346 [Pgs. 342–346 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 352–355 [Pgs. 352–355 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550], 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 559] Burden placed on claimant 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 521], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530].

Neutral port as base of belligerent trade 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Foodstuffs, status 229–230 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 271–274 [Pgs. 271–274 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 559], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 890]

Hospital supplies, status 831–832 [Pgs. 831–832 include portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, Doc. 1345, and Doc. 1346] Definition 832–834 [Pgs. 832–834 include portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, Doc. 1339, Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, and Doc. 1342]

Lists of— Austria-Hungary 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

France 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

Germany 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 411], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Great Britain 215–216 [Pgs. 215–216 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 391], 261–262 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 409], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

Japan 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Turkey 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Naval stores (turpentine and rosin), status 298–301 [Pgs. 298–301 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567]

Oil, status X [Pg. X is part of Preface], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 391], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 294–297 [Pgs. 294–297 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Reexportation by neutrals contiguous to belligerents, restrictions 234–235 [Pgs. 234–235 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 387–405 [Pgs. 387–405 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, and Doc. 618].

Rubber, status X [Pg. X is part of Preface], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Sale to belligerents X–XI [Pg. X is part of Preface], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 422], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 885], 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 570–580 [Pgs. 570–580 include portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958], 647–648 [Pgs. 647–648 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037] U. S. circular of Oct. 15 573–574 [Pgs. 573–574 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921]

Tobacco, status 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460]

United States, attitude IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 239–244 [Pgs. 239–244 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 272–278 [Pgs. 272–278 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423], 282–283 [Pgs. 282–283 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 297–299 [Pgs. 297–299 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618]. Circular of August 15 274–278 [Pgs. 274–278 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423]

Contributions of money to belligerent governments. See Loans.

Conversion of merchant ships into warships 594–604 [Pgs. 594–604 include portions of Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Convoy of merchant ships, attitude of U. S. 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

Copper: Contraband status IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 278–284 [Pgs. 278–284 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

Interference with shipments 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333–335 [Pgs. 333–335 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 337–339 [Pgs. 337–339 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 357–359 [Pgs. 357–359 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 362–363 [Pgs. 362–363 include portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, and Doc. 550], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569].

Restrictions on reexport by— Italy 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531]

Netherlands 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

Scandinavian countries 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

United States, protests against interference IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559] By citizens 278–282 [Pgs. 278–282 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Copper Country Commercial Club, Michigan, protest against interference with copper shipments 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

Cork (Ireland), war preparations 58–60 [Pgs. 58–60 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Cotton: Assurances against interference with shipments by— Austria-Hungary 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

France 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Germany 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Great Britain 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

Cablegrams concerning, obstruction 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 523–527 [Pgs. 523–527 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Conditions of transit through— Italy 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 399–401 [Pgs. 399–401 include portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

Netherlands 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

Scandinavian countries 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 398–399 [Pgs. 398–399 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606], 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

Conference of representatives of interests concerned 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 458]

Contraband status 284–293 [Pgs. 284–293 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Germany, desire for shipments 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613] Efforts to secure exchange for chemicals 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 415–417 [Pgs. 415–417 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Interference with shipments 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 435], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

United States, protests against interference 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531] By citizens 284–288 [Pgs. 284–288 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438]

Cottonseed products: Contraband status 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530]

Interference with shipments 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 321–323 [Pgs. 321–323 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]

Netherlands, acceptance of consignments 387–389 [Pgs. 387–389 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580]

United States, protests against interference 322–323 [Pgs. 322–323 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493] By citizens 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Cudahy Packing Co., meat shipments detained 349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536]

Curtiss Aeroplane Co., cablegrams stopped 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and Doc. 830]

Cushing, Standard Oil tanker detained 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Customs Collectors. See under United States.

Dardanelles, closure 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

Declaration of London: Blockade 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 264–265 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410]

Cargoes shipped in ignorance of war or of contraband proclamation 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 568]

Contraband, definitions 215–216 [Pgs. 215–216 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 364], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 240–244 [Pgs. 240–244 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 263–264 [Pgs. 263–264 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]. Destination, proof 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 228–230 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 375], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

Continuous voyage 220–222 [Pgs. 220–222 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 224–225 [Pgs. 224–225 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 396], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410]

Non-contraband articles 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, Doc. 1345, and Doc. 1346]

Prizes, destruction 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Recognition in present war: Proposal by United States 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

Replies of— Austria-Hungary 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

France 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Germany 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364]

Great Britain 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374]

Russia 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Argument of United States 225–233 [Pgs. 225–233 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

Negotiations at London and Washington 233–244 [Pgs. 233–244 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Counter-proposal of Great Britain 244–246 [Pgs. 244–246 include portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Objections and suggestions of U. S 249–252 [Pgs. 249–252 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397]

Contentions of Great Britain 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]

Recommendations of Ambassador Page and Mr. Anderson 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403] Reply of the President 252–253 [Pgs. 252–253 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, and Doc. 398]

Withdrawal of American proposal 257–259 [Pgs. 257–259 include portions of Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407]

Modifications adopted by Great Britain 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Reservists on neutral ships 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 410]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships 481–482 [Pgs. 481–482 include portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 767], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Declaration of Paris (1856) 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375]

Denmark: Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, protest 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Embargoes on reexport of contraband 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 402–404 [Pgs. 402–404 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

Mine laying 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709] Protest to belligerents 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Neutrality 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 159–161 [Pgs. 159–161 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283] British assurance of support 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

North Sea, protest against closure by Great Britain 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes: Cases 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437], 304–310 [Pgs. 304–310 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 319–321 [Pgs. 319–321 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 328–331 [Pgs. 328–331 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333–339 [Pgs. 333–339 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 349–354 [Pgs. 349–354 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538], 362–369 [Pgs. 362–369 include portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555], 387–388 [Pgs. 387–388 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 439–441 [Pgs. 439–441 include portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690].

France, rules 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Germany, protests 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 264–265 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 468–469 [Pgs. 468–469 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733] Destruction of neutral car-goes at sea 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

Great Britain, rules and practice 219–220 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]. Search in port required 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538]

“To order” consignment not admitted 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 350–353 [Pgs. 350–353 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543].

Non-contraband cargoes on captured and detained ships 304–316 [Pgs. 304–316 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 366–368 [Pgs. 366–368 include portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 385–387 [Pgs. 385–387 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]. Bonar Law executive committee for release 308–314 [Pgs. 308–314 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479]

Charges on released car-goes 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 326–328 [Pgs. 326–328 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]

Scandinavian countries, protest 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

United States, attitude and protests IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface]—X [Pg. X is part of Preface], 229–232 [Pgs. 229–232 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 277–278 [Pgs. 277–278 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 304–310 [Pgs. 304–310 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 322–326 [Pgs. 322–326 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 438–441 [Pgs. 438–441 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]. Note of December 26 372–377 [Pgs. 372–377 include portions of Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, and Doc. 564]

“To order” consignment upheld 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 538], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559]

Visit and search at sea insisted upon 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 521], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 538], 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 559]

“Working arrangement” proposed by Great Britain 356–358 [Pgs. 356–358 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, and Doc. 543], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

Dresden, warship in wireless communication with U. S. territory and coaled by merchant ship 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068]

Due diligence, interpretation. 601–603 [Pgs. 601–603 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, and Doc. 964]

Dumdum bullets: Allegations of sale in U. S XI [Pg. XI is part of Preface], 807–809 [Pgs. 807–809 include portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, Doc. 1285, and Doc. 1286]

Allegations of use 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 796–798 [Pgs. 796–798 include portions of Doc. 1264, Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 1283]

Ecuador: Neutralization of American waters, advocacy 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

Proposed declaration of mutual interest in neutrality by American states 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

U. S. representations on neutrality 686–689 [Pgs. 686–689 include portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, Doc. 1099, Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, and Doc. 1125]

Warships of belligerents, alleged use of Galápagos Islands as base 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102], 694–695 [Pgs. 694–695 include portions of Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Wireless telegraphy, alleged unneutral use 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 1119]

Egypt: Bedouin incursions 125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Military control assumed by Great Britain 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, and Doc. 263]

Proclamation of Hussein as Sultan 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275] Attitude of U. S 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Protectorate announced by Great Britain 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

War measures, adoption of 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 84–85 [Pgs. 84–85 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175]

Ellen , detained and cargo placed in prize court 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Embargoes on exports: British Empire 418–431 [Pgs. 418–431 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680] “Working arrangement” proposed to U. S 356–358 [Pgs. 356–358 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, and Doc. 543], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 425–431 [Pgs. 425–431 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Denmark 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]. 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 402–404 [Pgs. 402–404 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

France 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Germany 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 406–417 [Pgs. 406–417 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717] Efforts to exchange chemicals for cotton 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Italy 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 347–348 [Pgs. 347–348 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534], 393–395 [Pgs. 393–395 include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 400–406 [Pgs. 400–406 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

Netherlands 234–235 [Pgs. 234–235 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 387–390 [Pgs. 387–390 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 396–399 [Pgs. 396–399 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606].

Norway 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

Reexport of contraband, by neutrals: British negotiations 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

U. S. attitude 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559], 387–389 [Pgs. 387–389 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588], 395–397 [Pgs. 395–397 include portions of Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600].

Sweden 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

United States, efforts for exemptions: Chrome ore 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Cyanide 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Dyestuffs 406–408 [Pgs. 406–408 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, and Doc. 637]

Hides 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

Manganese 418–422 [Pgs. 418–422 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Meats 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

Plumbago 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

Potash, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

Rubber 420–422 [Pgs. 420–422 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

Wool 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Empress Elizabeth, Austrian warship at Tsingtao 176–177 [Pgs. 176–177 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

English & O’Brien, request for release of wool from embargo 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

Enlistment in belligerent forces 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 885], 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563 include portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, and Doc. 896], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

Epirus, question between Albania and Greece 88–90 [Pgs. 88–90 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Essex, warship hovering off American port 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

Evelyn, merchant ship suspected of supplying warships 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011]

F. B. Dalzell, tug accused of supplying warship 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

Far East, neutralization proposals: Chinese suggestions 162–163 [Pgs. 162–163 include portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288] Attitude of U.S 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288]

Discussion by U. S. and Great Britain 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299] Attitude of Great Britain 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

Suggestion by German Ambassador in Japan 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

Inquiry addressed to Germany by U. S 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

German proposal 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

Advocacy by U. S. of neutrality of international settlements 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Far East, war in. See under Germany; Great Britain; Japan; also Kiaochow; Pacific Islands; Shantung Railway.

Flag: American, on Red Cross ship 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321], 827–830 [Pgs. 827–830 include portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, Doc. 1332, Doc. 1333, and Doc. 1334]

American, proposed use on German and Austrian ships to repatriate Americans 474–485 [Pgs. 474–485 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

American, use to protect belligerent property in enemy countries 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 736–738 [Pgs. 736–738 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, and Doc. 1166], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 1169]

Argentine, reported desecration of, in Belgium 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126]

Commission for Belgian Relief 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

Red Cross 824–825 [Pgs. 824–825 include portions of Doc. 1318, Doc. 1319, Doc. 1320, and Doc. 1321], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Transfer of merchant ships from belligerent to neutral: Brazil, attitude 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 783]

Declaration of London, provisions 481–482 [Pgs. 481–482 include portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 767], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

France, attitude 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 490–492 [Pgs. 490–492 include portions of Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Germany, attitude 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Great Britain, attitude 326–329 [Pgs. 326–329 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Russia, attitude 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

United States, attitude 325–326 [Pgs. 325–326 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782], 499–500 [Pgs. 499–500 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032].

Fletcher, D. U. (U. S. Senator), request to secure shipment of naval stores 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454]

Foodstuffs: Contraband status 229–230 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 271–274 [Pgs. 271–274 include portions of Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 559], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 890]

Interference with shipments 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 336–338 [Pgs. 336–338 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 349–356 [Pgs. 349–356 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 363–368 [Pgs. 363–368 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

Netherlands, restrictions on reexport 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 391–393 [Pgs. 391–393 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 396–397 [Pgs. 396–397 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606]

United States, protests against interference 229–230 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 337–338 [Pgs. 337–338 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 353–354 [Pgs. 353–354 include portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]. By citizens 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 349–352 [Pgs. 349–352 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537]

Fore River Co., agrees not to build submarines for belligerents 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

France: African free-trade zone, attitude toward proposed neutralization 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

American Embassy retained in Paris 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Atrocities, protest against German 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Belgian neutrality, protests against violation by Germany 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Belgian relief, attitude 814–816 [Pgs. 814–816 include portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315]

Cablegrams, censorship 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Civilians charged with participating in hostilities 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, and Doc. 1256]

Contraband lists 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417] Cotton, assurance against inclusion 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Declaration of London, attitude toward recognition 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, rules 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Dumdum bullets, alleged use of 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Embargoes on exports 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Hospital supplies, attitude toward exemption from seizure 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 1345 and Doc. 1346]

Interests in charge of U. S. in— Austria-Hungary 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Germany 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Turkey 120–121 [Pgs. 120–121 include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

Liberian neutrality, assurance of respect 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Mine laying 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

Peace: Agreement against separate peace 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Efforts to preserve 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Good offices of U. S., attitude 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Overtures by Germany reported 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Prize procedure 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Red Cross ship, assurances 826–827 [Pgs. 826–827 include portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, protests 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships, attitude 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 490–492 [Pgs. 490–492 include portions of Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, conclusion with U. S. 3–7 [Pgs. 3–7 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Turkish threat of reprisals, reply 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, and Doc. 1241]

U. S. naval forces in Turkish waters, attitude 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

War with Central powers: Attitude in the crisis 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

German ultimatum 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184]

Mobilization 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61]

Hostilities reported 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 54–55 [Pgs. 54–55 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 92–93 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Declaration of war by Germany 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Severance of relations with Austria 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Declaration of state of war with Austria 64–65 [Pgs. 64–65 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

Removal of Government from Paris 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Severance of relations with Turkey 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 137–138 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 258]

Wireless telegraphy, representations regarding regulation in— Colombia 686–687 [Pgs. 686–687 include portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, and Doc. 1099]

Ecuador 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113]

Liberia 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

United States 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, Doc. 1077, and Doc. 1078]

Francis Ferdinand (Archduke), assassination 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 43], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Francis Joseph (Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary), reply to President Wilson’s offer of good offices 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Francisco, copper cargo requisitioned 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

Frederick , cotton cargo detained by Denmark 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

Fridland, meat shipments detained 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 536], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 536], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551]

Galápagos Islands. See Ecuador: Warships. Galveston Cotton Exchange, inquiries and protests 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 369–370 [Pgs. 369–370 include portions of Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, and Doc. 557], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842]

Gary, E. H., appeal for ships for repatriation of Americans 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Geier, warship interned XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 583–591 [Pgs. 583–591 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, and Doc. 950], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 1015]

Geneva Convention (1906) 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

George V (King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, etc.), reply to President Wilson’s offer of good offices for peace 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Germany: African free-trade zone, neutralization proposal 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209]

Architectural monuments, arrangements to spare in bombardment of Antwerp 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

Armament of merchant ships, attitude 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 963 and Doc. 964], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, and Doc. 969], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984]

Belgian relief, attitude 810–812 [Pgs. 810–812 include portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, Doc. 1288, Doc. 1289, Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, and Doc. 1293], 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, Doc. 1304, Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, and Doc. 1309], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318] Safe conduct for ships 819–820 [Pgs. 819–820 include portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, Doc. 1311, Doc. 1312, Doc. 1313, Doc. 1314, and Doc. 1315], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319]

Belgium, defense of invasion 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 184], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

Contraband lists 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 411], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415] Cotton, assurance against inclusion 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Conversion of merchant ships into warships, attitude and practice 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953], 598–600 [Pgs. 598–600 include portions of Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, and Doc. 962], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Cotton, desire for shipments 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 587 and Doc. 588], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613] Efforts to secure exchange for chemicals 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Declaration of London, attitude 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 224–225 [Pgs. 224–225 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 263–265 [Pgs. 263–265 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Destruction of prizes at sea 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, protests against 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 264–265 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 410], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 468–469 [Pgs. 468–469 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Embargoes on exports 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 406–417 [Pgs. 406–417 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717]

Far East, war in: Neutralization proposal 169–170 [Pgs. 169–170 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

Retrocession of Kiaochow discussed by Minister in China 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Japanese ultimatum and declaration of war 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 174–175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Defense and fall of Tsingtao 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Inquiry about nationals in China outside leased area 177–179 [Pgs. 177–179 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Enemy occupation of Shantung Railway 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335] Protest of directors 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

Enemy occupation of Pacific Islands 183–186 [Pgs. 183–186 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 190–194 [Pgs. 190–194 include portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, and Doc. 342]

Hospital supplies, attitude toward exemption from seizure 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, Doc. 1345, and Doc. 1346]

Interests in charge of U.S. in— Belgium 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 735–736 [Pgs. 735–736 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Egypt 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

France 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Great Britain 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Japan 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Persia 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Russia 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 37–38 [Pgs. 37–38 include portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, and Doc. 1155], 733–734 [Pgs. 733–734 include portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, and Doc. 1158], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Servia 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Liberian neutrality, assurance of respect 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Mails, censorship 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

Mine laying 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, and Doc. 734] British protests 455–464 [Pgs. 455–464 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]

Reply 467–469 [Pgs. 467–469 include portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Peace: Efforts to preserve. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Good offices of U. S., attitude 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 184], 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Overtures to France reported 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Terms, opinion of Ambassador Gerard 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 197]

Prize procedure 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Red Cross ship, assurances 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Sale of munitions by neutrals, attitude X [Pg. X is part of Preface]-XI [Pg. XI is part of Preface], 572–575 [Pgs. 572–575 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037]

South America, denial of aggressive intentions oward 87–88 [Pgs. 87–88 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, attitude 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 646–647 [Pgs. 646–647 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, Doc. 1036, and Doc. 1037], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships, attitude 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, negotiations with U. S 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 8–9 [Pgs. 8–9 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

Turkish treatment of foreigners, attitude 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 1249 and Doc. 1250] Representations of U. S. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1251 and Doc. 1252]

U. S. naval forces in Turkish waters, attitude 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

War with Allied powers: Efforts to avert 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Effect of Russian mobilization 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Ultimatum to France 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Ultimatum to Russia 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Reported overtures to Sweden 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Declaration of war on Russia 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Mobilization 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 184]

Invasion of Luxemburg 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Hostilities reported with France 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 54–55 [Pgs. 54–55 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 92–93 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Demands upon Belgium 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 39–40 [Pgs. 39–40 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Invasion of Belgium 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 184]

Declaration of war on France 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Efforts for British neutrality 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135]

British ultimatum and declaration of state of war 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184]

Proposals to Belgium 51–53 [Pgs. 51–53 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 170], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

Policy in Turkey 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Warfare, charges of illegal and inhumane methods: Against Germany 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263], 799–802 [Pgs. 799–802 include portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

By Germany against enemies 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, and Doc. 1256], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 805–808 [Pgs. 805–808 include portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, Doc. 1282, Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Wireless telegraphy, representations to U. S. regarding use 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080], 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085], 677–678 [Pgs. 677–678 include portions of Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Gibraltar, garrison mobilized 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

Gladstone. See Chilean.

Goeben, German cruiser sold to Turkey 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227], 159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Good offices. See African free-trade zone; Liberia; Peace; Persia.

Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., request to secure relaxation of rubber embargo 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

Grain. See Foodstuffs.

Grain Export and Foreign Exchange Conference, resolutions 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

Grand Trunk Railway, inquiry regarding transit of contraband 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925]

Great Britain: African free-trade zone, attitude toward proposed neutralization 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Armament of merchant ships, attitude 593–599 [Pgs. 593–599 include portions of Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, and Doc. 962], 604–611 [Pgs. 604–611 include portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, and Doc. 980], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987]

Belgian relief, attitude 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, and Doc. 1304], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 1307, Doc. 1308, and Doc. 1309], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

Cablegrams, censorship 504–513 [Pgs. 504–513 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 520–525 [Pgs. 520–525 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 527–531 [Pgs. 527–531 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857]

Contraband, negotiations with neutrals to restrict reexport 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611].

Contraband lists 215–216 [Pgs. 215–216 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 391], 261–262 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 409], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417] Assurances against inclusion of— Cotton 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442]

Hospital supplies 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339]

Naval stores (withdrawn) 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

Tobacco 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Declaration of London, attitude toward recognition 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 233–249 [Pgs. 233–249 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395], 253–257 [Pgs. 253–257 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410].

Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, rules and practice 219–220 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 409], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]. Cases 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437], 304–310 [Pgs. 304–310 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 319–321 [Pgs. 319–321 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 328–331 [Pgs. 328–331 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333–339 [Pgs. 333–339 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 349–354 [Pgs. 349–354 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538], 362–369 [Pgs. 362–369 include portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555], 387–388 [Pgs. 387–388 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 439–441 [Pgs. 439–441 include portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690].

Non-contraband cargoes on captured and detained 304–316 [Pgs. 304–316 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 326–328 [Pgs. 326–328 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 366–368 [Pgs. 366–368 include portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 385–387 [Pgs. 385–387 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576].

Search in port required 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538]

“To order” consignment not admitted 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 350–353 [Pgs. 350–353 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and Doc. 538], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543].

Detentions and embargoes, “working arrangement” proposed to U. S. 356–358 [Pgs. 356–358 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, and Doc. 543], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 425–431 [Pgs. 425–431 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Dumdum bullets, alleged use of 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 1283]

Egypt: Military control 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 84–85 [Pgs. 84–85 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, and Doc. 263]

Protectorate assumed 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Embargoes (including Australia, India, etc.) 418–431 [Pgs. 418–431 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Far East, war in: Reported agreement with Japan and Russia 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Preparations 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

Attitude on neutralization 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

Support of Japanese demands 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 184–185 [Pgs. 184–185 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337] Statement limiting operations 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 354]

Participation in operations 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Chinese protests against actions 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 342], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 342]

Attitude toward Japanese occupation of— Kiaochow 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Pacific Islands 185–186 [Pgs. 185–186 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Shantung Railway 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333]

Hovering by British warships 657–658 [Pgs. 657–658 include portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, Doc. 1061, and Doc. 1062]

Interests in charge of U. S. in— Austria-Hungary 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Belgium. 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159]

Germany 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184], 740 [Pg. 740 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Turkey 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 120–121 [Pgs. 120–121 include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

Liberian neutrality, assurances of respect 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Mails, censorship 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 867], 538–540 [Pgs. 538–540 include portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876]

Manifests of cargo, objections to withholding publication in U. S 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

Mine laying 455–460 [Pgs. 455–460 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 469–472 [Pgs. 469–472 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735] Protests against German methods 455–464 [Pgs. 455–464 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]

Neutrality rules, comments on changes proposed by Chile 693–696 [Pgs. 693–696 include portions of Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, Doc. 1113, and Doc. 1114]

North Sea declared a military area 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728]

Peace: Agreement against separate peace 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Efforts to preserve 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Good offices of U. S., attitude 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Terms, opinion of Ambassador Page 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Prize procedure 305–308 [Pgs. 305–308 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 311–316 [Pgs. 311–316 include portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 367–368 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 553], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

Red Cross ship, assurances 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323], 830–831 [Pgs. 830–831 include portions of Doc. 1333, Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, attitude 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997], 627–629 [Pgs. 627–629 include portions of Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, and Doc. 1007], 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, and Doc. 1012], 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, and Doc. 1017], 645–646 [Pgs. 645–646 include portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 693–694 [Pgs. 693–694 include portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114].

Transfer of flag of merchant ships, attitude 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, conclusion with U. S 3–5 [Pgs. 3–5 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Turkish threats of reprisals, replies 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 1237 and Doc. 1238], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

U. S. naval forces in Turkish waters, attitude 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210]

War with Central powers: Russian opinion on attitude 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31]

French opinion on attitude 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

Mobilization 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 56–60 [Pgs. 56–60 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Proposals for averting 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

Assurances to Belgium 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

German efforts for neutrality 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135]

Ultimatum to Germany 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Declaration of state of war with Germany 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184]

Uncertainty of relations with Austria 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Declaration of state of war with Austria 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

Assurances to Denmark 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Policy regarding Turkey 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Determination on victory 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Severance of relations with Turkey 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 137–138 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 258]

Declaration of state of war with Turkey 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Wireless telegraphy, representations regarding regulation in— Colombia 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, Doc. 1091, and Doc. 1092], 686–687 [Pgs. 686–687 include portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, and Doc. 1099], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Ecuador 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, and Doc. 1113], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 1119]

Liberia 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

United States 667–668 [Pgs. 667–668 include portions of Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 672–673 [Pgs. 672–673 include portions of Doc. 1077, Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080], 676–677 [Pgs. 676–677 include portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, and Doc. 1086]

Great Northern Steamship Co., inquiry about transportation of reservists 559–560 [Pgs. 559–560 include portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, and Doc. 892]

Greece: Attitude toward the war 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 88–91 [Pgs. 88–91 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Epirus question 88–90 [Pgs. 88–90 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Peace, attitude on good offices 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, negotiations with U. S 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Greenville (Miss.) Chamber of Commerce, protest against interference with shipments of cottonseed products 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Grey & Co., wood alcohol seized 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]

Guatemala, suggestion of American cooperation for peace 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Guaymas, alleged use as coaling station for German warships 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 1005 and Doc. 1006]

Guiana, British, mobilization 56–57 [Pgs. 56–57 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131]

Hague conventions cited: I: 1899, 1907 (pacific settlement of international disputes) 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

II, 1899; IV, 1907 (laws and customs of war on land) 802–803 [Pgs. 802–803 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, and Doc. 1277], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 1283]

III, 1899; X, 1907 (adaptation to maritime warfare of the principles of the Geneva Convention) 826–827 [Pgs. 826–827 include portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326]

III, 1907 (opening of hostilities) 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

V, 1907 (rights and duties of neutral powers and persons in case of war on land) 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, and Doc. 906], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, and Doc. 1080], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 1085 and Doc. 1086], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

VIII, 1907 (laying of mines) 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 717]

XI, 1907 (restrictions with regard to the right of capture in naval war) 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, and Doc. 752], 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763]

XII, 1907 (international prize court) 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 375]

XIII, 1907 (rights and duties of neutral powers in naval war) 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 686], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 961 and Doc. 962], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 962], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 1037], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121].

Hamburg. See Red Cross.

Hansen, Harry (correspondent), statement on atrocities in Belgium 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Harbison-Walker Refractories Co., request for release of chrome ore from embargo 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

Harris Irby Cotton Co., protest against interference with shipments 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Hayden, J. H., representing submarine manufacturers 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926]

Heller & Merz, request for release of dyes 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Hellig Olav, cotton cargo detained by Denmark 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

Hitchcock, G. M. (U. S. Senator), resolution against export of munitions 578–579 [Pgs. 578–579 include portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931]

Hizen, Japanese warship hovering off Honolulu XI [Pg. XI is part of Preface], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

Holland. See Netherlands.

Holland-America Line, conditions on acceptance of shipments 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 320–322 [Pgs. 320–322 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 387–389 [Pgs. 387–389 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

Honolulu. See Hizen.

Hoover, Herbert (chairman, International Commission for Relief in Belgium) 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, and Doc. 1301], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307]

Hopkinsville Tobacco Board of Trade, request for assurances regarding shipments 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Hospital supplies, exemption from seizure 831–832 [Pgs. 831–832 include portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, and Doc. 1339], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, Doc. 1345, and Doc. 1346] Definition 832–834 [Pgs. 832–834 include portions of Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, Doc. 1339, Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, and Doc. 1342]

Hostages 780–789 [Pgs. 780–789 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, and Doc. 1252]

Hovering: British warships 657–658 [Pgs. 657–658 include portions of Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, Doc. 1061, and Doc. 1062]

German warships 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Japanese warships 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

United States, protests XI [Pg. XI is part of Preface]-XII [Pg. XII is part of Preface], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1050 and Doc. 1051], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062]

Howard, Daniel (President of Liberia), representations regarding French demands 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134]

Howe, G. W., & Co., lumber shipment detained 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 568]

Idaho, copper cargo requisitioned 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

India, embargo on manganese 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650]

Indian Prince, prize with neutral cargo destroyed at sea 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486]

Insurance, difficulties regarding 272–273 [Pgs. 272–273 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 435], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 306n [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728].

Insurance Co. of North America, request for information on rights of neutral trade 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

Interests of belligerents, protection. See Representation of belligerent governments in enemy countries.

International Commission for Relief in Belgium 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 1296, Doc. 1297, and Doc. 1298], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, and Doc. 1318]

Internment (see also Prisoners of war and interned civilians): Merchant ships violating neutrality 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 650–651 [Pgs. 650–651 include portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043]

Warships and tenders XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 585–586 [Pgs. 585–586 include portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, and Doc. 942], 588–593 [Pgs. 588–593 include portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093] Crews 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Interparliamentary Union (Belgian Group), appeal for aid of neutral countries in safeguarding Belgian neutrality 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Italy: Embargoes (reexport of contraband) 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 347–348 [Pgs. 347–348 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559], 393–395 [Pgs. 393–395 include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 400–406 [Pgs. 400–406 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621].

Peace, attitude on good offices 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Territorial waters, six-mile rule 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066]

War, attitude toward 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 69–70 [Pgs. 69–70 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 157, Doc. 158, and Doc. 159], 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 124–125 [Pgs. 124–125 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235], 143–144 [Pgs. 143–144 include portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, and Doc. 262], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]. Declaration of neutrality 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Reported landing at Avlona 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Jackson, J. B. (U. S. Special Agent), inspection of prison camps XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface]

Jaffa, request for U. S. naval forces 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197]

Jaluit Island. See Pacific Islands of Germany.

Jamaica, mobilization 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

Japan: Agreement reported with Russia and Great Britain on Kiaochow and Manchuria 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Austria-Hungary, severance of relations 176–177 [Pgs. 176–177 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 328]

Contraband list 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Germans in neutral China, denial of intention to expel 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]

Germany, war with: Preparations 164–169 [Pgs. 164–169 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 184–185 [Pgs. 184–185 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337]

Ultimatum 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

Declaration 174–175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Siege and capture of Tsingtao 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Great Britain, relations 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 170–171 [Pgs. 170–171 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 184–186 [Pgs. 184–186 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 342], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 342], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 208–210 [Pgs. 208–210 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354].

Hovering by Japanese warships 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]

Interests in charge of U. S. in— Austria-Hungary 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Germany 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Manchuria and Mongolia, intentions regarding 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Occupation and statements of policy regarding— Kiaochow-Tsingtao 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 206–210 [Pgs. 206–210 include portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, and Doc. 354]

Shantung Railway 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335], 192–194 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 342], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

German Pacific Islands 183–186 [Pgs. 183–186 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, and Doc. 342], 208–210 [Pgs. 208–210 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

Operations in Europe, question of participation in 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, negotiations with U. S. 10–11 [Pgs. 10–11 include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

U. S. declaration regarding Kiaochow and the status of China 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Jerusalem, conditions and requests of American Jewish community 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199]

John D. Rockefeller , Standard Oil tanker detained 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 689]

Kahn, Julius (U. S. Congressman), request for raising Australian embargo on meats 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

Kansas City Board of Trade, request for assurances for grain exports 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Kiaochow-Tsingtao: Reported agreement of Japan, Russia, and Great Britain 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Japanese preparations for seizure 164–169 [Pgs. 164–169 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 184–185 [Pgs. 184–185 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337]

Ultimatum to Germany (pledge of restitution to China) 170–171 [Pgs. 170–171 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307]

Statement by U. S 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Proposed retrocession by Germany 172–174 [Pgs. 172–174 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314] Attitude of China 173–174 [Pgs. 173–174 include portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

Attitude of U. S 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

Japanese declaration of war 174–175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Operations and capture 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Participation in defense by Austria-Hungary 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322]

Japanese policy regarding administration and restitution 202–204 [Pgs. 202–204 include portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 206–210 [Pgs. 206–210 include portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, and Doc. 354] Attitude of Great Britain 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Kim, meat shipments detained 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 536], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Kirby Lumber Co., protest against interference with code cablegrams for Porto Rico 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

Kronprinz Wilhelm , conversion in American port 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 963 and Doc. 964], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Kronprinzessin Cecilie, return to American port with gold shipment 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501]

Kroonland, detention with copper shipments 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 333–335 [Pgs. 333–335 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 538], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 689]

Kursk, diverted to England with wheat cargo at outbreak of war 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Lancaster, warship hovering off American port 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1050 and Doc. 1051], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

Latakia, conditions and request for protection of American interests 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 1218]

Lavino, E. J., & Co., request for release of chrome ore from embargo 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

Leipzig, warship in communication with American port and supplied by merchant ship 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, and Doc. 989], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 1005 and Doc. 1006], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

L’Engle, E. J., request for assurances for shipments of naval stores 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Lewis, Roger (correspondent), statement on atrocities in Belgium 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Liberia: Neutrality: Appeals for good offices of U. S. in maintaining 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141]

Recommendations of U. S 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131], 713–714 [Pgs. 713–714 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 1144]

Representations by U. S. to belligerents 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131], 714–715 [Pgs. 714–715 include portions of Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Respect assured by— France 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Germany 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Great Britain 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Wireless telegraphy, regulation demanded by Allies 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134], 715–717 [Pgs. 715–717 include portions of Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, Doc. 1138, Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Wireless stations closed 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Loans and contributions to belligerent governments XII [Pg. XII is part of Preface], 580–583 [Pgs. 580–583 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937]

Locksun, tender of warship, interned XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 586–590 [Pgs. 586–590 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, and Doc. 950], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 951], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 1015], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

Lowther Range, seizure with coal cargo 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 1005 and Doc. 1006]

Luxemburg, violation of neutrality by Germany 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Macedonian question 90–91 [Pgs. 90–91 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

Mails, censorship by belligerents: Diplomatic and consular mail 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 867], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 540–542 [Pgs. 540–542 include portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881] Private correspondence, transmission not allowed 536–542 [Pgs. 536–542 include portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Regulations proposed by U. S 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

Ordinary mail VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 531–535 [Pgs. 531–535 include portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866]

Mallina, treated as tender of warship in Panama 652–654 [Pgs. 652–654 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046]

Malmö Conference (Scandinavian Monarchs) 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 159–161 [Pgs. 159–161 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283]

Manchuria and Mongolia, intentions of Japan 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Manifests of cargo: False 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Instructions to U. S. customs collectors 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958]

Withholding publication in U. S 331–333 [Pgs. 331–333 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511] British objections 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016]

Marshall Archipelago. See Pacific Islands.

Matanzas, chartered for transportation of chemical products from Germany 414–417 [Pgs. 414–417 include portions of Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Mazatlan, merchant ship accused of supplying belligerent warships 616–618 [Pgs. 616–618 include portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, Doc. 989, Doc. 990, Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034]

McCutcheon, J. T. (correspondent), statement on atrocities in Belgium 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Meat products. See Foodstuffs.

Mediation. See Peace: Good offices and mediation.

Merchant ships. See Armament; Conversion; Detention and seizure; Reservists, transport; Supplying belligerent warships; Transfer of flag; Unneutral service.

Merion, armed merchant ship 605–607 [Pgs. 605–607 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, and Doc. 974], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Mersina, conditions and request for protection of American interests 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Metz, H. A. (U. S. Congressman), requests for aid in obtaining German dyes and shipping cotton 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Military forces, belligerent. See Enlistment; Reservists.

Milmine, Bodman & Co., protest against interference with grain shipments 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Mine laying: Austria-Hungary 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

Denmark 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709] Protests against belligerents’ methods 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]

France 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc. 718]

Germany 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, and Doc. 734] British protests 455–464 [Pgs. 455–464 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722]

Reply to protests 467–469 [Pgs. 467–469 include portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733]

Great Britain 455–460 [Pgs. 455–460 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 469–472 [Pgs. 469–472 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735]

Netherlands 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]

Norway, protest against belligerents’ methods 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]

Russia 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Sweden 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705] Protests against belligerents’ methods 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]

Turkey 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

United States, attitude 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 455–456 [Pgs. 455–456 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Miramichi, judgment for claimants of wheat seized at outbreak of war 336–338 [Pgs. 336–338 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 367–368 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 553]

Missionaries in Turkey: Protection requested 769–770 [Pgs. 769–770 include portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

U. S. representations to Turkey 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221]

Withdrawal recommended 777–778 [Pgs. 777–778 include portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, and Doc. 1232]

Mobilization. See under Individual belligerent countries: War.

Montana, Governor protests against interference with copper shipments 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

Montano (Chatham), Standard Oil tanker, flag transferred 499–501 [Pgs. 499–501 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788]

Montenegro, declaration of war by Austria 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]

Morgan & Co., statement to, on loans to belligerent governments 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Morris & Co., meat shipments detained 349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Muir & Co., protest against interference with grain shipments 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518]

Munitions of war: Sale to belligerents X–XI [Pg. X is part of Preface], XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 422], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 885], 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 570–580 [Pgs. 570–580 include portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, and Doc. 932], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958], 647–648 [Pgs. 647–648 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037]. Circular of Oct. 15 573–574 [Pgs. 573–574 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921]

Illegal ammunition 806–809 [Pgs. 806–809 include portions of Doc. 1282, Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, Doc. 1285, and Doc. 1286]

Submarines in sections 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

Transit across U. S. territory XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 571–572 [Pgs. 571–572 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925]

National Association of Wool Manufacturers, protest against Australian embargo 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648]

National Electrolytic Co., request for release of chrome ore from embargo 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

Natural Products Refining Co., request for release of chrome ore from embargo 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668]

Naval stores (turpentine and rosin): Contraband status 298–301 [Pgs. 298–301 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567] British assurance against inclusion; withdrawal 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

United States, protests against interference 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558] By citizens 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458]

Naval war zone. See North Sea.

Nereide, armed merchant ship (case cited) 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975]

Netherlands: Embargoes on reexport of contraband 234–235 [Pgs. 234–235 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 253–254 [Pgs. 253–254 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 387–390 [Pgs. 387–390 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 396–399 [Pgs. 396–399 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc. 606].

Mine laying 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702]

Neutrality 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 170], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Peace, unofficial suggestions 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Red Cross ship, port charges waived 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

Neutral cargoes (see also Detention and seizure): On belligerent ships taking refuge in neutral ports 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 570, Doc. 571, and Doc. 572]

On captured belligerent ships 307–310 [Pgs. 307–310 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473], 312–313 [Pgs. 312–313 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 314–316 [Pgs. 314–316 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 385–387 [Pgs. 385–387 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576].

On prizes destroyed at sea 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

Shipped prior to contraband proclamation 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 558], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 567 and Doc. 568]

Shipped prior to the war 304–310 [Pgs. 304–310 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 336–338 [Pgs. 336–338 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 367–368 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 553], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 568], 383–387 [Pgs. 383–387 include portions of Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576].

Neutral ports: Armed merchant ships, treatment 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960], 604–609 [Pgs. 604–609 include portions of Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, and Doc. 977], 611–614 [Pgs. 611–614 include portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, and Doc. 985]

Arming and fitting out belligerent ships 548–549 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 885], 593–597 [Pgs. 593–597 include portions of Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 599–603 [Pgs. 599–603 include portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, and Doc. 964], 609–611 [Pgs. 609–611 include portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, and Doc. 980], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 1037 and Doc. 1038]. Submarines, delivery in sections 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

Base of belligerent trade 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Base of naval operations, conditions constituting 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 686], 618–620 [Pgs. 618–620 include portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, and Doc. 994], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 628–631 [Pgs. 628–631 include portions of Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016], 647–649 [Pgs. 647–649 include portions of Doc. 1036, Doc. 1037, and Doc. 1038], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, and Doc. 1102], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Merchant ships carrying reservists, clearance 556–559 [Pgs. 556–559 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Merchant ships supplying warships, treatment 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 941 and Doc. 942], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 615–651 [Pgs. 615–651 include portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, Doc. 987, Doc. 988, Doc. 989, Doc. 990, Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, Doc. 998, Doc. 999, Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, Doc. 1036, Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061].

Prizes, treatment 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 886]

Warships and tenders of belligerents, treatment XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 693], 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 885], 553–554 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 886], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888], 583–593 [Pgs. 583–593 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 651–655 [Pgs. 651–655 include portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1114 and Doc. 1115]. Internment, XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 585–586 [Pgs. 585–586 include portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, and Doc. 942], 588–593 [Pgs. 588–593 include portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Warships of belligerents, communication with shore 655–657 [Pgs. 655–657 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, Doc. 1050, and Doc. 1051], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 1054]

Wireless telegraphy, use by ships 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 886], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 1043], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 674–676 [Pgs. 674–676 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Neutral states, cooperation: American waters, proposed neutralization: Advocacy by— Argentina 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Brazil 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

Ecuador 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

Peru 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 445–446 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 693]

Comment of Chile 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 686]

Reference to Pan American Union 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 443–444 [Pgs. 443–444 include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 694], 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Argentina, exchange of information with U. S. regarding neutral rights 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 438–441 [Pgs. 438–441 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]

Chile, proposed changes in neutrality rules 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687] Comments of Peru 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 693]

Ecuador, proposed declaration of mutual interest in neutrality by American states 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]

Scandinavian states: Identic protests to belligerents 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Joint action sought with U. S 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]

Malmö conference 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 159–161 [Pgs. 159–161 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283]

Mutual assurances of neutrality 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Switzerland, joint action with U. S. against interference with cablegrams 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849]

United States, attitude 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686], 450–453 [Pgs. 450–453 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849].

Venezuela, proposal of neutral league 447–450 [Pgs. 447–450 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

Neutral territory, violation. See under Belgium; China; Luxemburg; Persia.

Neutral trade, rights. See Contraband of war; Declaration of London; Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes; Neutral cargoes.

Neutrality, declaration by:- Bulgaria 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237]

China 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Denmark 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Greece 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Italy 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

Netherlands 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 170]

Norway 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Portugal 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Roumania 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Spain 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Sweden 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Turkey 50–51 [Pgs. 50–51 include portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

United States 547–551 [Pgs. 547–551 include portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886]

Neutralization proposals. See African free-trade zone; American waters; Far East.

New Caledonia, embargo on chrome ore 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

New Orleans Cotton Exchange, protest against interference with cablegrams 524–526 [Pgs. 524–526 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845]

New York Chamber of Commerce, protest against interference with cotton shipments 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

New York Coffee Exchange, protest against destruction of cargoes at sea 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Nicholas II(Emperor of Russia), reply to President Wilson’s offer of good offices for peace 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Nieuw Amsterdam, neutral ship detained 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]

Noordam, reported interference with mail aboard 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, and Doc. 864]

North American Export Grain Association, protest against interference with shipments 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

North Carolina, American warship in Turkish waters 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208], 768–770 [Pgs. 768–770 include portions of Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

North Sea, military area declared by Great Britain 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728] Scandinavian countries’ protests 465–466 [Pgs. 465–466 include portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

United States, attitude 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Norway: Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, protest 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Embargoes (reexport of contraband) 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

Mine laying, protest to belligerents 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Neutrality 34–35 [Pgs. 34–35 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 159–161 [Pgs. 159–161 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283]

North Sea, protest against closure by Great Britain 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Nürnberg, warship hovering off American port 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Ogden Publicity Bureau, protest against interference with copper shipments 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

Oil: Contraband status X [Pg. X is part of Preface], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 391], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 294–297 [Pgs. 294–297 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Denmark, restrictions on reexport 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

Interference with shipments 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 689]

United States, protests against interference 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 689] By citizens 294–297 [Pgs. 294–297 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

Olson and Mahony, merchant ship suspected of intention to supply warships 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

Owen, R. L. (U. S. Senator), request for assurances for export of cotton 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432]

Pacific Islands of Germany, Japanese occupation 183–186 [Pgs. 183–186 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, and Doc. 342], 208–210 [Pgs. 208–210 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354] Attitude of Great Britain 185–186 [Pgs. 185–186 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Attitude of United States 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 353]

“Packers’ cases” (see also Foodstuffs) 349–356 [Pgs. 349–356 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 363–366 [Pgs. 363–366 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

Pact of London against separate peace 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Pan American Union: Peace resolution 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Reference to, of proposals for joint action in maintenance of neutral rights and duties 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 443–444 [Pgs. 443–444 include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 694], 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Panama, protocol of agreement with U. S. on neutrality 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888]

Panama Canal and Canal Zone: Maintenance of neutrality 651–655 [Pgs. 651–655 include portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Rules of neutrality XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 552–555 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886]

Passports and consular certificates: Certificates of identity and registration 721–724 [Pgs. 721–724 include portions of Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, and Doc. 1150]

Declarants, status 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148], 723–724 [Pgs. 723–724 include portions of Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, and Doc. 1150] In countries of origin 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

Wives 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

Emergency passports authorized 721–723 [Pgs. 721–723 include portions of Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, and Doc. 1149] Regulations, Dec. 21 728–731 [Pgs. 728–731 include portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Fraudulent obtainment XII [Pg. XII is part of Preface], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 1152]

Identification of applicants 722–723 [Pgs. 722–723 include portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, and Doc. 1149], 725–726 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 1150], 728–730 [Pgs. 728–730 include portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Minor children born in U. S., status 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, and Doc. 1152]

Photographs required 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 1152]

Rules for issuance in U. S., Nov. 13 724–727 [Pgs. 724–727 include portions of Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, and Doc. 1151]

Specification of countries visited and objects 724–725 [Pgs. 724–725 include portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 729–730 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 1152]

Peace (see also United States: Treaties for the advancement of general peace): Agitation in Austria-Hungary 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

Agreement of Allies not to negotiate separately 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Efforts to preserve: France 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Germany 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Great Britain 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Russia 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Good offices and mediation: Early suggestions for offer by U. S 18–20 [Pgs. 18–20 include portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Attitude of Great Britain 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82]

Offer by the President 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Replies of— Austria-Hungary 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

France 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Germany 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 184]

Great Britain 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Russia 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Suggestion of Guatemala 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

Attitude of Italy 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Attitude of Greece 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Germany’s readiness intimated by Ambassador Bernstorff to Mr. Straus 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188]

Attitude of Great Britain 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Attitude of France 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Attitude of German Govment 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Spanish proposals for joint offer 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 70–71 [Pgs. 70–71 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

Venezuelan suggestions 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696] Swiss proposal of joint offer 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Netherland unofficial suggestion 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Overtures by Germany to France reported 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Pan American Union appeal 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225]

Terms: British, opinion of Ambassador Page 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

German, opinion of Ambassador Gerard 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 197]

United States, day of prayer 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Persia: Protection of German interests by U. S 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 1175 and Doc. 1176], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Neutrality and request for good offices of U. S. in preserving 129–130 [Pgs. 129–130 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Perth Amboy Board of Trade, protest against interference with copper shipments 268–269 [Pgs. 268–269 include portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416]

Peru: Neutralization of American waters, advocacy 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 445–446 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 693]

Supplying belligerent warships in neutral ports, attitude 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 693]

Petroleum. See Oil.

Pisa, German merchant ship suspected of intention to supply warships 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979]

Platuria, Standard Oil tanker detained 324–326 [Pgs. 324–326 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 689], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690]

Poincaré, Raymond (President of France): Remarks to Ambassador Herrick on transfer of Government from Paris 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Reply to German protest against methods of warfare 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Reply to President Wilson’s offer of good offices for peace 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Porto Rico, cable communication with U.S. obstructed 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

Portugal, attitude toward the war 76–77 [Pgs. 76–77 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281]

Potsdam, detained with oil cake shipment 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Prisoners of war and interned civilians, activities of U. S. regarding treatment XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 751–756 [Pgs. 751–756 include portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, Doc. 1188, Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236], 785–791 [Pgs. 785–791 include portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255] Relief 752–753 [Pgs. 752–753 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, and Doc. 1191]

Prize procedure: France 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Germany 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Great Britain 305–308 [Pgs. 305–308 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 311–316 [Pgs. 311–316 include portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, and Doc. 489], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 367–368 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 553], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

Prizes: Destruction at sea 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

Panama Canal rules 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 886]

Protesilaus, use of wireless in neutral waters 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046]

Radio. See Wireless telegraphy.

Recruiting. See Enlistment; Reservists.

Red Cross: American units offered to belligerents 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 1318 and Doc. 1319]

Ship chartered, arrangements 825–831 [Pgs. 825–831 include portions of Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, Doc. 1332, Doc. 1333, Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337] Assurances as to treatment by- France 826–827 [Pgs. 826–827 include portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, and Doc. 1326], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Germany 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, and Doc. 1332]

Great Britain 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323], 830–831 [Pgs. 830–831 include portions of Doc. 1333, Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Netherlands 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329]

Russia 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Supplies sent to belligerent countries 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 1340]

Red Cross (Hamburg), transportation of units and supplies 825–831 [Pgs. 825–831 include portions of Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, Doc. 1332, Doc. 1333, Doc. 1334, Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Regina d’Italia, copper shipments seized 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 342–344 [Pgs. 342–344 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527]

Registry of ships, transfer. See Flag: Transfer.

Relief. See under Belgium; Prisoners of war.

Remington Arms-Union Metallic Cartridge Co., denial of sale of dumdum bullets to British XI [Pg. XI is part of Preface], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 1285 and Doc. 1286]

Repatriation of Americans in Europe, proposed use of German and Austrian ships 474–485 [Pgs. 474–485 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Representation of belligerent governments in enemy countries: American flag, use on protected property 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 736–738 [Pgs. 736–738 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, and Doc. 1166], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 1169]

Expenses, payment by represented government 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 1169], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, and Doc. 1172]

Prisoners of war and interned civilians, inspections and reports XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 751–755 [Pgs. 751–755 include portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, Doc. 1188, Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, and Doc. 1192] Relief 752–753 [Pgs. 752–753 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, and Doc. 1191]

Requests and protests to local government 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 138–140 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 258], 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1157 and Doc. 1158], 736–740 [Pgs. 736–740 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, and Doc. 1169], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 1169], 746–751 [Pgs. 746–751 include portions of Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188], 780–781 [Pgs. 780–781 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236], 785–790 [Pgs. 785–790 include portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, and Doc. 1253].

Seal, use on protected property 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

Transmission of communications between governments 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 1169], 742–746 [Pgs. 742–746 include portions of Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, and Doc. 1178], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 780–791 [Pgs. 780–791 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

Reservists of belligerent forces: Departure from neutral ports 556–559 [Pgs. 556–559 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Transit across neutral territory XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 564–570 [Pgs. 564–570 include portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

Transport on neutral ships 559–560 [Pgs. 559–560 include portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, and Doc. 892], 563–564 [Pgs. 563–564 include portions of Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899] Removal by enemy forces VIII–IX [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 410], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

Riopasig, merchant ship supplying belligerent warships 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997]

Robert Dollar , transfer from British to American flag 492–499 [Pgs. 492–499 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

Root-Takahira exchange of notes, 1908, on intervention in China 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 338], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Rosenthal Brothers, request for release of wool from embargo 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659]

Rotterdam, detained neutral ship 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Rubber: Contraband status X [Pg. X is part of Preface], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 391], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 394], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Interference with shipments 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 689]

United States, protest against interference 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511]

Russia: Agreement denied with Japan and Great Britain on Manchuria and Kiaochow 164–165 [Pgs. 164–165 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Declaration of London, attitude 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Hospital supplies, attitude toward exemption from seizure 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Mails, censorship 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

Mine laying 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Peace: Agreement against separate peace 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192]

Efforts to preserve 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Good offices of U. S., reply to offer 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Red Cross ship, attitude 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships, attitude 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, conclusion with U. S 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

U. S. naval forces in Turkish waters, attitude 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

War with Central powers: Attitude toward Austro-Servian conflict 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

Mobilization 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 20 [Pg. 20 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 39 [Pg. 39 includes portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

German ultimatum rejected 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Declaration of war by Germany 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184]

Uncertainty of relations with Austria 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Declaration of war by Austria 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Policy regarding Turkey 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227]

Bombardment of Odessa by Turkish ships 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 258]

Severance of relations with Turkey 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 137–138 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 258]

Negotiations with Bulgaria and Servia 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Ryndam, detained neutral ship 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

Sacramento (Alexandria), transfer to American flag and supplying warships 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 1000 and Doc. 1001], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118]

Safe conduct for Belgian relief ships 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 1316, Doc. 1317, Doc. 1318, and Doc. 1319]

San Giovanni , copper shipments seized 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 512 and Doc. 513], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527]

Sandefjord , neutral ship detained 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Schneefels, prize ship completing voyage with neutral cargo 386–387 [Pgs. 386–387 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Schwab, C. H., agreement not to build submarines for belligerents 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

Scorpion, American warship stationed at Constantinople 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Scott, R. E., enlistment in French army 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563 include portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, and Doc. 896]

Senate. See United States: Congress.

Serajevo assassinations 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 43], 108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Servia: Mails, censorship 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884]

War with Central Powers: Serajevo assassinations 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 43], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Austrian ultimatum 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 102–103 [Pgs. 102–103 include portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Reply 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 194]

Mobilization 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, and Doc. 33], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 201]

Declaration of war by Austria 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 194]

Hostilities 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143]

Notification of annulment of treaties with Turkey 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260]

Negotiations with Russia regarding cessions to Bulgaria 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Shantung Railway, occupation by Japan 181–183 [Pgs. 181–183 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335], 191–202 [Pgs. 191–202 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Sif, copper shipments detained 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Sigrun, neutral ship and cargo detained 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Silk Dyers’ Mutual Protective Association, request for aid in securing German dyes 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 622]

Silver City (N. Mex.) Chamber of Commerce, protest against interference with copper shipments 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, and Doc. 428]

Sloterdyk, neutral ship detained with copper cargo 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Smyrna, conditions and requests for protection of American interests 66–67 [Pgs. 66–67 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199], 762–763 [Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, and Doc. 1209], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233], 780–781 [Pgs. 780–781 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236] Tennessee incident 771–774 [Pgs. 771–774 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, and Doc. 1234]

Spain: Hospital supplies, proposal to exempt from seizure 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337]

Neutrality 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 135–136 [Pgs. 135–136 include portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258]

Peace, proposals to U. S. for joint offer of good offices 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 70–71 [Pgs. 70–71 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, conclusion with U. S 6n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Spencer Kellogg & Sons, oil cake shipment accepted by Netherlands 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578]

Spenser, diverted to England with wheat cargo at outbreak of war 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Standard. See Caloria. Standard Oil Co.: Detention of ships, protests 324–326 [Pgs. 324–326 include portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 689]

Illuminating oil, discussion of contraband status 294–297 [Pgs. 294–297 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

Transfer of ships from German to American flag, discussion 486–489 [Pgs. 486–489 include portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771] British and French protests 499–500 [Pgs. 499–500 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786]

Question waived 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502]

Stewart, Rev. J. S. (missionary in Turkey), request for aid and protection 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 1218]

Stone, W. J. (Chairman, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations), correspondence on neutrality VI–XIV [Pg. VI is part of Preface]

Straits Settlements, embargo on rubber 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Straus, Oscar, conversation with German Ambassador on peace 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188]

Strinda, detained with meat shipments 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 536]

Sturmfels, German ship with neutral cargo, proposed safe conduct between neutral ports 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 570, Doc. 571, and Doc. 572]

Submarines, sale to belligerents in sections 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

Suffolk, warship hovering off American port 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1050 and Doc. 1051], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

Sulzberger & Sons, meat shipments detained 349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

Supplying belligerent warships: By merchant ships: Argentina, regulations and practice 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 690–691 [Pgs. 690–691 include portions of Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121]

Brazil, regulations and practice 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 1093]

Chile, regulations and attitude 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 1121]

France, protests 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, and Doc. 996]

Germany, attitude and protests 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 646–647 [Pgs. 646–647 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, Doc. 1036, and Doc. 1037], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 1052 and Doc. 1053]

Great Britain, protests and suggestions 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 938 and Doc. 939], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 996 and Doc. 997], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, and Doc. 1006], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, and Doc. 1012], 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, and Doc. 1017], 645–646 [Pgs. 645–646 include portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 693–694 [Pgs. 693–694 include portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114].

United States, rules and attitude 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 941 and Doc. 942], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 616–620 [Pgs. 616–620 include portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, Doc. 989, Doc. 990, Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, and Doc. 994], 622–626 [Pgs. 622–626 include portions of Doc. 996, Doc. 997, Doc. 998, Doc. 999, Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, and Doc. 1003], 628–632 [Pgs. 628–632 include portions of Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, and Doc. 1011], 634–636 [Pgs. 634–636 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 638–639 [Pgs. 638–639 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], 641–644 [Pgs. 641–644 include portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032], 647–651 [Pgs. 647–651 include portions of Doc. 1036, Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]. Memorandum of Sept. 19 618–620 [Pgs. 618–620 include portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, and Doc. 994]

In neutral ports: Chile, regulations and attitude 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 1114 and Doc. 1115], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 704–705 [Pgs. 704–705 include portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121]

Colombia, regulations 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

Panama Canal, rules XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 553–554 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 886]

Peru, comment on Chilean proposals 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 693]

United States, rules and attitude 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 885]

Sweden: Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, protest 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Embargoes on reexport of contraband 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 522], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

Mine laying 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705] Protest to belligerents 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Neutrality 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 159–161 [Pgs. 159–161 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283] German overtures for aid 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

North Sea, protests against closure by Great Britain 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, conclusion with U. S 7–8 [Pgs. 7–8 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Swift & Co., meat shipments detained 349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553]

Switzerland: Cablegrams, protests against interference 513–516 [Pgs. 513–516 include portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, and Doc. 824], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849] Joint action with U. S 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849]

Imports, request for aid in securing transit across Italy 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]

Peace, proposal to U. S. of joint good offices 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249]

Tellus, detained with neutral cargo 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

Tenders of warships 586–590 [Pgs. 586–590 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, and Doc. 950], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046]

Teneriffe Steel Co., license for manganese refused 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Tennessee (American warship): Dispatched with funds for distressed Americans 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 184]

In Turkish waters 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Smyrna incident 771–774 [Pgs. 771–774 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, and Doc. 1234]

Territorial waters: Italian six-mile rule 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066]

United States, attitude 665–667 [Pgs. 665–667 include portions of Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, and Doc. 1068]

Uruguayan five-mile rule 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

Threefoot Bros. & Co., protest against interference with cablegrams 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Tobacco: Contraband status 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 458] British assurance against inclusion 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Interference with shipments 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460]

United States, protest against interference 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460] By citizens 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Toronto, copper cargo seized 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships, belligerent to neutral: Brazil, attitude 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 783]

Declaration of London, provisions 481–482 [Pgs. 481–482 include portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 767], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

France, attitude 485 [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 490–492 [Pgs. 490–492 include portions of Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Germany, attitude 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Great Britain, attitude 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 496–497 [Pgs. 496–497 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Russia, attitude 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]

United States, attitude 325–326 [Pgs. 325–326 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782], 499–500 [Pgs. 499–500 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032].

Treaties for the advancement of general peace. See under United States.

Treaty of Washington, 1871, rules on arming and fitting out belligerent ships 593–594 [Pgs. 593–594 include portions of Doc. 951, Doc. 952, and Doc. 953]

Tremeadow, British collier at Panama 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045]

Triton, cotton shipments detained by Denmark 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

Tsingtao, See Kiaochow. Tuckerton Radio Station taken over by Navy Dept., rules of operation 678–679 [Pgs. 678–679 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Turkey: Aliens and alien property, treatment 138–141 [Pgs. 138–141 include portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 1211], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 1218], 780–791 [Pgs. 780–791 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]. Exchange of nationals demanded 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 258], 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 1185 and Doc. 1186], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 1247 and Doc. 1248], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

Intercession of U. S. Government and Ambassador 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 138–140 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 258], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 281]-159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 780–781 [Pgs. 780–781 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236], 785–790 [Pgs. 785–790 include portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, and Doc. 1253]

Reprisals threatened for bombardments 780–789 [Pgs. 780–789 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, and Doc. 1252]

Capitulations, abrogation 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 281], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197], 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231] Protests of U. S 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Contraband lists 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Foreign institutions, treatment 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 157–159 [Pgs. 157–159 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215], 775–779 [Pgs. 775–779 include portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, Doc. 1232, and Doc. 1233], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246]

Interests in charge of U. S. in Great Britain 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Mails, censorship 540–541 [Pgs. 540–541 include portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879]

Mine laying 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Treaty for the advancement of general peace, negotiations with U. S 9–10 [Pgs. 9–10 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

U. S. naval forces in Turkish waters: Requests for dispatch 62–63 [Pgs. 62–63 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 756–759 [Pgs. 756–759 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210], 767–770 [Pgs. 767–770 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

Reference to European powers759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Replies of— France 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Germany 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Great Britain 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210]

Russia 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Dispatch of North Carolina and Tennessee 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

Tennessee launch fired on at Smyrna 771–774 [Pgs. 771–774 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, and Doc. 1234]

Retention 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

War with Allied powers: Attitude 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 160], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 119–121 [Pgs. 119–121 include portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 1198 and Doc. 1199], 762–763 [Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, and Doc. 1209], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213].

Declaration of neutrality 50–51 [Pgs. 50–51 include portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

Mobilization 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 175], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Purchase of Goeben and Breslau 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138]

Attitude of U. S 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Fleet in Black Sea 1–11 [Pgs. [1]–11 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

Closure of Dardanelles 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 258]

Bedouin incursions into Egypt 125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Bombardment of Odessa by fleet 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 258]

Departure of Allied Ambassadors 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267]

Declaration of state of war by Great Britain 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Proclamation of Holy War 132–133 [Pgs. 132–133 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 142–143 [Pgs. 142–143 include portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, and Doc. 261], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270], 159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

Servian notification of annulment of treaties 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 258, Doc. 259, and Doc. 260]

Turpentine. See Naval stores.

Tyr, copper and rubber shipments detained 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 549 and Doc. 550]

Uller, detained with cotton cargo 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 532, Doc. 533, and Doc. 534]

Ultimate destination. See Contraband of war: Continuous voyage.

Union Metallic Cartridge Co. See Remington Arms-U. M. C. Co.

United Metals Selling Co., protests against interference with copper shipments 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

United States: Armament of merchant ships, rules and attitude 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 885], 595–597 [Pgs. 595–597 include portions of Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 599–604 [Pgs. 599–604 include portions of Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 970, Doc. 971, and Doc. 972], 611–614 [Pgs. 611–614 include portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, and Doc. 985] Memorandum of Sept. 19 611–612 [Pgs. 611–612 include portions of Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, and Doc. 982]

Atrocity charges, attitude 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 796–798 [Pgs. 796–798 include portions of Doc. 1264, Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282], 808–09 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, Doc. 1285, and Doc. 1286] Reports of diplomatic and consular officers 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 799–802 [Pgs. 799–802 include portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, Doc. 1282, and Doc. 1283]

Belgian neutrality, reception of protests against violation 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

Belgian relief, attitude 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 1286, Doc. 1287, and Doc. 1288], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 1290, Doc. 1291, Doc. 1292, Doc. 1293, Doc. 1294, and Doc. 1295], 815–817 [Pgs. 815–817 include portions of Doc. 1298, Doc. 1299, Doc. 1300, Doc. 1301, Doc. 1302, Doc. 1303, Doc. 1304, Doc. 1305, Doc. 1306, and Doc. 1307], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 1309, Doc. 1310, and Doc. 1311]

Belgium, Legation retained in Brussels 45–47 [Pgs. 45–47 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 73–74 [Pgs. 73–74 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162] Representations against defense of city 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Cablegrams, protests against interference 505–512 [Pgs. 505–512 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 519–530 [Pgs. 519–530 include portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]

Cables, attitude on cutting VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793]

Capitulations in Turkey, protest against abrogation 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Citizens abroad, aid, protection, repatriation: In Europe at outbreak of war 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 26–28 [Pgs. 26–28 include portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 34–38 [Pgs. 34–38 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 81–82 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 170], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 92–97 [Pgs. 92–97 include portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 197], 474–484 [Pgs. 474–484 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 1157 and Doc. 1158], 826 [Pg. 826 includes portions of Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, and Doc. 1323], 831 [Pg. 831 includes portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, and Doc. 1337].

In Turkish territories 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 66–67 [Pgs. 66–67 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 258], 756–778 [Pgs. 756–778 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, and Doc. 1232]

Citizens’ protests against interference with cablegrams 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, and Doc. 824], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, and Doc. 841], 526–527 [Pgs. 526–527 include portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848]

Citizens’ protests against interference with shipments of: Copper 278–282 [Pgs. 278–282 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 330–331 [Pgs. 330–331 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Cotton and cottonseed products 284–288 [Pgs. 284–288 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Foodstuffs 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 349–352 [Pgs. 349–352 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537]

Naval stores (turpentine and rosin) 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458]

Oil 294–297 [Pgs. 294–297 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

Tobacco 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

Congress: Act of Aug. 18, 1914, on registry of foreign-built ships 485–486 [Pgs. 485–486 include portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767]

Appropriation for representation of belligerent governments 472–473 [Pgs. 472–473 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736]

Resolution (Senate) on interference with copper shipments 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485]

Resolution (Senate) proposed on export of munitions 578–579 [Pgs. 578–579 include portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931]

Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, correspondence of chairman on neutrality VI–XIV [Pg. VI is part of Preface]

Contraband, attitude IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 240–244 [Pgs. 240–244 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 272–278 [Pgs. 272–278 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423], 282–283 [Pgs. 282–283 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 297–299 [Pgs. 297–299 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618]. Circular of Aug. 15 274–278 [Pgs. 274–278 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423]

Continuous voyage IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 375], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 396], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 521], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537]

Neutral port as base of belligerent trade, suggestion 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

Convoy of merchant ships, attitude 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

Cooperation of neutral states, attitude 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 681 and Doc. 682], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686], 450–453 [Pgs. 450–453 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 848 and Doc. 849]

Cotton shipments to Germany, efforts to promote 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Customs collectors, instructions and reports on maintenance of neutrality 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958], 612–613 [Pgs. 612–613 include portions of Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, and Doc. 984], 615–617 [Pgs. 615–617 include portions of Doc. 985, Doc. 986, Doc. 987, Doc. 988, Doc. 989, Doc. 990, and Doc. 991], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 1002 and Doc. 1003], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 1010 and Doc. 1011], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083].

Dardanelles, protest of Ambassador against closure by Turkey 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

Declaration of London, proposal to recognize XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 225–244 [Pgs. 225–244 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 249–252 [Pgs. 249–252 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 257–259 [Pgs. 257–259 include portions of Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561].

Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes, attitude and protests IX [Pg. IX is part of Preface]–X, 229–232 [Pgs. 229–232 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 277–278 [Pgs. 277–278 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 304–310 [Pgs. 304–310 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 322–326 [Pgs. 322–326 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 551, Doc. 552, and Doc. 553], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 432–435 [Pgs. 432–435 include portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 438–441 [Pgs. 438–441 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 843, Doc. 844, and Doc. 845] Note of December 26 372–375 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 559]

Visit and search at sea insisted upon 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 521], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 538], 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 559]

Detentions and embargoes, “working arrangement” proposed by Great Britain 356–358 [Pgs. 356–358 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, and Doc. 543], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 425–431 [Pgs. 425–431 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Egypt, attitude toward alteration of status 150–151 [Pgs. 150–151 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Embargoes by belligerent states, efforts for exemptions: Chrome ore 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Cyanide 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Dyestuffs 406–408 [Pgs. 406–408 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 414–416 [Pgs. 414–416 include portions of Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640]

Hides 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

Manganese 418–422 [Pgs. 418–422 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]

Meats 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

Plumbago 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, and Doc. 671]

Potash 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

Rubber 420–422 [Pgs. 420–422 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, and Doc. 677]

Wool 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Embargoes by neutral states, attitude 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 378], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 354–355 [Pgs. 354–355 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 559], 387–389 [Pgs. 387–389 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588], 395–397 [Pgs. 395–397 include portions of Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600]

Enlistment in belligerent forces, attitude 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 885], 562–563 [Pgs. 562–563 include portions of Doc. 894, Doc. 895, and Doc. 896], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

Far East, policy regarding developments: Armed forces, augmentation and use 161–165 [Pgs. 161–165 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Foreign intervention in China (Root-Takahira notes) 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 338], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

Japanese occupation of German Pacific Islands 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 353]

Neutralization proposals 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Proposed retrocession of Kiaochow by Germany 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

Statement to Japan 172–173 [Pgs. 172–173 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Flag: On Red Cross ship 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 1320 and Doc. 1321], 827–830 [Pgs. 827–830 include portions of Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, Doc. 1329, Doc. 1330, Doc. 1331, Doc. 1332, Doc. 1333, and Doc. 1334]

Proposed use on German and Austrian ships to repatriate Americans 474–485 [Pgs. 474–485 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, and Doc. 766]

Use to protect belligerent property in enemy countries 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 736–738 [Pgs. 736–738 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, and Doc. 1166], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 1169]

France, Embassy retained in Paris 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Hospital supplies, efforts for exemption from seizure 831–835 [Pgs. 831–835 include portions of Doc. 1335, Doc. 1336, Doc. 1337, Doc. 1338, Doc. 1339, Doc. 1340, Doc. 1341, Doc. 1342, Doc. 1343, Doc. 1344, and Doc. 1345]

Hovering, protests XII–XIII [Pg. XII is part of Preface], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 1050 and Doc. 1051], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 1056, Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062]

Institutions in Turkey, treatment 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 157–159 [Pgs. 157–159 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 775–779 [Pgs. 775–779 include portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, Doc. 1231, Doc. 1232, and Doc. 1233], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246]

Intercessions on behalf of foreigners in Turkey 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 138–140 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 258], 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 780–781 [Pgs. 780–781 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, and Doc. 1236], 785–790 [Pgs. 785–790 include portions of Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, and Doc. 1253]. Representations to Germany 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 1245 and Doc. 1246], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 1251 and Doc. 1252]

Liberian neutrality, good offices for maintenance 711–718 [Pgs. 711–718 include portions of Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, Doc. 1131, Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, Doc. 1138, Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144]

Loans to belligerent governments, attitude XII [Pg. XII is part of Preface], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937]

Mails, attitude on censorship VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861], 535 [Pg. 535 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881] Consular transmission of private letters 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, and Doc. 873], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Proposed regulations for diplomatic and consular mail 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Manifests of cargo, instructions to customs collectors 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958] Withholding publication. 331–333 [Pgs. 331–333 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, and Doc. 511]

Mine laying by belligerents, attitude 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 455–456 [Pgs. 455–456 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Munitions of war: Sale, attitude X–XI [Pg. X is part of Preface], XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 422], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 885], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 885], 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 575–576 [Pgs. 575–576 include portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 958], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]. Circular of Oct. 15 573–574 [Pgs. 573–574 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921]

Illegal ammunition 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, Doc. 1285, and Doc. 1286]

Transit XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925]

Naval forces in Turkish waters: Requests for dispatch 62–63 [Pgs. 62–63 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 756–759 [Pgs. 756–759 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210], 767–770 [Pgs. 767–770 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, Doc. 1215, Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

Reference to European powers 759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203]

Replies of— France 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Germany 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

Great Britain 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210]

Russia 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206]

Dispatch of North Carolina and Tennessee 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 1216, Doc. 1217, and Doc. 1218]

Tennessee launch fired on at Smyrna 771–774 [Pgs. 771–774 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, and Doc. 1234]

Retention 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

Neutrality: Proclamation 547–551 [Pgs. 547–551 include portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886]

President’s appeal to citizens 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886]

Public circulars 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 573–574 [Pgs. 573–574 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921]

North Sea, attitude toward British declaration of military area 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 726, Doc. 727, and Doc. 728], 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, and Doc. 738]

Panama Canal, maintenance of neutrality XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 552–555 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 886], 651–655 [Pgs. 651–655 include portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Passports and consular certificates, regulations 721–731 [Pgs. 721–731 include portions of Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, and Doc. 1152] Executive order of Nov. 13 724–727 [Pgs. 724–727 include portions of Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, and Doc. 1151]

Circular instruction on emergency passports, Dec. 21 728–731 [Pgs. 728–731 include portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Peace: Day of prayer 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Good offices, offers of 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, and Doc. 61], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188]

Joint good offices, attitude toward proposals of neutral states 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700]

Representation of belligerent governments to increase influence 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Persian neutrality, response to request for good offices for preservation 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247]

Red Cross, assistance in sending units to belligerent countries 824–828 [Pgs. 824–828 include portions of Doc. 1318, Doc. 1319, Doc. 1320, Doc. 1321, Doc. 1322, Doc. 1323, Doc. 1324, Doc. 1325, Doc. 1326, Doc. 1327, Doc. 1328, and Doc. 1329], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 1333 and Doc. 1334]

Representation in enemy countries of— Austria-Hungary 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 328], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157], 736–738 [Pgs. 736–738 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, and Doc. 1166], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

France 120–121 [Pgs. 120–121 include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 1152], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182]

Germany 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 37–38 [Pgs. 37–38 include portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 184], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 732–736 [Pgs. 732–736 include portions of Doc. 1153, Doc. 1154, Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, Doc. 1158, Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Great Britain 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 159], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 184], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 120–121 [Pgs. 120–121 include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 267], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 1152], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195].

Japan 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 1170 and Doc. 1171]

Turkey 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

Representation of belligerent governments in enemy countries, instructions 736–756 [Pgs. 736–756 include portions of Doc. 1159, Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, Doc. 1164, Doc. 1165, Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, Doc. 1188, Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195]

Representations on behalf of belligerents to— Colombia 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099], 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109], 699–701 [Pgs. 699–701 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 1123 and Doc. 1124]

Ecuador 686–689 [Pgs. 686–689 include portions of Doc. 1095, Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, Doc. 1098, Doc. 1099, Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, and Doc. 1125]

Liberia 713–714 [Pgs. 713–714 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 1144]

Reservists of belligerent forces, attitude: Departure from ports 556–559 [Pgs. 556–559 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954]

Removal from ships by enemy forces VIII–IX [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

Transit XIII [Pg. XIII is part of Preface], 564–570 [Pgs. 564–570 include portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

Transport on merchant ships 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899]

Submarines, attitude toward sale in sections 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, and Doc. 929]

Supplying belligerent warships by merchant ships, regulations and attitude 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 941 and Doc. 942], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 616–620 [Pgs. 616–620 include portions of Doc. 987, Doc. 988, Doc. 989, Doc. 990, Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, and Doc. 994], 622–626 [Pgs. 622–626 include portions of Doc. 996, Doc. 997, Doc. 998, Doc. 999, Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, and Doc. 1003], 628–632 [Pgs. 628–632 include portions of Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, and Doc. 1011], 634–636 [Pgs. 634–636 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 638–639 [Pgs. 638–639 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], 641–644 [Pgs. 641–644 include portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032], 647–651 [Pgs. 647–651 include portions of Doc. 1036, Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061]. Memorandum of Sept. 19 618–620 [Pgs. 618–620 include portions of Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, and Doc. 994]

Territorial waters, comment on Italian six-mile rule 665–667 [Pgs. 665–667 include portions of Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, and Doc. 1068]

Transfer of flag of merchant ships’ attitude 325–326 [Pgs. 325–326 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500], 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, and Doc. 771], 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782], 499–500 [Pgs. 499–500 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032].

Transmission of communications between belligerents: African free-trade zone, neutralization proposal 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 168, Doc. 169, and Doc. 170], 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255].

Arrangements to exclude Lille area from hostilities 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 1282 and Doc. 1283], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Arrangements to spare architectural monuments of Antwerp 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

General instructions 741–746 [Pgs. 741–746 include portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, and Doc. 1178], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191]

German interests in neutral China, inquiry as to Japan’s intentions 177–179 [Pgs. 177–179 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Shantung Railway, protest of German directors against seizure by Japan 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

Turkish and Allied protests and replies on bombardments and treatment of nationals 780–791 [Pgs. 780–791 include portions of Doc. 1233, Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, Doc. 1242, Doc. 1243, Doc. 1244, Doc. 1245, Doc. 1246, Doc. 1247, Doc. 1248, Doc. 1249, Doc. 1250, Doc. 1251, Doc. 1252, Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, and Doc. 1255]

Warfare, protests against methods 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 1255 and Doc. 1256], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282]

Treaties for the advancement of general peace (Bryan treaties), negotiations with— Austria-Hungary 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Belgium 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

China7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

France 3–7 [Pgs. 3–7 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Germany 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 8–9 [Pgs. 8–9 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18]

Great Britain 3–5 [Pgs. 3–5 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Greece 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Japan 10–11 [Pgs. 10–11 include portions of Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

Russia 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Spain 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Sweden 7–8 [Pgs. 7–8 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]

Turkey 9–10 [Pgs. 9–10 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Turkey’s entrance into the war, attitude 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Warships of belligerents in ports XIV [Pg. XIV is part of Preface], 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 885], 553–554 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 886], 583–593 [Pgs. 583–593 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 651–655 [Pgs. 651–655 include portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, and Doc. 1048]

Wireless telegraphy, regulations on use VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 674–676 [Pgs. 674–676 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085], 678–681 [Pgs. 678–681 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091] Provisions for use by Germany 669–674 [Pgs. 669–674 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, Doc. 1073, Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, Doc. 1077, Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, Doc. 1081, and Doc. 1082], 676–678 [Pgs. 676–678 include portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

United States Chamber of Commerce, protests against interference with trade and communications 281–282 [Pgs. 281–282 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 456, Doc. 457, and Doc. 458], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, and Doc. 841]

United States Steel Products Co., requests for release of manganese from embargo, refusal of licenses 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 421–422 [Pgs. 421–422 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674]

Unneutral service by merchant ships 559–560 [Pgs. 559–560 include portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, and Doc. 892], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015], 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 650–651 [Pgs. 650–651 include portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, Doc. 1040, Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050]

Unneutral service by wireless installations VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, Doc. 1077, and Doc. 1078], 678–681 [Pgs. 678–681 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Uruguay: Territorial waters, five-mile rule 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 1063 and Doc. 1064]

Wireless telegraphy, regulation 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Van Leer, cotton cargo detained by Denmark 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]

Vaterland, merchant ship accused of intention to convert into warship 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 953 and Doc. 954], 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979]

Venezuela: Neutral league proposal 447–450 [Pgs. 447–450 include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

Peace proposals 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696]

Viereck, G. S., protest against interference with mail 533–535 [Pgs. 533–535 include portions of Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866]

Viking, proposed transfer of registry 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744]

Visit and search insisted upon by U. S. (See also Detention and seizure of neutral ships and cargoes) 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 511], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 521], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 538], 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 559]

War, beginnings and developments. See under individual belligerent countries.

War Risk Insurance. See Insurance.

Warfare, charges of illegal and inhumane methods: Architectural monuments, destruction of 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282] Arrangements to avert, in bombardment of Antwerp 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, and Doc. 1272], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, Doc. 1274, Doc. 1275, Doc. 1276, Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279]

Civilians engaging in hostilities 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, and Doc. 1256], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Dumdum bullets, allegations of use 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 1283]

Non-combatants, alleged mistreatment 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 195–196 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 342], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 342], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 1260, Doc. 1261, Doc. 1262, and Doc. 1263], 799–802 [Pgs. 799–802 include portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274]

Protests by— Belgium 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265]

France 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Germany 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 1253, Doc. 1254, Doc. 1255, and Doc. 1256], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 805–808 [Pgs. 805–808 include portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, Doc. 1282, Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

United States, attitude 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 796–798 [Pgs. 796–798 include portions of Doc. 1264, Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 1277, Doc. 1278, and Doc. 1279], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, and Doc. 1282], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, Doc. 1285, and Doc. 1286] Reports of diplomatic and consular officers 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 1257, Doc. 1258, and Doc. 1259], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261], 799–802 [Pgs. 799–802 include portions of Doc. 1270, Doc. 1271, Doc. 1272, Doc. 1273, and Doc. 1274], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 1280, Doc. 1281, Doc. 1282, and Doc. 1283]

Warships, belligerent. See under Internment; Neutral ports; also Hovering; Supplying.

Washburn-Crosby Co., protest against interference with cablegrams 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805]

Washington. See Brindilla.

Weihaiwei, British naval concentration 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

Western Union Telegraph Co., protest against interference with cablegrams 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]

Wichita Mill & Elevator Co., request for assurances for grain shipments 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]

Wilhelm II (German Emperor): Protest against enemies’ methods of warfare 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 1260 and Doc. 1261]

Reply to President Wilson’s offer of good offices for peace 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135]

Williams, J. S. (U. S. Senator), request for assurances for shipments of cottonseed cake 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Wilson, Woodrow (President): Appeal to citizens for neutrality 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886]

Offer of good offices for peace 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Remarks to Belgian Commission 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 1264 and Doc. 1265]

Reply to French President’s protest against German methods of warfare 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 1267, Doc. 1268, and Doc. 1269]

Reply to German Emperor’s protest against Allies’ methods of warfare 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 1265, Doc. 1266, and Doc. 1267]

Telegram to Ambassador in Great Britain on Declaration of London controversy 252–253 [Pgs. 252–253 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, and Doc. 398]

Winchester Repeating Arms Co., denial of sale of “riot guns” and cartridges to British XI [Pg. XI is part of Preface], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 1283, Doc. 1284, and Doc. 1285]

Wireless telegraphy: Regulations governing use in— Argentina 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Brazil 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Colombia 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106]

Liberia 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Panama Canal Zone 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 886]

Uruguay 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

United States VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 674–676 [Pgs. 674–676 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085], 678–681 [Pgs. 678–681 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091] Provisions for use by Germany 669–674 [Pgs. 669–674 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, Doc. 1073, Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, Doc. 1077, Doc. 1078, Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, Doc. 1081, and Doc. 1082], 676–678 [Pgs. 676–678 include portions of Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, Doc. 1085, Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Ships’ equipment, use in neutral waters 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 886], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 1043], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 674–676 [Pgs. 674–676 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, Doc. 1083, Doc. 1084, and Doc. 1085], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 1098 and Doc. 1099], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109]

Unneutral use VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Preface], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, Doc. 1077, and Doc. 1078], 678–681 [Pgs. 678–681 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 1091 and Doc. 1092], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Warships of belligerents, communication with neutral ports 655–657 [Pgs. 655–657 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, Doc. 1050, and Doc. 1051], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 1054]
