Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XV, Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1994)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v15).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XV)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume XV

Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963

Editor:Charles S. SampsonGeneral Editor:Glenn W. LaFantasie
United States Government Printing Office

Washington
1994

U.S. Department of State

Office of the Historian

Bureau of Public Affairs

This experimental e-book was generated on May 21, 2013.

Please visit the Office of the Historian e-books web page to access updates.

About the Electronic EditionAbout the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to
release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States
(FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable
than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each
volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook
devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based
edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without
internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the
original printed edition. Representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks
has proved to be difficult. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we
recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers. Document numbers are persistent,
media-neutral identifiers. Please note that since the indexes in older FRUS volumes
refer to page numbers rather than document numbers, we have found certain indexes cannot be
used “as is” in ebook versions and so have been omitted from the ebook edition of
pre-Johnson administration volumes. Volumes from the Johnson administration onward, whose
indexes reference document numbers, are unaffected by this issue.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a
broad range of devices. Please email
history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general,
visit our ebooks homepage,
and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian

Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2013

Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XV)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963March 1962: Discussion of Berlin at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee Meetings at Geneva (Documents 1-29)

April-May 1962: Differences Between the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany (Documents 30-58)

May–July 1962: Further Discussions in Washington, Geneva, and Moscow (Documents 59-89)

August-September 1962: Contingency Planning, the Death of Peter Fechter, and the Abolition of the Office of the Soviet Commandant (Documents 90-112)

September–November 1962: U.S. Policy on Berlin During the Cuban Missile Crisis (Documents 113-151)

November 1962–January 1963: Allied Consideration of Resuming Talks With the Soviet Union (Documents 152-169)

January–June 1963: Resumption of Talks With The Soviet Union and President Kennedy's Trip to Germany (Documents 170-198)

June-October 1963: Discussions at Moscow, New York, and Washington (Documents 199-218)

October-December 1963: Convoy Incidents and Chancellor Erhard's Visit to the United States (Documents 219-256)

Index

PrefacePreface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents
the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and
significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series
documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies
and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy
positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for
the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The
staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans,
researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary
editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of
historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for
the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by
Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with
minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by
Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992
and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section
198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic
Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be
a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy
decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the
series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation
of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government,
including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that
provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately
adopted.

The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the
Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles
of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or
deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been
made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in
reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of
concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30
years after the events recorded.

The editors of this volume, which was compiled in 1991, are convinced that it
meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and
editing. Although this volume records policies and events of more than 30 years
ago, the statute of October 28, 1991, allows the Department until 1996 to reach
the 30-year line in the publication of the series.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a triennial subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series. This subseries documents the most important
issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years (1961–1963) of the administration of
John F. Kennedy. In planning and
preparing the 1961–1963 triennium, the editors chose to present the official
record of U.S. foreign affairs with respect to Europe, the Soviet Union, and
Canada in six print volumes and one microfiche supplement.

Volume V, Soviet Union, includes documentation on U.S.-Soviet bilateral
relations. Volume VI, Kennedy-Khrushchev Correspondence, includes the comprehensive record of
correspondence between President Kennedy and Soviet
Chairman Khrushchev. Volume XIII, Western
Europe and Canada, documents U.S. policy regarding European economic and
political integration, U.S. participation in NATO, and U.S. bilateral relations with Canada, France, Italy,
Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Volume XIV, Berlin Crisis, 1961–1962,
and Volume XV, Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963 (presented here), document U.S.
involvement in the continuing Four-Power negotiations over divided Germany and
the status of the Western-occupied sectors of Berlin. A combined microfiche
supplement to volumes XIII, XIV, and XV will be published separately. Volume
XVI, Eastern Europe, presents the basic record of U.S. relations with Austria,
Finland, Poland, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey, as well as documentation on
general U.S. policy toward the Eastern European region and U.S. efforts to
resolve the Cyprus problem.

The statute of October 28, 1991, requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to
provide comprehensive documentation on all the major foreign policy decisions
and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government
agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with
the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to
records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing
copies of selected records. The editors judge that this volume was prepared in
complete accordance with the stand-ards and mandates of this statute.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

In planning and preparing this volume and the other five documenting U.S. foreign
policy regarding Europe during the Kennedy administration,
the editors concluded that the records of the Department of State would
constitute the central core of the published record. In preparing this volume,
Department of State historians have enjoyed complete and unconditional access to
all records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the
Department; the special decentralized (lot) files of the policymaking levels;
the files of the Department of State's Executive Secretariat, which comprehend
the official papers created by or submitted to the Secretary of State; the files
of all overseas Foreign Service posts and U.S. special missions; and the
official correspondence with foreign governments and with other Federal
agencies. Any failure to include a complete Department of State record in the
Foreign Relations series cannot be attributed to
constraints or limitations placed upon the Department historians in their access
to Department records, information security regulations and practices
notwithstanding.

The editors of this volume fully researched the papers of President
Kennedy and other White House foreign policy records.
These Presidential papers have become a major part of the official record
published in the Foreign Relations series. Presidential
papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of
the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other Federal
agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence
Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. All of this
documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign
Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the
cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.
Particular thanks are due to officials at the John
F. Kennedy Presidential Library for their assistance in preparing
this volume.

These Presidential files were supplemented by White House documents in Department
of State files. The Department of State files were particularly valuable for
documenting the implementation of the policy presented in this volume.

The editors also had complete access to the papers of General Maxwell Taylor at the National Defense
University, which proved to be a valuable source for the formulation of policy
under President Kennedy. In addition, the editors reviewed
the body of declassified JCS files at the
National Archives and Records Administration. Copies of individual classified
JCS materials were obtained from the Joint
Staff on a request basis.

Completion of the declassification of this volume and the final steps of its
preparation for publication coincided with the development since early 1991 by the Central Intelligence Agency,
in cooperation with the Department of State, of access by deparment
historiansccess by Department historians to high-level intelligence documents
from among those records still in the custody of that Agency. The Department of
State historians have been provided selective access to particular special files
of the Agency. The Department has used this access, as arranged by the CIA's
History Staff, in the compilation of this volume.

The List of Sources, pages XIII–XV, identifies the particular files and
collections used in the preparation of this volume.

Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961–1963,
Volume XV

In selecting documents for inclusion in volume XV, the editors recognized the
predominant role of President Kennedy and his advisers at
the White House in formulating policy with respect to Berlin and to the German
question. This volume focuses on the many meetings of the President with his
advisers from the White House, the Department of State, and other agencies, as
well as the written advice to the President from these advisers. The editors
have selected from White House, Department of State, and National Defense
University records memoranda of conversation and records of meetings between the
President and his principal foreign policy advisers. They have also included
internal U.S. Government policy recommendations and decision papers relating to
Berlin. The editors also included the advice and recommendations on foreign
policy issues from top-level military commanders and advisers.

The editors also focused on the principal aspects of the military contingency
planning regarding Germany and the Berlin crisis that took place among the
Western Allies as well as with representatives of the Soviet Union. Normal
command and control activities of U.S. forces were not researched.

In focusing on the major lines of the development of the crisis, the editors have
also presented a record of the U.S. reaction and response to the major political
events within the Federal Republic of Germany insofar as they figured directly
in ongoing high-level political negotiations.

Intelligence information regarding Soviet intentions with respect to Berlin and
Germany in general was vitally important during the Berlin crisis and is
reflected in the political documents selected for publication. The editors did
not, however, attempt to document any particular operational activities by
intelligence authorities in connection with the German problem or to explore the
scope and impact of intelligence operations.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in
the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed
according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving
agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are
placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date
the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign
Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by
guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text
is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations,
which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed
according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in
the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors
for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and
punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious
typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the
source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic
type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text
are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in
the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of
each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an
unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after
declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not
declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source
text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes
have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of
pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material
omitted from this print volume and from the microfiche supplement because it was
unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All
ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by
footnotes.

The unnumbered first footnote to each document indicates the document's source,
original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source
footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and
indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every
effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published,
and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not
printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources,
provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes,
describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements
that supplement and elucidate the
printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand
accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official
record.

Declassification Review

The declassification review of this volume in 1992 and 1993 resulted in the
decision to withhold one percent of the documents originally selected. The
remaining documentation provides a full account of the major foreign policy
issues confronting, and the policies undertaken by, the
Kennedy administration during the second part of the
Berlin crisis.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of
Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration,
Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents
published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the
standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information
and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the
following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected
to cause damage to the national security, requires classification:

1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or
plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence
sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national
security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information,
subject only to the current requirements of national security and law.
Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic
and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of
the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific
documents of those governments.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic
Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under
Title IV of the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act, amended on October
28, 1991, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relationsseries. The Advisory Committee monitors
the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and assists with any
access and/or clearance problems that arise. Time constraints prevent the
Advisory Committee from reviewing all volumes in the series.

This volume has not been reviewed by the Advisory Committee.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the John F. Kennedy Library, in particular Suzanne
Forbes, who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume.

Under the supervision of former Editor in Chief John P. Glennon, Charles S.
Sampson collected, selected, and edited all the material presented in this
volume. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the
editorial and publication process. Rita M. Baker and Vicki E. Futscher did the
copy and technical editing and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services
Division (Natalie H. Lee, Chief) oversaw the printing production of the volume.
Do Mi Stauber prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
February 1994

List of SourcesList of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State

Decimal and Subject-Numeric Indexed Central Files. Until
January 1963, the Department of State used a decimal file system for its central
indexed records. For Berlin the most important numbers under this system
are:

10.11–RU: Secretary of State Rusk's travels abroad

611.61: general U.S.-Soviet relations

762.00: general reporting on Germany

762.0221: the status of Berlin

962.72: access to Berlin

In February 1963, the Department of State changed to a subject-numeric system.
Under this system, the most significant files for Berlin are:

POL US–USSR: general U.S.-Soviet relations

POL 7 US/Kennedy: general correspondence of the
President

POL 28 Berlin: the status of Berlin

POL 38–9 and 10: access to Berlin

Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been
supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the
Department of State. A list of the major lot files used or consulted for this
volume follows:

Berlin Desk Files: Lots 91 D 305, 306, and
313

Master files of the Berlin Task Force, basic
documents on Germany and Berlin, and various files pertaining to Live Oak
planning on Berlin, 1944–1977.

Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533

Collection of documentation on official visits
by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major
international conferences attended by the Secretary of State and the Under
Secretary of State for 1962, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110

Collection of documentation on official visits
by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major
international conferences attended by the Secretary and Under Secretary of State
for 1961–1964, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

EUR/CE Files: Lot 86 D 339

Files relating to Germany and Berlin,
1955–1972.

G/PM Files: Lot 69 D 258

Files of the Under Secretary of State for
Political/Military Affairs, 1961–1965.

Hillenbrand Files: Lot 88 D 325

Files of Ambassador Martin J. Hillenbrand primarily relating to Berlin and Germany,
1950–1975.

INR-NIE Files

Files retained by the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research containing copies of National Intelligence Estimates and Special
National Intelligence Estimates, including the NIEs and SNIEs for 1962–1963.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204

Exchanges of correspondence between the
President and the Secretary of State with the heads of government and foreign
ministers of the United Kingdom, France, Germany, the Soviet Union, and certain
other countries, 1953–1964.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163

Correspondence between Presidents
Kennedy and Johnson and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union and correspondence
between other high officials of the two countries, 1961–1969.

Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D
149

Memoranda of the President's conversations,
1956–1964.

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192

Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, including texts of speeches and
public statements, miscellaneous correspondence files, White House
correspondence, chronological files, and memoranda of telephone conversations,
1961–1969.

S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2

Files of Ambassador at Large Llewellyn E. Thompson, 1961–1964.

Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D
330

Memoranda of the Secretary of State's and Under
Secretary of State's conversations, 1961–1964.

S/S Files: Eyes Only Telegrams

Microfilm reels of incoming and outgoing
telegrams slugged Eyes Only, 1953 ff., maintained by the Executive
Secretariat.

S/S Files: Lot 65 D 438

Files of the Executive Secretariat on the Cuban
missile crisis, 1962.

National Archives and Records Administration

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of
Defense

OASD/ISA Files:
FRC 65 A 3501

General and country files of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1962.

OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542

Records of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy
Secretary of Defense, and their special assistants for 1962.

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington,
D.C.

Taylor Papers

Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1955–1959;
Military Adviser to the President, 1961–1962; and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, 1962–1964.

Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas

Norstad Papers

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston
Massachusetts

Ball Papers

National Security Files (NSF)

Aides Files

Countries Series

Meetings and Memoranda Series

President's Office Files

Sorensen Papers

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin,
Texas

Rusk Appointment Books

Vice Presidential Security Files

Published Sources

Only publications cited in the volume are listed
here.

Documentary Publications and Periodicals

Biewer, Gisela and John Werner, eds. Dokumente zur
Deutschlandpolitik, 1963. IV Reihe, Band 9. Frankfurt, 1978.

De Gaulle, Charles.Major Addresses, Statements and Press Conferences of General
Charles de Gaulle, May 19,
1958–January 31, 1964. New York, undated.

The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog and
Microfiche. Woodbridge, Conn., Research Publications (formerly
Washington, Carrollton Press), 1977 ff.

Hannelore, Nathan, ed. Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik,
1962. IV Reihe, Band 8. Frankfurt, 1977.

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current
Documents, 1962, 1963. Washington, 1966 and 1967.

————. Department of State Bulletin, 1962–1963.

————. Documents on Germany, 1944–1985. Revised edition.
Washington, 1986.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public
Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, 1963. Washington, 1962,
1963.

U.S. Senate. Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee (Historical Series), 1962. Washington, 1986.

USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs and GDR Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (Ministerstvo Inostranykh Del SSSR i GDR). Otnosheniia SSSR s GDR, 1949–1959, Dokumenty i Materialy. Moscow, 1974.

Memoirs and Secondary Literature

The Department of State takes no responsibility
for the accuracy of these publications nor does it endorse their
interpretations.

Brandt, Willy. Begegnungen und Einsichten, Die Jahre 1960–1975. Hamburg, 1976.
(English translation: People and Politics, the Years
1960–1975. London, 1978)

Kroll, Hans S.Lebenserinnerungen eines Botschafters. Cologne, 1967.

McGhee, George C.At the Creation of a New Germany, From Adenauer to Brandt: An
Ambassador's Account. New Haven, undated.

Nitze, Paul H.From Hiroshima to Glasnost: At the Center of Decision, A
Memoir. New York, 1989.

Macmillan, Harold. At
the End of the Day, 1961–1963. London, 1973.

Sorensen, Theodore C.Kennedy. New York, 1965.

List of AbbreviationsList of Abbreviations

ACA, Allied Control Authority

APC, armored personnel carrier

ATC, Allied traffic control

AUA, Austrian Airlines

AV, Aviation Bureau, Department of
State

BASC, Berlin Air Safety Center

BERCON/MARCON, Berlin
contingency/maritime contingency

BQD, Berlin Quadripartite
Document

BTF, Berlin Task Force

CDU, Christlich-Demokratische Union
(Christian Democratic Union)

CEMA, Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance

ChiComs, Chinese Communists

CINC, Commander in Chief

CINCEUR, Commander in Chief,
Europe

CINCLANT, Commander in Chief,
Atlantic

CINCUSEUR, Commander in Chief
U.S. Army, Europe

DDR, Deutsche Demokratische Republik
(German Democratic Republic)

Deptel, Department of State
telegram

DM, Deutschemark (German Mark)

EE, Eastern Europe

EEC, European Economic
Community

EFTA, European Free Trade Area

EmbOff, Embassy officer

Embtel, Embassy telegram

ENDC, Eighteen-Nation Disarmament
Committee

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs,
Department of State

EUR/SOV, Office of Soviet Union
Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Exdis, exclusive distribution

FDP, Freie Demokratische Partei (Free
Democratic Party)

FedRep, Federal Republic

FonMin, Foreign Ministry

FonOff, Foreign Office

FRG, Federal Republic of
Germany

FYI, for your information

G/B, Germany/Berlin

G/PM, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Political/Military Affairs

GA, General Assembly

GDR, German Democratic Republic

GER, Office of German Affairs, Bureau
of European Affairs, Department of State

GSFG, Group of Soviet Forces in
Germany

HQ, headquarters

IAA, International Acces
Authority

ICBM, intercontinental ballistic
missile

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, Department of State

ISA, Office of International Security
Affairs, Department of Defense

IZT, interzonal trade

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff
memorandum

JSSC, Joint Strategic Survey
Council

K, Khrushchev

L, Office of the Legal Adviser,
Department of State

Limdis, limited distribution

L/S, Bureau of Language Services,
Department of State

M, Office of the Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs

memcon, memorandum of
conversation

MFA, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs

MLF, multilateral force

MOD, Ministry of Defense

MRBM, medium-range ballistic
missile

mytel, my telegram

NAC, North Atlantic Council

NAP, nonaggression pact

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty
Organization

NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs,
Department of State

Niact, Night action, communications
indicator requiring attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or
night

NSAM, National Security Action
Memorandum

OAS, Organisation de l'Armee Secrete
(Secret Army Organization)

OECD, Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development

OSD/ISA, Office of International
Security Affairs, Department of Defense

PET, President's European trip

POLAD, political adviser

Polto, series indicator for
telegrams from the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
European Regional Organizations

R/PM (RPM), Office of Atlantic
Political and Military Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of
State

reftel, reference telegram

RIAS, Rundfunk in Amerikanischen
Sektor (U.S. Radio in the American Sector of Berlin)

S, Office of the Secretary of
State

SAC, Strategic Air Command

SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander,
Europe

SACLANT, Supreme Allied Commander,
Atlantic

S/B, Office of the Special Assistant to
the Secretary of State

SecDel MC, Secretary's delegation
memorandum of conversation

Secto, series indicator for
telegrams from the Secretary of State while away from Washington

SED, Sozialistische Einheitspartei
Deutschlands (Socialist Unity Party of Germany)

septel, separate telegram

SET/MC, Secretary's European
Trip/memorandum of conversation

SHAPE, Supreme Headquarters, Allied
Powers, Europe

SHLO, SHAPE Liaison Office

SOV, Soviet; Office of Soviet Union
Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

SPD, Sozialdemokratische Partei
Deutschlands (German Social Democratic Party)

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department
of State

SYG, Secretary-General

TASS, Telegraphnoe Agentsvo
Sovietskogo Soiuza (Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union)

TB, Test Ban

Topol, series indicator for
telegrams to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
European Regional Organizations

Tosec, series indicator for
telegrams to the Secretary of State while away from Washington

TTD, temporary travel document

U, Office of the Under Secretary of
State

UKMLM, United Kingdom Military
Liaison Mission

UN, United Nations

UNGA, United Nations General
Assembly

USAFE, United States Air Force,
Europe

USAREUR, United States Army,
Europe

USCINCEUR, United States
Commander in Chief, Europe

USCOB, United States Command(er),
Berlin

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information
Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence
Board

USRO, Mission to the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations

USUN, United States Mission to the
United Nations

Vopo, Volkspolizei (Peoples'
Police)

WE, Office of Western European Affairs,
Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

WM, war memorial

List of PersonsList of Persons

Abrasimov, Pyotr A., Soviet
Ambassador to the German Democratic Republic

Adenauer, Konrad, Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany until October 1963

Adzhubei, Alexei I., Editor in
Chief of Izvestiia and Khrushchev's
son-in-law

Akalovsky, Alexander,
Department of State interpreter

Alphand, Herve, French
Ambassador to the United States

Amrehn, Franz, Deputy Mayor of
Berlin

Anderson, William O., Office
of Soviet Union Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of
State

Ausland, John C., Member of
the Berlin Task Force, Department of State

Bahr, Egon, Press Chief of the
Berlin Senate

Baker, Major General William
C., Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, Europe

Ball, George W., Under
Secretary of State

Behrendt, Heinz, Head of the
Office of Inter-German Trade in the East German Ministry of Foreign and
Inter German Trade

Bohlen, Charles E., Special
Assistant to the Secretary of State until September 1962; thereafter
Ambassador to France

Bolshakov, Georgi N., Editor
of USSR magazine

Brandin, Robert M., Office of
German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Brandt, Willi, Governing Mayor
of Berlin

Brentano, Heinrich von,
Majority (CDU) Leader in the Bundestag and
former German Foreign Minister

Bruce, David K.E., Ambassador
to the United Kingdom

Bundy, McGeorge, Special
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Burris, Colonel Howard L.,
Military Assistant to the Vice President

Butler, Richard A., British
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs from October 1963

Calhoun, John C., Minister and
Assistant Chief of Mission at Berlin from May 1963

Carstens, Karl, State Secretary
in the German Foreign Ministry

Cash, Frank E. Jr., Office of
German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Clarke, General Bruce C.,
Commander in Chief, U.S. Army, Europe, until May 1962

Clay, Brigadier General Lucius
D., President's Special Representative in Berlin until
May 1962; thereafter Special Consultant to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Cleveland, Harlan, Assistant
Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Clifton, Major General Chester V.,
Jr., Military Aide to the President

Couve de Murville, Maurice,
French Foreign Minister

Cowles, Gardner, Editor of the
Des Moines Register and Tribune

Creel, Robert C., Director of
the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of
State

Davis, Richard H., Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Day, Arthur R., Member of the
Berlin Task Force, Department of State, until June 1962; thereafter
Political Officer at Berlin

de Gaulle, Charles, President
of France

Dobrynin, Anatoli F., Soviet
Ambassador to the United States from March 1962

Dowling, Walter C., Ambassador
to Germany until April 1963

Eckardt, Felix von, State
Secretary in the German Press and Information Office

Erhard, Ludwig, German Minister
of Economic Affairs until October 1963; thereafter Chancellor

Finletter, Thomas K.,
Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Foster, William C., Director
of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Freeman, General Paul L.,
Jr., Commander in Chief, U.S. Army, Europe, from May
1962

Gavin, James M., Ambassador to
France until September 1962

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy
Secretary of Defense

Globke, Hans, State Secretary
in the Office of Chancellor Adenauer

Gray, Major General David
W., Head of the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of
Staff

Grewe, Wilhelm C., German
Ambassador to the United States until September 1962

Gromyko, Andrei I., Soviet
Foreign Minister

Guthrie, John C., Director of
the Office of Soviet Union Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department
of State

Hassel, Kai-Uwe von, German
Minister of Defense from 1962

Hillenbrand, Martin J.,
Director of the Berlin Task Force and the Office of German Affairs, Bureau
of European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1963; thereafter
Minister to Germany

Hilsman, Roger Jr., Director
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until April
1963

Holloway, Jerome K., Jr.,
Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of
State

Home, Lord Douglas, British
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs until October 1963

Hood, Viscount Samuel, British
Minister to the United States

Hulick, Charles E., Jr.,
Deputy Assistant Chief of Mission at Berlin

Johnson, Lyndon B., Vice
President of the United States until November 22, 1963; thereafter
President

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Kaysen, Carl, President's
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs

Kennedy, John F., President of
the United States until November 22, 1963

Kennedy, Robert F., Attorney
General of the United States

Khrushchev, Nikita S.,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union

Kitchen, Jeffrey C., Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for Political/Military Affairs

Klein, David, Member of the
National Security Council Staff

Knappstein, Karl H., German
Ambassador to the United States from October 1962

Kohler, Foy D., Assistant
Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 1962; thereafter
Ambassador to the Soviet Union

Konev, Marshal of the Soviet Union Ivan
S., Commander in Chief, Group of Soviet Forces in
Germany until 1962

Kornienko, Georgi M.,
Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in the United States

Kranich, Robert H., Office of
Atlantic Political and Military Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs,
Department of State

Kreisky, Bruno, Austrian
Foreign Minister

Kroll, Hans, S., German
Ambassador to the Soviet Union until September 1962

Kuznetzov, Vasili V., Soviet
First Deputy Foreign Minister

Lebel, Claude, French
Minister-Counselor in the United States

Legere, Colonel Lawrence J.,
Assistant to the President's Military Representative

Lejins, Nora, Department of
State interpreter

Lemnitzer, Lieutenant General Lyman
L., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until
October 1962; thereafter Supreme Allied Commander, Europe

Leopold, Kurt, Head of the
German Interzonal Trade Office in Berlin

Lightner, E. Allan, Jr.,
Minister and Deputy Chief of Mission at Berlin until May 1963

Lilienfeld, Georg, German
Minister to the United States

Macmillan, Harold, British
Prime Minister until October 1963

Manning, Robert J., Assistant
Secretary of State for Public Affairs

McCloy, John J., former High
Commissioner for Germany and President's Adviser on Disarmament

McCone, John A., Director of
Central Intelligence

McGhee, George C., Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs until March 1963; thereafter
Ambassador to Germany

McNamara, Robert S.,
Secretary of Defense

Mende, Erich, Chairman of the
German Free Democratic Party and Minister for All-German Questions from
October 1963

Mikoyan, Anastas I., First
Vice Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union

Morris, Brewster H., Minister
in Germany until 1963

Nitze, Paul H., Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs and from October
1962, Chairman of the Berlin-NATO
Subcommittee of the Executive Committee of the National Security
Council

Norstad, Lieutenant General
Lauris, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, until
1962

Ormsby Gore, David, British
Ambassador to the United States

Owen, Henry D., Deputy
Counselor and Vice Chairman of the Policy Planning Council

Penberthy, Grover W., Berlin
Task Force, Department of State

Polk, Major General James
H., U.S. Commander in Berlin from January 1963

Reinkemeyer, Albert, Deputy
Director, Division II, German Foreign Ministry

Roberts, Sir Frank, British
Ambassador to the Soviet Union until November 1962

Rostow, Walt W., Counselor of
the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council; from
October 1962, Chairman of the Advance Planning Subcommittee of the Executive
Committee of the National Security Council

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of
State

Salinger, Pierre E.G.,
President's Press Secretary

Schaetzel, J. Robert, Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs from September 1962

Schroeder, Gerhard, German
Foreign Minister

Schuetz, Klaus, Berlin Senator
for Bundestag Affairs

Semenov, Vladimir S., Soviet
Deputy Foreign Minister

Shuckburgh, Sir Evelyn,
British Deputy Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Smirnovsky, Mikhail N., Chief
of the U.S. Section of the Soviet Foreign Ministry

Smith, Bromley, Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council

Sorensen, Theodore C.,
President's Special Counsel

Stevenson, Adlai E., Permanent
Representative to the United Nations

Strauss, Franz Joseph, German
Minister of Defense until 1962

Sukhodrev, Victor, Soviet
interpreter

Taylor, General Maxwell D.,
President's Military Representative until October 1962; thereafter Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Thant, U, United Nations
Secretary-General

Thompson, Llewellyn E.,
Ambassador to the Soviet Union until July 1962; thereafter Ambassador at
Large

Tyler, William R., Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 1962;
thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Ulbricht, Walter, Chairman of
the German Democratic Republic Council of State and of the Socialist Unity
Party

Watson, Major General Albert,
II, U.S. Commandant in Berlin from December 1962

Weiss, Seymour, Special
Assistant to the Secretary of State

Westrick, Ludgar, State
Secretary in the German Economics Ministry

Yakubovsky, Marshal of the Soviet Union
Ivan I., Commander in Chief, Group of Soviet Forces
in Germany from 1962

Zorin, Valerian A., Soviet
Deputy Foreign Minister

Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963

March 1962: Discussion of Berlin at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee Meetings at Geneva (Documents 1-29)

April-May 1962: Differences Between the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany (Documents 30-58)

May–July 1962: Further Discussions in Washington, Geneva, and Moscow (Documents 59-89)

August-September 1962: Contingency Planning, the Death of Peter Fechter, and the Abolition of the Office of the Soviet Commandant (Documents 90-112)

September–November 1962: U.S. Policy on Berlin During the Cuban Missile Crisis (Documents 113-151)

November 1962–January 1963: Allied Consideration of Resuming Talks With the Soviet Union (Documents 152-169)

January–June 1963: Resumption of Talks With The Soviet Union and President Kennedy's Trip to Germany (Documents 170-198)

June-October 1963: Discussions at Moscow, New York, and Washington (Documents 199-218)

October-December 1963: Convoy Incidents and Chancellor Erhard's Visit to the United States (Documents 219-256)

March 1962: Discussion of Berlin at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee Meetings at GenevaMarch 1962: Discussion of Berlin at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee Meetings at Geneva: Document List

Document 1: Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 9, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 2: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 10, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2058A. Secret. Drafted by Hillenbrand on March 9 and cleared in draft by Bohlen.

Document 3: Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy

Moscow, March 10, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. No classification marking. In a memorandum to the President on March 12, Sorensen explained that he had picked up this letter at 3:20 p.m. on March 10 from Georgi Bolshakov, who in a 15-minute conversation, reflected the contents of the letter in a “less dogmatic and more affirmative and friendly tone.” Bolshakov stressed that concession on the international access authority was made personally to the President and that the Chairman's best efforts came from his own pen and not from the Foreign Office. (Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Cuba, General, 1962) A copy of the letter was transmitted to Secretary Rusk in Geneva at 9:30 p.m. on March 10 in Tosecs 9 and 10. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163) The full texts of all the Kennedy-Khrushchev messages are printed in volume VI.

Document 4: Telegram From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk, at Geneva

Washington, March 11, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret; Eyes Only.

Document 5: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, March 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/3–1062. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 6: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 11, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.41/3–1162. Secret. Drafted by Kohler and approved in S on March 13. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 10 from Geneva, March 12. (Ibid., 762.00/3–1262)

Document 7: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 11, 1962, 7:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–362. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. The meeting was held at the Hotel Richmond. A summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 11 from Geneva, March 12. (Ibid., 700.5611/3–1262)

Document 8: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 12, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1262. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 18 from Geneva, March 12. (Ibid., 611.61/3–1262)

Document 9: Memorandum From the Representative to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee (Dean) to Secretary of State Rusk

Geneva, March 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–GE/3–1362. Secret. Drafted by Dean and also sent to Bohlen, Kohler, Hillenbrand, Manning, Spiers, and Martin.

Document 10: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 13, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1362. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's suite at the Hotel Richmond. A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 29 from Geneva, March 13. (Ibid., 611.61/3–1362)

Document 11: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 13, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Chron. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Rusk and concurred in by Kohler. Repeated to Berlin.

Document 12: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant (Weiss) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Kitchen)

Washington, March 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1462. Top Secret. Drafted and initialed by Weiss.

Document 13: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 14, 1962, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3–1462. Secret.

Document 14: Editorial Note

Document 15: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 17, 1962, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3–1762. Top Secret; Niact. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2060)

Document 16: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 18, 1962, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1862. Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Bohlen on March 19. The meeting was held at the Hotel du Lac.

Document 17: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 19, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3–1962. Secret; Priority. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Hillenbrand and concurred in by Bohlen and Kohler. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2060)

Document 18: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 20, 1962, 7:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2062. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 73 from Geneva, March 21. (Ibid., 611.61/3–2162)

Document 19: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 22, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2262. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's suite at the Hotel Richmond. A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 92 from Geneva, March 23. (Ibid., 611.61/3–2362)

Document 20: Paper Prepared in the U.S. Delegation

Geneva, undated.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2062. Confidential. The source text bears no drafting information, but is attached to a March 21 memorandum from Kohler to Rusk, which states that it had been worked out after communications with Washington. The source text bears the handwritten notation: “As handed Gromyko.”

Document 21: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, March 22, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0021/3–2262. Secret; Priority. Received at 3:17 p.m. Also sent to Geneva and USAREUR and repeated to Berlin, London, Paris, and Moscow.

Document 22: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 23, 1962, 2 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2262. Secret; Niact. Received on March 22 at 11:18 p.m. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk and concurred in by Bohlen, Thompson, and Kohler. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 193, Chron)

Document 23: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, March 23, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/3–2362. Secret; Priority. Received at 2:40 p.m. Also sent to Geneva and Bonn.

Document 24: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 25, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2562. Secret; Niact. Passed to the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk and concurred in by Thompson, Kohler, and Bohlen. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 193, Chron)

Document 25: Memorandum of Conversation

Geneva, March 26, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2662. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. The meeting was held at the Soviet Mission. A detailed summary of this conversation was transmitted in Secto 114 from Geneva, March 27. (Ibid., 611.61/3–2762)

Document 26: Telegram From the President's Special Representative in Berlin (Clay) to the Commander in Chief, United States Army, Europe (Clarke)

Berlin, March 26, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/3–2662. Top Secret; Priority. Also sent to Bonn, Geneva, and to the Department of State as telegram 1817, which is the source text.

Document 27: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 26, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2662. Top Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Passed to the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2060)

Document 28: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Mission at Berlin

Geneva, March 27, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–2762. Secret. Also sent to the Department of State as Secto 116, which is the source text.

Document 29: Minutes of the Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, March 28, 1962, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

1. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk1. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, March 9,
1962.

In your discussions with Foreign Minister Gromyko at Geneva,2 you should bear in mind our need to draw him out
on the main directions of present Soviet policy regarding the West and,
specifically, the United States. It would be of considerable importance
to us to get a clearer picture of the underlying attitudes which will
have a direct bearing on such matters as a nuclear test ban,
disarmament, Berlin and Southeast Asia. You will have to judge on the
spot how best to explore these matters but, for our own approach, my
conversation in Vienna, my interview with Adzhubei3 and other
communications with Soviet leadership give ample guidance.

With particular regard to Berlin, you should attempt to develop in your
discussions with Gromyko the
draft proposal of a modus vivendi which has my approval.4 I should like to
add the following for your guidance:

1. We anticipate that, at an appropriate stage, such a proposal would be
given in written form to Gromyko.
This is the only way we can be sure that in its full form it will get
top-level study in Moscow.

2. In presenting the proposal, you would indicate to Gromyko that this represents the sort
of practical way of moving ahead with due regard to the interests and obligations of both parties that I
have had in mind in my various communications with Chairman Khrushchev.

3. While the draft proposal corresponds, in our view, to the essential
interests of all concerned, and while in our view it would stand before
the world as a document fair to the prestige and power of all, we should
of course be glad to hear Soviet suggestions for improvement. We believe
that our document points the way to a method of handling the Berlin
question which recognizes the realities on all sides.

4. In presenting the draft proposal to Gromyko, we should initially omit the section on
Germany. Since Gromyko will
almost certainly raise questions which are directly relevant to such a
section, you would indicate to him that we must talk with our Allies,
including Bonn, before agreeing on any language for such a paragraph
with the Soviet Government. Since it is in the common interest of both
Moscow and Washington that we reach some basis of stability and mutual
security on such questions, Gromyko will appreciate the need for us to be able to
act on the basis of agreement with the strong and independent
governments with whom we are intimately associated.

5. You should indicate also that if the Soviet Government is interested
in discussion of this kind of proposal, and if serious progress can be
made with respect to agreement on such a proposal, I would regard the
matter as one which might be the basis of a fruitful meeting of Heads of
Government.

While our expectation is that you may not get much questioning from
Gromyko on this document at
this stage, there may easily be an immediate question about the duration
of such an understanding. I believe that our answer on this point should
be indefinite, but if the point is pressed, we might suggest that the
Committee of Deputies might be asked to report after a given interval of
time. This would give a date for new negotiations without threatening
the life of the modus vivendi itself.

6. If the Soviet Union should press on the matter of occupation status, I
assume that we will answer in the usual fashion—that the real presence
of our troops and our real access to the city cannot be negotiated away.
But it is appropriate to remark that the modus vivendi is so constructed
as not to require any open abandonment by the Soviet Union of its own
views on this matter.

7. The draft proposal does not go very far, mainly because we must not
put on paper things which might shock our Allies if presented without
prior consultation. However, you should indicate orally to Gromyko that if the Soviet Government
is prepared to discuss an interim arrangement, we would expect to be
able to consider a number of additional elements. One of course is a
paragraph relating to Germany, and
you should indicate informally the possibilities now contained in the
bracketed German paragraph of the draft proposal. In addition, we could
make it clear that during the life of the modus vivendi both sides could
readily lower the temperature of their “inflammatory propaganda” on
Berlin and East Germany. Further, we could indicate the possibility of
widening the future negotiations on non-aggression so as to examine
together proposals which the two sides have made in the past. And
finally, you should repeat the private assurance you have given
Gromyko in the past that if
progress can be made in this direction, we believe that boundary
problems can be effectively settled.

8. If discussion should turn toward respect for the sovereignty of the
GDR, you should indicate, as I did
to Adzhubei, that time may be
more effective here than any other instrument, and you should also find
occasion to develop the point that if the Soviet Union should ever wish
to multiply the responsiveness of the West on this point, we believe it
could obtain substantial concessions by the simple expedient of
replacing Ulbricht by a more “Polish” leader; this is a statement of
objective fact, and not a bargaining proposal.

9. I believe that the privacy of the draft proposal is of very great
importance, and yet I recognize the necessity for avoiding a split in
the Western alliance by apparent “back door” negotiations. Accordingly,
we have agreed that you will give appropriate oral indications of our
notion of an indefinite modus vivendi to Home and Schroeder—but it seems to be quite
undesirable that the document itself should be mentioned or circulated
at this time. We must consider by cable or telephone, prior to your
handing over a document to Gromyko, whether we should do so without specific
consultation with our Allies. It is my thought that, if real progress
has been made consistent with the vital interests of the West, Allied
consultation would not be difficult; on the other hand, if Gromyko's reactions are entirely
negative, we must consider whether there would be any point in
transmitting to him a document which would be both futile in Moscow and
irritating to our Allies.

John Kennedy

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. The source
text bears no drafting information.

2 Rusk was in Geneva March 10–27
for a meeting of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament March
14–June 14.

3 Regarding President
Kennedy's interview with Adzhubei on January 31, see vol.
XIV, Document 277.

4 The draft under reference, dated March 6, consisted
of four paragraphs (Purpose, Proposal, Advantages, and Soviet
Reactions) and a draft proposal with paragraphs on: 1) Berlin, 2)
Germany, 3) Nuclear Diffusion, and 4) Non-Aggression. (Attachment to
memorandum from Legere to Taylor, March 9; National Defense
University, Taylor Papers, 38 Negotiations) In commenting on this
draft, Legere wrote that it was “a very dangerous paper,” since it
assumed that pending a Berlin settlement, the Soviet Union was
interested in eliminating tensions. (Ibid.)

2. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to Secretary of State Rusk2. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European
Affairs (Kohler) to
Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, March 10,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin

1. Attached at Tab A is the text of our Berlin Modus Vivendi which might
be handed to Gromyko at an
appropriate point.

2. To supplement the President's communication to you, the following
tactical considerations seem pertinent:

a. In a formal sense, your conversations will be a continuation of your
meetings with Gromyko in
September and of the five Thompson conversations with him.2 The theory
has been that you and Ambassador Thompson were trying to ascertain whether a basis for
negotiations existed. This formula was designed largely to accommodate
the French and to provide a vehicle for their eventual participation in
Four-Power negotiations. It now seems clear that nothing which is likely
to emerge from discussions with the Soviets will be enough to obtain
De Gaulle's agreement to have
the French join with the British and us in a conference. The problem,
therefore, becomes one of finding a formula so that the French cannot
legally block an arrangement on Berlin rather than trying to maintain an
arbitrary and partly fictitious line between exploratory talks and
negotiations.

b. It still seems desirable, however, that we should continue to
represent the bilateral discussions at Geneva as exploratory talks to
the Soviets, making clear that we are not in a position to commit our
Allies but that, if a promising avenue towards a modus vivendi appeared
to be opening up, we would undertake to obtain their approval.

c. As you are aware, Soviet intentions remain unclear. While Gromyko has made threats to Ambassador
Thompson and the Soviets have
put pressure on us in the air corridors, they have not shown an
unmistakable determination to push ahead with their program of a
unilateral peace treaty with the GDR and
a turnover of their access responsibilities to GDR officials. This indicates a need for some caution on
our part, lest by seeming over-eager we encourage the Soviets to think
that harassments in the air corridors and their other pressures have already softened our position.
Presentation of a new formulation such as the suggested Modus Vivendi on
Berlin must be carefully worked out to avoid creating such an
impression.

d. Given these considerations, an initial carrot and stick approach seems
appropriate, prior to presentation of the Modus Vivendi. It will
probably be desirable to begin by saying something about the air
corridors (this to be decided in the light of the situation on March 12
and of the possible discussion of this subject during the tripartite
meeting the previous evening). You may then wish to refer to the
deadlock reached in the Thompson—Gromyko
talks, adding that, as the President pointed out to Adzhubei in their recent discussion in
Washington, both sides seem to be repeating static formulas. The
President, it may be recalled, suggested to Mr. Adzhubei that, since any final solution
of the Berlin problem seemed out of the question, both sides should seek
to find an accommodation which would prevent tensions from mounting. You
might then wish to continue along the lines of the attached talking
points (Tab B).3 Talking
point papers for subsequent meetings with Gromyko will be prepared as required at Geneva.

Tab A4

DRAFT MODUS VIVENDI

The US and USSR have been discussing a wide range of subjects. They have
agreed, in regard to certain of these subjects on (i) certain general
principles to which their governments subscribe; (ii) procedures for
continuing negotiation on the basis of these principles by a Committee
of Foreign Ministers' deputies, which will be established specifically
for this purpose, and which France and the UK will be invited to join;
and (iii) certain interim steps to meet immediate dangers in the
meantime.

1. Berlin

(a) General Principles: They believe that West
Berlin should be free to choose its own way of life, that its viability
should be maintained, and that its access should remain free and
unhindered.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree to study
proposals for improving the situation in Berlin consistent with these
principles in the aforementioned committee of Foreign Ministers'
deputies.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare
that present access procedures should remain in effect, irrespective of
the nationality of the persons performing these procedures at Nowawes
and Marienborn checkpoints.

2. Nuclear Diffusion

(a)General Principles: They believe that further
diffusion of nuclear weapons into the control of national government not
now owning them would make more difficult the problem of maintaining
lasting peace.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree to seek, in
the above-mentioned committee (or a sub-committee thereof) to develop
policies regarding non-diffusion of nuclear weapons to which all states
owning nuclear weapons might agree and to which states not now owning
nuclear weapons might also subscribe.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare
that they will not themselves relinquish control over any nuclear
weapons to any individual State not now owning such weapons and will
refrain from assisting any such State in manufacturing them.

3. Non-Aggression

(a) General Principles: They believe that force
should not be used to change existing frontiers and demarcation lines in
Europe or for any other aggressive purpose.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree to seek in the
above-mentioned committee (or a sub-committee thereof) (i) to develop
declarations which all NATO and Warsaw
Pact members might be invited to make in this regard; and (ii) to
consider measures which might be taken to enable the governments
represented on that Commission to communicate and establish their
non-aggressive intent in the event of grave crises and otherwise to
reduce the risk of war by accident or miscalculation.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime, they desire
that they will not themselves use or support use of force to change the
external borders of Germany or the demarcation line inside Germany, and
they note with approval past declarations of the Federal Republic that
it will not use force to achieve the reunification of Germany or to
settle international disputes.

4. Procedures

Once the proposed Committee of Foreign Ministers' deputies has been
established, the Foreign Ministers of countries represented on it should
meet periodically, as seems useful, to review its work. If and as the
Foreign Ministers believe that this is warranted, the Heads of
Government could meet from time to time to consummate agreements that
these efforts had produced.

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2058A. Secret. Drafted by
Hillenbrand on March 9
and cleared in draft by Bohlen.

2 For records of Rusk's three meetings with Gromyko in September and Thompson's five meetings with
Gromyko in January,
February, and March, see vol. XIV, Documents
156, 160, 164, 251, 264, 278, 284, and 314.

3 Not printed.

4 Secret. The source text bears no drafting
information.

3. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy3. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy1

Moscow, March 10,
1962.

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have received your message on the German
affairs2 and have closely
studied the U.S. Government's memorandum handed by your Ambassador to
the Soviet Foreign Minister on March 6.3 I regret that after so many meetings of our
representatives and in spite of our confidential communication, the
negotiations on the questions relating to the German peaceful
settlement, do not make any progress, to put it mildly. I have the
impression that the American side has not got rid of the preconception
that under the peaceful settlement which we seek somebody takes
something, somebody gives—one takes an orchard and gives an apple, or
sells the same horse twice. To be frank, I simply do not understand such
an approach to the appraisal of the meaning of our negotiations.

Perhaps the reason for that is that we look at things from different
angles, that we view the situation and the causes that have brought it
about in a different way and consequently we have different views on the
methods of eliminating the existing tension. If you could distract
yourself from the notions so deeply rooted overseas and look at the
situation in the way we see if after all we have lived through, you
would probably see for yourself that in a German peaceful settlement
nobody sells or buys anything, nobody trades unequal values.

No, from the point of view of common sense the situation here is quite
clear. A terrible blood-shedding war took place. The peoples of our
countries fought shoulder-to-shoulder against the common
enemy—aggressive Hitlerite Germany. By a supreme effort and at a cost of
countless losses we achieved the goal—defeated the enemy. By right of
conquerors the four Allied Powers—the USSR, the USA, Britain and
France—occupied temporarily, till the peace treaty is signed, the
territory of Germany who had unleashed World War II.

As a heritage from our predecessors we have got a delimitation of our
troops, which was not quite reasonable, and the division of Berlin into four parts. I was told that
when at the end of the war the plans of occupation of Germany were
discussed at the European Advisory Commission the British proposed to
seat the Allied Control Council not in Berlin but in a small town at the
juncture of the three occupation zones. That proposal motivated by
practical considerations was not accepted and it was decided to seat the
Control Council for symbolic reasons, in the capital of defeated
Hitlerite Germany.

Nobody could then envisage, of course, that there would be two Germanies
and the people acted at the time on the basis of the requirements of
organization of military occupation. It may serve as a certain excuse
for those who adopted decisions at that time.

But history does not always develop as the statesmen foresee. In reality
it turned out that there exist two Germanies. Neither you, Mr.
President, nor I know for how long the two German states that emerged on
the ruins of the Reich will exist, if they ever unite. And our
sympathies for these states are not quite the same: you sympathize with
social and political system of the FRG,
and I naturally sympathize with the German Democratic Republic as a
socialist state.

In addition there exists West Berlin. The population of this city lives
under old capitalist order while around it—on the territory of the
GDR—socialist order has been
established. And here we are looking for a solution—how to ensure
peaceful coexistence under these circumstances.

You are well aware, Mr. President, that because of the absence of
peaceful settlement and the continuation of occupation West Berlin has
for many years been causing serious and dangerous frictions between us.
I will not conceal that when you insist on keeping your troops in West
Berlin, we understand it as an expression of a desire to preserve a
NATO beachhead and military base
against us inside the GDR. We entered
Berlin as allies but we are not allies any longer. Moreover—we are in
different military blocs—you are in the North Atlantic bloc, we are in
the Warsaw Treaty Organization—organization of socialist countries.

These two groups are antagonistic because the NATO countries have formed their bloc against socialist
countries. To protect our interests we had to set up a defensive Warsaw
Treaty Organization. What was left to be done?

You note that the present situation in Germany is not satisfactory. This
is our point of view too. And what can we do now? Once upon a time, so
the story goes, two goats met head to head on a narrow bridge across an
abyss. They would not give the way to each other and down they fell.
They were stupid and stubborn animals.

But if we fail now to show sober understanding of the situation and do
not realize that we have to pass by each other in a friendly way and not to collide at the place where,
as you yourself emphasized, our essential interests do not cross—then it
will be difficult to take a reasonable decision which would permit both
sides to live calmly.

You often call West Berlin a stumbling block and say that until recently
everything was allegedly all right there. When we propose to sign a
peace treaty and to create a free demilitarized city in West Berlin
granting its population guarantees of free and independent life you
assert that this is abnormal. It means, that situation can be considered
normal only when your troops are stationed in West Berlin as occupants,
when the state of war is preserved there, and you do not want to
participate in concluding a peace treaty. But could it really be
considered normal? This is against common sense.

The Soviet Union proceeds from the necessity to find such a solution
which would not cause damage to either side; we must solve this whole
problem amicably and, having solved it, not collide with each other in
the future. In short, it is necessary to untie knots which create
frictions between our states.

I do not know, Mr. President, what else you could suggest as a solution
of this problem. My colleagues and I could not find anything better for
the improvement of post-war relations other than the conclusion of a
German peace treaty and the normalization of the situation in West
Berlin on this basis. To use the language of your representatives, we do
not sell or buy this city as a horse. We do not want to own this horse
and it is not your horse after all. It belongs to none of us.

West Berlin has turned out to be a capitalist island in the midst of
socialist countries. So, what! Let it remain such—we do not want to
seize this island or to liquidate the capitalist order which exists on
it. Let it be fixed what has been given by history.

You write in your message that two principles must be taken as a starting
point: (1) to avoid any shift favorable to one side and detrimental to
the other, and (2) to ensure a greater degree of stability and
tranquility in the entire German situation. If one adds to this that it
is also necessary to take into consideration the real situation in
Germany, i.e. the existence of the two German States—then one can say
that these very principles form the basis of the Soviet proposals on the
conclusion of a German peace treaty. The peace treaty should fix the
situation which really exists, should not allow to upset the established
balance and should secure stable peace and tranquility in Europe and not
only in Europe.

One of the important aspects of such solution is the respect for the
sovereignty of the German Democratic Republic. No one demands from the
Western powers to do more than observe generally adopted norms of the
international law and international practice with regard to the GDR. One cannot ignore the dignity and
sovereign rights of a state, especially if one wants to use the routes
of communications crossing its territory as well as its services, if a
display of good will is expected from it. And it is impossible to
achieve a peaceful solution by pushing aggressive circles of the FRG to still new aggravations of the
situation in the centre of Europe.

You write that both sides should refrain from actions which would burden
the proceeding negotiations. This is a right idea. Unfortunately, the
Western powers are still trying in everything—both in major and in minor
matters—to ignore and tread on the rights of the GDR. The NATO Council—not
without the US participation, one can assume—has even adopted a special
decision recommending the members of this bloc to deprive the citizens
of the GDR of the possibility to have
normal contacts with many countries of the world. But what if the GDR in response to such a defiant decision
forbade the citizens of the NATO
countries to go and to fly to the GDR or
anywhere through its territory? The Western powers, evidently, would not
like it, but that would be the exercise by the German Democratic
Republic of its sovereign right. Why, then, do the USA and its allies
consider it possible to hold such a position towards the German
Democratic Republic?

Or, perhaps, one should regard as a contribution to the solution of the
questions discussed by us the endless—and let us call a spade a
spade—provocative visits by politicians of the FRG and other NATO
countries to West Berlin? I do not wish to go into polemics now and
therefore I will not refer to many well known facts.

You, Mr. President, in your message, and also the US Ambassador when he
called on the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR touched upon the
question of the flights of Soviet aircraft in the air routes leading to
West Berlin over the territory of the GDR. In so doing the American side tries to create an
impression as if the Soviet aircraft make “aggressive harassment” to the
flights of the aircraft of the USA, Britain and France to West Berlin. I
see no necessity to dwell on this question: the actual situation and our
position are undoubtedly well known to the US Government. This position
is based entirely on the corresponding international agreements and on
the practice of use of these air routes.

There seems to be somebody's hand in this artificial heating up of the
atmosphere around the Berlin air routes. To our mind, the best thing to
do would be not to encourage certain hot-heads in the NATO, especially among the military, but
to cool them off so that they realize at last that no instigating
actions can change the situation and deprive the Soviet Union and the
German Democratic Republic of what they possess. Abandoning by the
Western powers of their attempts to violate the lawful interests of the
GDR and the USSR would constitute
that very abstention from
unilateral actions, creating the danger of outbreak of serious
incidents, which the US Government calls for.

Generally speaking, it is very difficult to find in the document handed
by Ambassador Thompson on March 6
a desire to facilitate an agreement. There is, however, a statement in
it to the effect that the US stands for the achievement of a just and
peaceful settlement of disputed questions dividing our countries. This
statement is correct, but, unfortunately, it is not substantiated in the
negotiations in order to achieve the necessary agreement.

I would not like to leave anything unclear—one way or another we will
sign a German peace treaty. I have already said in Vienna and repeat it
now that if there is no other choice we will make use of the US example
and the lesson which was taught us by it in case with Japan. Some
hot-heads occupying official positions in the USA are threatening us
with various misfortunes, but I think they are more clever in their
doings than in their words because only suicides can now threaten with
war but suicides are always insane people. I, for myself, consider that
our counterparts with whom we conduct conversation are mentally normal
people and can realistically evaluate and understand what it would mean
to attack the Soviet Union or another country.

Some people allege that we are attacking someone, demanding a peaceful
German settlement. But no sane person can consider as an attack the
talks on the conclusion of a peace treaty. And the conclusion of a peace
treaty means putting an end not only to the state of war but also to the
state of hostility which results from an unaccomplished peaceful
settlement.

I believe that we, the men vested with great trust and responsibility by
our peoples, should understand all this correctly and should oppose
opinions which sometimes push us to the wrong way. To say it straight:
let us not frighten each other with words. We have seen enough of
frightening. You, Mr. President, participated in the World War II, I
participated not only in that war. Both of us are aware what war means
and as the leaders of states we know what military means are now at the
disposal of the USSR and the USA. Let us not count by pieces who has
more or who has fewer modern means of mass destruction. Each of our
countries has already stock-piled more than enough means to inflict an
irreparable devastating blow.

The Soviet Union intends to conclude a German peace treaty. If we do not
find common language with you and you yourself do not want to take part
in the peaceful settlement then the Soviet Union and other states will
sign the peace treaty with the GDR.

My colleagues and I have much pondered how to bring closer our positions
on the questions under discussion including the problem of ensuring a free access to West Berlin.
Your recent letter, in which certain ideas on this point are expressed,
strengthened my intention to share with you the considerations that we
have arrived at on the creation of an international organ on the access
to West Berlin. I hope that the ideas that I am expressing here will be
received with good will, without prejudice.

Specifically I have in mind the following:

We are prepared to meet halfway the desire expressed by you and to agree
to the creation of a special international organ on the access to West
Berlin for the period of time that will be defined by the agreement
between us. The organ that I have in mind would act as an arbiter if
difficulties appeared during the practical implementation of the
agreements on free access to and from West Berlin. It would not be
empowered with any administrative functions which would give it
authority to directly regulate traffic or set its own regulations on the
traffic routes connecting West Berlin with the outside world because
this is a prerogative of the German Democratic Republic. In brief, any
talk of an organ of the kind proposed by the American side at the
negotiations in Moscow, which would be a kind of state within state is
out of question. Such situation would be in basic contradiction with the
most elementary concepts of respect for the sovereignty of states. From
the remarks made by the American side you also, it seems to me, see the
necessity to take this aspect of the matter into consideration.

Naturally, the creation of the international organ on the access to West
Berlin that I have in mind is possible only under the condition that the
troops which are now stationed there by virtue of occupation are
withdrawn from West Berlin as a result of the conclusion of a peace
treaty. We consider that for West Berlin itself it would be calmer and
better if there were no foreign troops stationed there at all. However,
you say, you have some doubts—would not some harm be done to the
population of West Berlin on the part of the GDR. Although we have repeatedly explained that the GDR does not and cannot have such aims, we
are nevertheless ready to agree to stationing in West Berlin for some
period of time, let us say for 3–5 years, symbolic contingents of troops
of the UN or neutral countries.

All this, of course, is connected with the transformation of West Berlin
into a free demilitarized city and with the simultaneous achievement of
an agreement on a final legalization and consolidation of the existing
German borders and also on other questions which are well known to you
and which you mention in your message.

Such an arrangement could then be fixed in a peace treaty with the German
Democratic Republic (or in an annex to it), which will be concluded by
the Soviet Union and a number of other states, if the Western powers have definitively decided that at
the present time they will not take part in a German peaceful
settlement.

Under an agreed solution of all these problems a part of which would be
an agreement on the creation of an international organ on the access to
West Berlin, such access through the territory of the GDR would be exercised on the basis of
agreements, that is with the observance of usual regulations and
formalities which are applied to the transit through the territory of
sovereign states. We know that the GDR
is ready to assume in an appropriate form the obligations providing for
an unimpeded access to and from West Berlin. Should any complications or
frictions in the exercise of a free access to West Berlin arise, the
last word would be with the international organ—arbiter of which we have
said above.

The international organ would include, first of all, the four powers—the
USSR, the US, Britain and France. Thus the Soviet Union would act in
capacity of a guarantor of a free and uninterrupted access to West
Berlin to which, judging by everything, the Western powers attach
particular importance. As to other possible participants of the
international organ, this question could be solved later by the
agreement of the parties.

What is the advantage of a decision that I have just outlined? In a sense
this is an alloy of the two positions—American and Soviet. On one hand,
the Soviet Government, though it is not so simple for us, agrees to the
creation of an international organ on access. On the other hand, an
agreement will be reached—if the US is not ready yet to conclude a peace
treaty with both German states—that with the conclusion by the Soviet
Union and by a number of other states of a peace treaty with the GDR the situation in West Berlin is
normalized on this basis by transforming it into a free demilitarized
city in accordance with our mutual agreement, and other questions which
you know are being solved. That would be a great victory for the cause
of consolidating peace and easing tension.

This is a reasonable proposal and if we could reach an agreement on its
basis it would help us to take off the existing heat in international
relations. Our proposal is a concession to you. We do not want to create
difficulties for you, Mr. President, and your country because in your
country there are hot-heads; maybe there are some among your allies too.
These questions are correctly understood in our country and by our
allies. Let us leave the troops of the UN
or neutral countries in a free city of West Berlin for 3–5 years to
allow the nerves to cool down during this period of time and then the
whole situation will look in a quite different light.

I hope that the thoughts, expressed by me, will allow us to concentrate
our attention in the course of the talks on the main questions and to
achieve a necessary progress in the nearest future.

It was my intention to dwell upon in this message only on the German
peace treaty. But in the meantime I was informed about the confidential
conversation with your brother, Robert
Kennedy. 4

He said that since we had not achieved any progress on Berlin question,
you, Mr. President, consider it necessary to make an effort to find the
areas wherein the soonest achievement of an agreement with the Soviet
Union is possible. And you, according to Mr. Robert Kennedy, think that such area is the disarmament
problem and, first of all, the question of the nuclear test ban.

I would have understood such a position of yours, let us say, a few days
ago. But, how, may I ask you, should we understand it now, when you have
made a decision to resume nuclear weapon tests5 and especially on the eve
of the conference where we are to deal with the disarmament questions. I
have expressed my attitude towards your decision with full frankness in
my message of March 3.6 What was said there may seem harsh to you, but had I
given another evaluation of such a step by the US Government I would
have been simply insincere.

Your brother expressed the thought that our Ministers should discuss at
Geneva the possibilities of an accommodation on the question of the
nuclear test ban. As you already know from my recent message we have
agreed that our Minister will participate in the work of 18 nation
conference though I do not conceal that if you start series of nuclear
explosions, it will certainly not increase chances for success in the
Committee's work. We, you and I, must look at the course of events
realistically.

Your brother said that you, Mr. President, would like to have a summit
meeting, which could be prepared in advance by the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs or through diplomatic channels. I also would believe that such a
meeting with you would be useful if an accommodation on a number of
questions is reached before it by our Ministers, that is if the
questions are prepared for their final discussion, approval and
formalizing at the meeting of the Heads of State. I am always ready for
such a meeting in order to ensure a necessary accommodation. When I am
speaking about such a meeting at the highest level I believe that both
our peoples are equally interested in it. After all, when the fate of
the mankind is at stake we as statesmen, must use all the opportunities
to justify the great trust placed upon us. It certainly happens
sometimes that efforts of ministers alone are not enough and then for
the sake of success and in the
interests of peace the Heads of state and government have to join the
effort.

Our new Ambassador, A.F. Dobrynin
will soon arrive in Washington. I recommend him to you and I am
confident that he will represent the Soviet Union in your country well.
He enjoys the full confidence of the Soviet Government and my full
confidence. Whenever you need to convey something to me in a
confidential way he will be able to transmit this to me personally.

I would like to thank you for your kind and warm words passed to me
through A.I. Adzhubei and in my
turn to wish you and your family success and good health.

Sincerely

N. Khrushchev7

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. No classification
marking. In a memorandum to the President on March 12, Sorensen explained that he had
picked up this letter at 3:20 p.m. on March 10 from Georgi Bolshakov, who in a
15-minute conversation, reflected the contents of the letter in a
“less dogmatic and more affirmative and friendly tone.” Bolshakov stressed that concession
on the international access authority was made personally to the
President and that the Chairman's best efforts came from his own pen
and not from the Foreign Office. (Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers,
Cuba, General, 1962) A copy of the letter was transmitted to
Secretary Rusk in Geneva at 9:30 p.m. on March 10 in Tosecs 9 and
10. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163)
The full texts of all the Kennedy-Khrushchev messages are printed in
volume VI.

2 For text, see vol. XIV, Document 296.

3 Regarding this memorandum, see ibid., Document
314.

4 Not further
identified.

5 On March 2 President Kennedy had authorized
the resumption of nuclear testing.

6 For text of this
letter, see Department of State Bulletin, March 26, 1962, pp.
494–497.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

4. Telegram From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk, at Geneva4. Telegram From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk, at Geneva1

Washington, March 11,
1962.

CAP 5114–52. For Mr. Rusk from the
President. You have the latest Khrushchev letter,2 and you also have the problem of harassment in the corridors. In
this situation I cannot give you binding instructions from here. But I
do want you to know once again of my own strong belief that we must not
spare any effort to find a modus vivendi. Khrushchev's proposal of an international organ on
access, though at present attached to a quite unacceptable condition,
does offer a real chance of progress, and I think you should add the
idea of such an organ to your presentation on a modus vivendi. We should
certainly register our opinion of chaff and of Soviet flight plans for
Monday.3 Still, I myself am most concerned
not to miss the chance of
starting a serious discussion of a modus vivendi, and I depend on you to
press strongly in this direction. With all my confidence and best
wishes.

John F. Kennedy

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Germany, Berlin. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 Document 3.

3 On March 10 the Soviets announced
that they would operate inbound and outbound flights in the southern
corridor to Berlin at altitudes that were normally reserved for
Western flights to Berlin.

5. Memorandum for the Record5. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, March 11,
1962.

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION BETWEEN

John C. Ausland (State
Department) and Martin J.
Hillenbrand (Geneva)

Mr. Hillenbrand said that he had
talked to the Secretary about General Norstad's request for authority to fly over 10,000 feet
in the Berlin air corridors [1 line of source text not
declassified].2 The Secretary asked that we request
the approval of the President to grant General Norstad the authority he had
requested. The Secretary had spoken with Lord Home and recommended that the British Government
grant the authority requested by General Norstad also. As soon as the Secretary has received the
British reply Mr. Hillenbrand
will inform the Department and will request that the Department approach
the French with a request that they grant the authority requested by
General Norstad also. If neither
the British or French or both have not granted General Norstad the requested authority by
1800 Z, March 12, the Secretary believes that General Norstad should be granted authority to
proceed unilaterally.

The Secretary will be discussing the air corridor question with Gromyko this evening and if this
conversation affects the views expressed above he will communicate
immediately with the President.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/3–1062.
Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

2 In a message dated
March 11, Norstad described
the flights that the Soviets planned to operate in the southern
Berlin air corridor and stressed that these flights raised the
corridor problem to new heights of seriousness and complexity. He
outlined the countermeasures he had ordered and requested authority
to fly above 10,000 feet when Soviet flights prevented Western use
of the normal flying altitudes. (Ibid., 962.72/3–1162) Later on
March 11 President Kennedy approved this
authority. (Tosec 12 to Geneva, March 11; ibid., Conference Files:
Lot 65 D 533, CF 2058)

6. Memorandum of Conversation6. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
11, 1962, 4 p.m.

SecDelMC/4

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary of State

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

United Kingdom

Lord Home

Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh

Sir Frank Roberts

SUBJECT

British-American Bilateral Talks

Negotiations with the Soviets

The Secretary opened the conversation by reviewing briefly his talk with
German Foreign Minister Schroeder.2 Following
this he set forth our estimate that while there had been absolutely no
give in the Soviet position during the bilateral talks we have had with
them, still there is no evidence they are preparing for a showdown.
However, it seems likely that they consider that they are stuck with
public positions. We had considered whether we could develop a sort of
generalized formula under which it would be possible to set up a
continuing negotiating forum such as Deputy Foreign Ministers. Lord Home wondered whether this would
fill the Soviet requirements since he felt that a summit conference was
an immediate goal of Khrushchev.
The Secretary replied that it might even be possible to have a Summit
Conference which would serve to launch the continuing Deputy Foreign
Ministers forum. In response to a further question from Lord Home as to the content of the
formula, the Secretary said this might provide for a continuance of
existing access procedures (that is, at a suitable date, not as now
under harassment) to which could be added items regarding non-transfer
of nuclear weapons, no use of force to effect boundary changes and a
NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression
arrangement. At least this would enable us to put forward an agenda
broad enough to be of some interest to the Russians. This idea was based
on an assumption that the Russians were not out really to take over access and that such a formula would
give them a chance to draw away. If this assumption proved to be wrong
then we were faced with a crisis and showdown in any event. Lord Home observed the Secretary's
formula did not touch on the status of the city of West Berlin which
seemed a prime Soviet point or the question of the presence of Allied
troops in Berlin. He suggested that we might also be able to add
something about practical dealings with the GDR. If we did not add such elements Lord Home feared we would simply face a
Soviet charge this was another Western delaying tactic.

Turning to Sir Frank Roberts, the
Secretary asked his opinion as to whether the Soviets would be more
receptive to his formula if it were launched at a Summit meeting in May.
Sir Frank thought that this would enhance the
attractiveness of the proposal. Ambassador Thompson agreed but went on to point out with reference
to Lord Home's remarks that our
position was that the matter of our staying in West Berlin was not
negotiable and that this would have to be made clear. The Secretary
resumed, saying that it might be possible to add to the formula some
reference to the ultimate reunification of Germany and the setting up
meanwhile of technical communications between the FRG and the GDR. Ambassador Thompson commented that two recent developments might be
interpreted as a good sign. Khrushchev's speech to the Central Committee Plenum had
made clear that the conflict with the Chinese would continue.
Furthermore it seemed possible that the big Soviet loan to Ulbricht
might be a sort of sop to him in lieu of positive action with respect to
the peace treaty and status of West Berlin. Lord Home, who had been reflecting on the conversation,
then agreed it would be useful to try out a formula along these lines.
Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh asked
whether we would envisage the result of this as parallel declarations or
what? The Secretary replied that he thought it was possible that a
quadripartite paper could be developed to which all four powers would
adhere. However he felt that there was no use to consult in any detail
with the Germans and French unless there was some indication of Soviet
interest.

Air Corridors

The Secretary then turned to the subject of the air corridors and
reviewed briefly the very serious Soviet maneuvers and harassments of
our access. He felt that the use of chaff to jam radars was particularly
outrageous and little short of the actual use of firearms. Ambassador
Bohlen commented on the
surprising nature of this Soviet action contrary to their usual practice
of trying to cover their acts with some semblance of legality and
expressed the opinion that it would be important to hit Soviet Foreign
Minister Gromyko on this promptly
tonight. As evidence of the seriousness with which the US regarded this
the Secretary then pointed out to
Lord Home that if the
dropping of chaff in the air corridors had happened two days earlier it
was quite possible he would not be here today. However the news had been
received too late to enable him to touch base with the British and
others. After some further discussion of the details of the Soviet
actions in the air corridors and particularly the filing of flight plans
between the altitudes of 7500 and 10,000 feet, the Secretary suggested
that the time had come when we should perhaps authorize Norstad to put flights through over
10,000 feet. Mr. Kohler explained
that the US had already given such authority to Norstad but that it was for the time
being contingent on British and French agreement. The Secretary then
gave Lord Home a copy of the
talking points prepared for his meeting with Gromyko tonight. (Attachment) After they had been looked
over by the British Delegation it was agreed that these talking points
were very suitable for use with Gromyko tonight except for the last sentence of numbered
paragraph (1). It was noted that the British could add specific
incidents involving British aircraft. The Secretary then suggested a
number of possible courses of action that might be taken as follows:

A. In the corridors:

1) schedule Allied flights in the same altitudes as Soviet flights, with
ten minute time lags;

2) schedule Allied flights exactly to coincide in time and altitude with
Soviet flights;

3) delay schedules and inconvenience LOT flights in the same measure as
the Soviets have affected our flights; and

4) orbit fighters at the entrance to the corridors at normal operational
flight elevations.

B. Outside the corridors:

Harass Soviet flights over Western Europe, and over the Atlantic,
Mediterranean, and North Sea with:

1) regular fighter escorts;

2) fighter harassment, close buzzing to match Soviet actions with our
aircraft; and

3) delay of airport clearances.

We would also harass Soviet bloc flights over Western Europe.

These were discussed at some length. It was suggested during this
discussion that many of these measures could be taken within Norstad's present authority if they
were suggested to him by governments; also that the original British
condition to authorize flights over 10,000 feet, i. e. that the Soviets
attempt to preclude flights in the normal commercial channels of 7500 to
10,000 feet had now been met. While no definite decision was made on
these proposed countermeasures it was agreed that the Secretary would
serve notice on Gromyko before the dinner tonight of his intent to bring
up this serious matter and that the Secretary and Lord Home sometime
following the dinner take Gromyko
aside and take this question up with him. Meanwhile the Secretary had
been attempting to place a phone call to General Norstad. He finally reached the
General though with a rather bad connection. General Norstad informed the Secretary that he
had sent his recommendations with regard to the Soviet maneuvers which
should reach us within the hour and that as of tonight he needed no new
authority.3

Attachment4

BERLIN AIR CORRIDORS

Talking Points

1. I have observed with increasing concern the activities of Soviet
aircraft in the Berlin air corridors. We had hoped that it would be
possible, in the course of the next week or ten days, to have some
fruitful discussions with you regarding Berlin. We cannot and will not
hold such discussions, however, when the Soviet Union is carrying on a
policy of deliberate harassment of Allied flights through the Berlin air
corridors.

2. I would like to leave you under no illusion as to the risk you are
running in seeking to interfere with Allied exercise of their rights in
the Berlin air corridors. This was brought to the attention of the
Soviet Government as recently as February 15 following harassment of
United States aircraft by Soviet fighters on February 14.

3. On February 14, 1962, Soviet aircraft on three occasions seriously
threatened by close approach United States aircraft flying in the North
corridor to Berlin in accordance with quadripartitely agreed flight
rules under flight plans on which customary flight information had been
made available to the Soviet element of the Berlin Air Safety Center
(BASC). Soviet MIG's performed
acrobatics around the nose of two United States Air Force C/124's,
approaching at times as close as twenty feet. A Soviet MIG also
approached to within one plane length of a Pan American World Airways
aircraft loaded with passengers.

4. On February 19, the Soviet controller in BASC began to file individual flight plans for Soviet
military transports. Although the Soviet Government has, in the past, flown occasional
individual aircraft along the air corridors, this was the first time it
was done on a systematic basis. The Soviet controller sought to portray
these flights as “normal”, but they were a patent attempt to preempt
space in the corridors by flying unnecessary flights. This intention was
clearly demonstrated on March 7 when the Soviet controller filed a
flight plan for a Soviet LI–2 at the same altitude and time that a
scheduled Pan American World Airways plane was due in the corridor under
a flight plan filed in BASC. When the
United States controller asked the Soviet controller to refile his
flight plan for another altitude, the Soviet controller refused.
Although the Pan American plane reached Berlin safely, the Soviet flight
was an obvious attempt to interfere with use by United States aircraft
of the air corridors.

5. On March 9 on two occasions, Soviet aircraft made runs across the
three air corridors some four miles West of Berlin, employing measures,
including the dropping of chaff, designed to interfere with radar. This
was a direct and deliberate effort to threaten the safety of flight.
There can be no justification whatsoever of such practice in or near the
corridors.

6. On March 10, the Soviet controller filed flight plans for Soviet
aircraft for March 12, in the South corridor at altitudes between 7,000
and 10,000 feet which are those normally used by aircraft flying to and
from Berlin. The Soviet Government knows that these flights will
conflict with scheduled flights by Pan American World Airways and Air
France aircraft. This tactic represents a further obvious attempt to
inhibit legitimate air access to Berlin provided for under the
quadripartite agreements.

7. The Soviet Government should not overlook the fact that up to this
point the Allies have shown great restraint in the face of severe
provocation. The Soviet Government should understand that the Allies
have the means to respond with vigor and effectiveness and that they are
not prepared to tolerate persistent Soviet actions directed toward
restricting exercise of their rights of air access to Berlin. We expect
the Soviet Government to cease its interference in the air corridors.
Allied aircraft will continue to fly in the corridors at times and
altitudes deemed necessary. We will take the necessary steps to ensure
the safety of such flights and will hold the Soviet Government
responsible for the consequences of any incidents that might occur.

8. We note that these activities are being intensified on the eve of the
Disarmament Conference. This Conference is being held pursuant to a
statement of agreed principles for disarmament negotiations signed by
both the US and the USSR and unanimously approved by the General
Assembly of the United Nations. In this statement of principles it was
agreed that, in order to facilitate the attainment of general and
complete disarmament in a
peaceful world, all states should refrain from any actions that might
aggravate international tensions. Actions of the Soviet Union which
deliberately interfere with well established rights of air access will
make the achievement of this goal much more difficult. They will
jeopardize the Conference, and threaten most seriously the prospects for
discussions on Berlin and other important items.

9. I should add that the Soviet assertion of alleged “GDR” sovereignty over Berlin and over the
air corridors overlooks the basic fact that the arrangements for both
Berlin and the air corridors antedate by some years the setting up of
the “GDR”.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.41/3–1162. Secret.
Drafted by Kohler and
approved in S on March 13. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission.
A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 10
from Geneva, March 12. (Ibid., 762.00/3–1262)

2 During a working
luncheon with Rusk at the
Hotel Lausanne at noon, Schroeder stated that he had no doubts about U.S.
intentions with regard to Berlin. Rusk outlined the U.S. appreciation of the
discussions with Gromyko.
(SecDel MC/1, 6, 9, and 10; ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533,
CF 2074) During the conversation the Germans presented the U.S.
Delegation with a 3-page paper on how the talks with the Soviets
might be continued. (Attachment to SecDel MC/10)

3 See footnote 1, Document 5.

4 Secret.

7. Memorandum of Conversation7. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
11, 1962, 7:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin and Germany

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Foster

Ambassador Dean

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Mr. Gromyko

Mr. Zorin

Mr. Semenov

Mr. Tsarapkin

Mr. Grizlov

Mr. Usachev

Mr. Soukhodrev

UK

Lord Home

Mr. Godber

Sir Michael Wright

Sir Frank Roberts

Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh

Mr. Samuel

SecDel/MC/56

The Secretary, Lord Home, and Mr.
Gromyko had a conversation
among themselves after dinner.

The Secretary raised the question of the very serious harassments by the
USSR during the past several weeks of air and ground access to Berlin.
He recalled the USSR's attempts to reserve time in the air corridors for
its own flights, which attempts had been rejected by the West. He noted
that since then the USSR had employed other methods of harassment, such
as saturation of corridors contrary to past practice and to the need
revealed to the Western Powers, filing of flight plans in direct
opposition to Western flight plans, jamming of air frequencies used by
the West to ensure air safety and, finally, three days ago, the dropping
by Soviet bombers, which had come from the Soviet Union, of chaff in the
corridors to jam Western radar installations. He also noted that the
Soviets had now filed plans for flights on March 12th at altitudes from
7,500 to 10,000 feet at the exact times when Western civil airlines flew
to Berlin. The Secretary stressed that such harassments were not
tolerable and could lead to serious consequences. He emphasized that the
U.S. would take all the steps necessary to ensure safety for air access
to Berlin. He expressed the hope that Mr. Gromyko would get in touch with his Government so that
danger may be avoided, but stressed that the US would not shrink from
such danger.

Lord Home pointed out that the
Soviet bombers which had dropped metal filings in the corridors had come
from a long distance. He strongly emphasized that the Soviet chaffing
activity was totally inappropriate since it was something that one would
not do to a friend but only to an enemy. If a Western plane had crashed
it would have been the same as if it had been shot down, and up to 100
lives would have been lost. He said that he had nearly turned his
aircraft back to London after having heard of this action by the Soviet
Union, noting that he was not sure that he would not do it even now. He
observed that these actions by the Soviet Union were in contradiction to
the USSR's claim that it wishes to relieve tensions. He recalled his
warning to Mr. Gromyko in New
York that harassment of access may lead to war and urged that it be
stopped so as to avoid catastrophic consequences. He pointed out that
the chances for agreement in Geneva on much bigger things would be
jeopardized should the Soviet harassment activity continue.

The Secretary observed that we knew the identity, the origin, and the
destination of the bombers involved, as well as their flight patterns,
and said that chaff had been dropped precisely in the corridor. He
pointed out that this activity could not have been the result of
maneuvers outside the corridor.

Mr. Gromyko said that as far the
question of corridors was concerned the Soviet Union had replied to the
West in its note.2 The Soviet Union disagreed with the Western
statements that Soviet planes were flying through the air lanes (he
avoided the term “corridor”) in violation of the existing agreements and
past practice. The Soviet Union could not recognize the West as arbiter
in interpreting the existing situation. He claimed that the US
assessment of the situation was apparently based on incorrect
conclusions by some of its experts. In preparing its note, the USSR had
studied the situation, including the existing agreements and past
practices, and had based its reply on that study. If the United States
intended to take steps to ensure its interests, that was its own
business, but the USSR would also take steps to ensure its own
interests, as well as those of the GDR,
and would not yield them. Therefore, one must appraise the situation
more calmly, taking into account the best interests of all concerned.
Mr. Gromyko asserted that the
USSR did not wish to heighten tensions in connection with Berlin and
Germany, as well as Europe in general. He professed that the USSR
desired an international detente, as he had stated to the Secretary in
New York and to the President in Washington. It would be best if an
agreed solution to all these problems could be reached. He alleged that
the Secretary and Lord Home were
attempting to dramatize the situation by referring to some unidentified
bombers which had dropped chaff, and said that the reports about these
activities, which he had read in the Western press, were a strictly
Western responsibility. Mr. Gromyko rejected Lord
Home's warning, saying the latter should weigh his words
and keep such language to himself. He asserted that what should be done
here was to find a way of easing the situation and to promote the
solution of questions of interest to all concerned, rather than to give
warnings.

The Secretary suggested that Mr. Gromyko inquire with his Defense Ministry so as to see
that the bombers involved had indeed come from the USSR, dropped chaff,
and returned back to the Soviet Union. The Secretary then referred to
Mr. Khrushchev's assertions that
the USSR wished to ease tensions. He said that this was one voice of the
USSR. The other voice of the USSR was what was happening in Berlin. The
problem was to find out which was the authentic voice of the USSR, since
the two did not speak the same language.

Mr. Gromyko interjected that there
was no point in using such enigmatic language and asserted that the USSR
spoke with only one voice.

The Secretary said that then we must weigh the voice we always considered
to be authentic, but that we must also weigh the events in the
corridors.

Mr. Gromyko reiterated that the
USSR did not believe that it was violating the existing agreements with
regard to the air lanes. Thus there was no such contradiction as the
Secretary was referring to. He also reiterated that the USSR would not
yield and would continue to protect its interests in the air lanes, as
well as the interests of the GDR, which
was an ally of the Soviet Union. He asserted again that the USSR was
still seeking agreement on these questions and that it had not changed
its view that these problems should be resolved on the basis of an
understanding with the West. Otherwise, there would have been no talks
with Ambassador Thompson in
Moscow and no meeting here in Geneva. The USSR was prepared to talk here
in Geneva about these matters but it did not see any contradiction
between its statements regarding its desire for a detente and its
activities in the air lanes or, to use Western language, air corridors.
He then wondered where the true voice of the United States was.

The Secretary noted the lateness of the hour but said he wished to make
only two comments. First, it was a simple and fundamental principle that
any rights the USSR had in East Germany or Berlin rested only on one
basis, which was also the basis of Western presence in West Berlin and
of access to that city, namely, the surrender of Nazi Germany;
therefore, the Soviet Union was in no position to infringe upon the
rights of the Western Powers in Berlin or East Germany. All this was so
simple and fundamental that sometimes it was even difficult to
understand. Secondly, Mr. Gromyko
would be well advised to get in touch with his Government and stop such
actions as would necessarily interfere with the settlement of the
problems to be discussed here in Geneva. The Secretary then observed
that in the following days he would inevitably listen with two ears; one
to Mr. Gromyko, and one to what
happened in Berlin.

Mr. Gromyko replied that he would
be listening with both ears to the Secretary as well as to what the West
did in Berlin. If the US intended to complicate the situation in the air
lanes, then the United States, and perhaps other governments, would have
to bear full responsibility for that.

The Secretary inquired, in a jocular manner, whether Mr. Gromyko was going to telephone the
Soviet Commandant in Berlin and have him change the Soviet flight
plans.

Mr. Gromyko responded that the
Secretary should not prompt him as to how he should conduct his
affairs.

Lord Home remarked that if Mr.
Gromyko telephoned his
Defense Minister he would find out about the chaffing operation.

The conversation ended with Mr. Gromyko again denying any knowledge of such
operation.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–362. Secret;
Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. The meeting
was held at the Hotel Richmond. A summary of the conversation was
transmitted in Secto 11 from Geneva, March 12. (Ibid.,
700.5611/3–1262)

2 For texts of the February 15
Western note and the February 17 Soviet reply, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp.
687–689.

8. Memorandum of Conversation8. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
12, 1962, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Mr. Gromyko

Mr. Semenov

Mr. Kovalev

Mr. Bondarenko

Mr. Sukhodrev

SecDel/MC/58

Mr. Gromyko hosted a luncheon at
the Soviet Mission.

Mr. Gromyko opened the
conversation by raising the question of Berlin. He referred to the US
view that this question should be discussed here in Geneva, and said
that since both sides had this desire, perhaps it would be worthwhile to
do so.

The Secretary agreed that this would be useful to discuss this problem.
He stated that the United States had reviewed the exchanges of views
that had taken place on this subject since last June, some of them at
the highest level and some at the diplomatic level, and had attempted to
assess the current situation. He said he wished to comment on the more
important elements of that situation.

The Secretary expressed regret that it had not been possible to find a
way of resolving this problem so as to stabilize the situation and to
remove the dangers involved. He expressed the view that it was important
to place Berlin in the context of the broader positions of the US and
USSR and of their responsibility as great powers. He said he knew that
the President and Mr. Khrushchev
understood the historical role they were to play and pointed out that
the shape of history over the next decade may depend on how they resolve
that problem. He recalled the President's conversation with Mr.
Khrushchev2 about the
ideological difference between them and their recognition that neither
could change the views of the other. He expressed the belief that the
differences relating to the internal organization of the two states were
not important to their relations. In this connection the Secretary
observed that the leader of the USSR of the 1920's would not recognize
the USSR of today; nor would the
leaders of the US of that period recognize the US of today. Changes had
occurred and would occur in both countries and they were not important
to their mutual relation. The Secretary observed that the differences in
the US and USSR outlook on the development of the international
community, referred to by the President in his interview with Adzhubei, were perhaps more
troublesome. The United States believed in the development of
independent states under the Charter of the United Nations, whereas the
USSR seemed to have commitments with regard to revolutionary movements.
Even so, this was not fundamental in our problems.

The Secretary expressed the belief that the firmest basis on which the
two sides should consider their problems was that of their common
interests. Both sides had interests in their security, their future, and
the development of the well-being of their peoples. They also had a
great deal of unfinished business at home. For its part, the US would be
only too glad to turn to those internal tasks. The USSR should turn to
the resolution of the problems standing between them, that would bring
important change in the international scene. Also, if progress were made
in the disarmament field both sides could devote greater resources to
their internal economic development. The Secretary stressed that the US
had come to Geneva to engage in serious and careful negotiations to make
steps in the disarmament field in spite of its disappointing experience
over the past 15 years. He expressed the view that unless the US and the
USSR succeeded in resolving this problem there would be competition in
armaments and an increase in the dangers on the international scene.
Although there were some people who apparently did not believe that
peaceful coexistence was possible, the Secretary said he held the
opposite view. In this connection, he cited the fact that the US and the
USSR had lived in peace during a period of over 40 years.

The Secretary recalled Mr. Khrushchev's remark that the Berlin situation had been
inherited from the previous governments of the two countries. However,
the Secretary said, he did not wish to go into the details of history.
What he wished to stress was that both sides should proceed on the basis
of their state interests in Central Europe. On that basis, the problem
boiled down to the simple proposition that the USSR had been taking a
one-sided approach: when the West wished to take up its rights on land,
in the air, and in Berlin on a juridical basis, the USSR said that we
should proceed on the basis of facts; on the other hand, when the West
cited facts, the USSR stated that facts should be changed. The United
States did not believe that relations between Great Powers were possible
on the basis of such an approach. In fact, if the USSR should press this
approach it would not be to its advantage either, because that might
lead to a massive rearmament of the West and also give rise to extremist
elements in the various countries which might be difficult to handle. Such a situation would
require diversion of resources from the peaceful development of our two
peoples.

The Secretary went on to say that the United States was aware that the
situation in East Germany was not satisfactory from the standpoint of
the USSR and the East German authorities. The fact that many people had
left East Germany was probably a source of concern both to the USSR and
the East German authorities. Thus the USSR appeared to believe that this
unstable situation required solution. However, the US did not believe
that the USSR had a right to transfer the burden of that situation to
the West.

Referring to the US–USSR exchanges of views over the past months, the
Secretary wondered whether both sides should not approach the problem on
the basis of their total interests and on the basis of the points of
agreement and disagreement between them. While the US could not speak
for the USSR, it was convinced that both sides had a common interest in
peace. If this was not the case, the Secretary observed, then the
further remarks he was going to make would be irrelevant.

Noting that he was not suggesting any Western allied positions on any
points, although the US was of course aware of the views of its allies,
the Secretary stated that, speaking on behalf of the President, he
wished to put forward certain thoughts designed to place the situation
under control and to put the problem in proper perspective in the
context of the broader interests of both sides. He suggested that
perhaps an attempt could be made to find certain principles to which
both sides could subscribe and a procedure for negotiations on the basis
of those principles, and to undertake certain steps while negotiations
were proceeding so that there would be no danger of crises.

Citing Berlin as an example, the Secretary said that both Governments had
stated, although in different terms, that West Berlin should be free to
choose its own way of life, that its viability should be maintained, and
that access to it should be free and unhindered. Perhaps that is a
general proposition to which both sides could give their accord. If such
a general proposition were agreed, ways could be found of improving the
situation in Berlin on the basis of these principles. In the meantime,
both sides would also state that existing access procedures would remain
in effect.

The Secretary then referred to the problem of the diffusion of nuclear
weapons and noted that the USSR had apparently expressed an interest in
and concern about the US policy with regard to it. The United States,
for its part, was also interested in and concerned about the Soviet
policy in this respect. The Secretary expressed the belief that both
sides had a common interest in not having nuclear weapons pass into the
hands of others. He suggested that both sides could perhaps agree that
further diffusion of nuclear
weapons into the hands of national governments now not owning such
weapons would not further the cause of peace. Then, in negotiations, a
system providing for non-diffusion of nuclear weapons might be developed
to which all states owning nuclear weapons, as well as those now not
owning such weapons might subscribe. In the meantime, both sides would
declare that they would not themselves relinquish control over any
nuclear weapons to any individual state now not owning such weapons and
would refrain from assisting any such state in manufacturing such
weapons.

As a third example of the suggested approach, the Secretary referred to
the problem of non-aggression. He noted that the US and USSR with their
respective allies were not in a major confrontation in Central Europe
and that it would be tragic if force were used and if uncontrollable
events were set in motion. There would be few survivors to conduct a
post mortem on our mistakes in dealing with this problem. Therefore,
both sides could undertake the commitment not to use force to bring
about a change in the status quo. In further negotiations, a declaration
by all NATO and Warsaw Pact members
might be developed and specific measures by all governments might be
considered to establish their non-aggressive intent and to reduce the
risk of war by accident or miscalculation. In the meantime, both sides
could undertake not to use force to change the existing borders or
demarcation lines in Germany and would note with approval West Germany's
declaration that it would not use force for those purposes.

Noting that Mr. Gromyko might have
some additional points to suggest along the above-mentioned lines, the
Secretary said that perhaps he and Mr. Gromyko could find a procedure for reaching agreement on
a set of such principles and then heads of government might meet to
conclude the agreement. Throughout this process, both sides would of
course wish to remain in touch with their respective allies. As to the
forum for future negotiations on the basis of those principles, the
Secretary suggested that it could perhaps consist of the Deputy Foreign
Ministers of the US, the USSR, the UK and France. However, that would be
contingent upon substantial agreement in advance and on the absence of
actions aggravating the international situation.

By way of a post script, the Secretary stressed that the United States
wished to make very serious progress in the disarmament field and hoped
to find ways of managing those serious problems which stood in the way
to such progress.

Mr. Gromyko responded by stating
that the Soviet Government deeply regretted that no agreement on a
German peace treaty had been possible so far. In spite of Soviet efforts
to reach agreement with the United States and its allies, the period
elapsed had shown that agreement was still far away. He claimed that the
reason for this situation lay in
the US unwillingness to take into account the existing facts resulting
from World War II, and in particular the existence of two sovereign
German states. Whether the West liked it or not, the GDR existed, just as the FRG existed. He asserted that the authors
of post war agreements could not foresee the situation existing now,
since they had proceeded on the premise that there would be one, united,
demilitarized, sovereign, and peaceful Germany. The situation was now
different, and the world could see that there were two sovereign German
states in existence. Mr. Khrushchev had pointed out this fact to the President in
Vienna and had stressed that 16 years had passed since World War II and
that the situation, which in the absence of a peace treaty had become
bad and wrong, could not be left unchanged. This was why the USSR had
proposed a two-fold formula for a German peace treaty; either two peace
treaties—one with each of the two Germanies, or a single treaty with
both Germanies. Thus, when the USSR referred to a German peace treaty it
had in mind these two formulae. Mr. Gromyko contended that the USSR still believed that the
best solution would be if agreement were reached with the West to
conclude a German peace treaty. However, since the US and its allies had
stated that they would not participate in a peace treaty with the GDR, the Soviet Government was prepared to
resolve the question on the basis of the USSR's, along with other states
that might wish to do so, signing a peace treaty, accompanied by the
settlement of a number of other problems, including West Berlin, on the
basis of negotiations between the US and the USSR and their respective
allies. He recalled his conversation with Ambassador Thompson on this subject in Moscow.
Referring to the general principles mentioned by the Secretary, Mr.
Gromyko said they failed to
include such an important principle as due respect for the sovereignty
of the GDR. He stressed that the Soviet
Union would not accept any arrangements infringing upon the sovereignty
of the GDR. He said that this meant that
the question of communications to West Berlin could be agreed only on
the basis of respect for the sovereign rights of the GDR, i.e., on the basis of the established
international practice with regard to transit by land, air, and water.
The question of communications was insolubly linked to the question of
the status of West Berlin, a point which the Secretary had failed to
mention. The status of West Berlin must be resolved on the basis of a
peace treaty, although the US may not take part in such treaty. To the
USSR West Berlin was only a part of the German problem, whereas the
Secretary's general principles were limited to West Berlin alone. Mr.
Gromyko then recalled the
Soviet draft on the status of a free city of West Berlin3 and contended that the USSR did not seek to affect the social order
in West Berlin established by the population of that city. He reiterated
that two points were missing from the Secretary's list of general
principles: (1) respect for the sovereignty of the GDR, and (2) status of West Berlin. He then
recalled Mr. Khrushchev's
statement that the USSR did not need West Berlin—not a single acre, or
street, or house in West Berlin was needed by the Soviet Union. Nor did
the GDR have any need for West Berlin.
At the same time, the GDR was making a
great concession, even a sacrifice, in agreeing to West Berlin's
becoming a free city.

Mr. Gromyko then said that the
Soviet Union was prepared to approach the question of a German peace
treaty from any end, although it was not prepared to have that question
approached in a one-sided manner. The Secretary had mentioned only
questions of interest to the US and had failed to mention matters of
interest to the USSR and its allies.

As to the substance of the status of a free city in West Berlin, Mr.
Gromyko said that the Soviet
proposals on this subject were well known and therefore there was no
need for repeating them. The Secretary was familiar with the Soviet
proposals with regard to the stationing of token contingents of troops
in West Berlin and with the different variants of that proposal. The
Secretary was also familiar with the Soviet position with regard to the
question of access. As to the latter question, the USSR was convinced
that the requirements of unrestricted access and of genuine respect for
the sovereignty of GDR, a respect that
should not be only on paper, could both be satisfied. Mr. Gromyko said that if the West were
interested in unrestricted access and if it agreed to respect the
sovereignty of the GDR, then the way to
agreement was open. Otherwise, if the West were interested in
unrestricted access but wished to ignore the sovereignty of the GDR, the way to agreement was closed.

Referring to the Secretary's suggestion with regard to general
principles, Mr. Gromyko observed
that this was something new, at least in form, and that he did not
exclude the possibility of first reaching agreement on a set of general
principles, then gradually developing those principles, and ultimately
reaching agreement on a detailed basis. However, the interests of all
parties concerned must be taken into account in that process, and
therefore both sides should jointly consider the situation to develop a
mutually acceptable set of principles.

With reference to the Secretary's general remarks, Mr. Gromyko stated that agreement between
the US and the USSR would undoubtedly be of tremendous importance to the
world situation. The Secretary had mentioned the US allies, but that, of
course, was a matter for the United States itself to handle. As for the
USSR, it wished to reach agreement. As Mr. Khrushchev had mentioned to the President in Vienna, US
and Soviet interests were in direct confrontation only in one place on
the international scene. That confrontation was due to the abnormal
situation in Germany, which in
turn had resulted from the fact that no peace treaty had been concluded
so many years after World War II. Therefore, if that question were
resolved on a mutually accepted basis, the international situation would
be radically improved and the source of friction would disappear. Of
course, there remained the disarmament problem. Mr. Gromyko asserted that as far as the
USSR was concerned, it had come to Geneva to attempt to resolve that
problem. But agreement on the question of a German peace treaty and the
settlement of the West Berlin problem on the basis of such a treaty
would certainly be of no detriment to the cause of disarmament. However,
there must be a desire on the part of all parties concerned to reach
agreement. Speeches such as those made by Mr. McNamara and other, even civilian,
personalities in the United States brandishing nuclear arms were not
conducive to positive results. Methods of threat were now outmoded and
could not lead to any results. What both sides must do was seek to bring
their respective positions closer together.

Finally, Mr. Gromyko said that the
Secretary had correctly interpreted the spirit of the Vienna meeting as
regards the lack of desire on either side to convert the other side to
its views and ideology. Both sides could live in peace and their desire
for peace must unite them in their work, including here in Geneva.

The Secretary said that all of us could remember that the former Germany
had made the US and USSR allies, and noted that it would be a pity if
the present Germany were to make them enemies. Referring to the fact
that both sides had used the term “one-sided”, the Secretary wondered
whether the gap could be bridged if certain simple ideas were
established. Mr. Gromyko had
mentioned the existence of two Germanies. The United States would
certainly not deny that fact, but there were other facts, such as West
Berlin, Western presence in West Berlin, and Western access to it. All
these were facts as well. As to the question of a peace treaty, the
Secretary said that the US was not deeply concerned about the Soviet
intention to sign such a treaty, but we were deeply disturbed by what
the USSR had stated it intended to do in that connection. The USSR had
never disposed of our rights with regard to access and, therefore, it
could not transfer them to East Germany. In fact, the Zorin-Bolz letters
recognized that in 1955;4 that exchange of letters also
recognized that there were international commitments with respect to
Germany. However, since that time Soviet demands appeared to have risen,
although there had been no change in the situation. This was what we
called one-sided approach. Referring to Mr. Gromyko's contention that the Secretary had failed to
take into account Soviet interests, the Secretary stated that we were prepared to talk about all of
Germany, all of Berlin, or any aspect of the problem. As to the question
of the so-called respect for the sovereignty of the GDR, the Secretary
said that he did not believe there was great difficulty on this point,
because no one in the West intended to have things happening in the
corridors that would interfere with the affairs of East German
authorities. On the other hand, the 1955 exchange of letters had not
placed access under the GDR sovereignty
and it was impossible to see how the USSR could do it now. The Secretary
concluded the conversation by reiterating that our problem was not the
Soviet intention to sign a peace treaty, but only what such a treaty
would do to us.5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1262. Secret;
Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July 9. A detailed
summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 18 from Geneva,
March 12. (Ibid., 611.61/3–1262)

2 For a memorandum of the President's
conversation with Khrushchev
on June 4, 1961, see vol. XIV, Document 33.

3 A copy of the draft statute for West Berlin, handed
to Thompson by Gromyko at their second meeting on
January 12, is in Department of State, Hillenbrand Files: Lot 84 F
53, Box 1, Folder 8.

4 For text of the
letter from Bolz to Zorin,
September 20, 1955, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp.
460–461. Zorin addressed an
analogous letter to Bolz.

5 At 6 p.m. on March 12
Rusk cabled President
Kennedy to report on the discussion with
Gromyko: “In my bilateral with Gromyko
today I began unfolding modus vivendi, using portions on Berlin, nuclear
diffusion and non-aggression as examples of techniques of solution we
had in mind. At the same time I noted other subjects could be included.
Gromyko noted absence of
'sovereignty of GDR' and ‘status of West
Berlin’. He did not close door on proposed technique and atmosphere
entirely calm despite effort made previous evening by Home and me to
press him on Berlin incidents. Am seeing Gromyko again at Tuesday lunch and will continue with
modus vivendi along lines of instruction. Since Gromyko clearly acknowledged I would
have to consult allies, believe I can go somewhat further without allied
consultation on details. However do not believe I should give him a
piece of paper just yet… Also am trying to combine serious attitude on
Berlin incidents with recognition of importance leaving avenues open for
adjustment Berlin crisis.” (Secto 16; Department of State, Central
Files, 611.61/3–1262)

9. Memorandum From the Representative to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee (Dean) to Secretary of State Rusk9. Memorandum From the Representative to the Eighteen-Nation
Disarmament Committee (Dean) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Geneva, March 13,
1962.

Pursuant to your instructions I called upon Lord Home at his house in Geneva (10 rue Jean-Senebier).
There was also present J.B. Godber, Minister of State, Sir Frank Roberts, British Ambassador to
Moscow, and Sir Evelyn
Shuckburgh, Deputy Under-Secretary of State in the Foreign
Office.

1. I gave Lord Home a copy of the
telegram we received this morning.2
After some discussion he recommended the following procedure:

(a) Finesse the lunch today with Gromyko and do not mention either the receipt of the
telegram or the proposed afternoon meeting. Make the lunch short and
crisp.

(b) U.S. Secretary of State and British Foreign Minister should ask
Gromyko to come to see them
this afternoon. At that meeting they should say, in no uncertain terms,
that this nonsense must stop immediately and apart from other things it
is definitely not refraining from actions which might aggravate
international tensions as was agreed in the Joint US–USSR Statement of
Agreed Principles for Disarmament Negotiations dated September 20,
1961.3

2. The Secretary of State and British Foreign Minister should ask the
Foreign Ministers of Canada and Italy to call on Gromyko to protest this action on the
eve of the disarmament conference.

3. The Secretary of State and British Foreign Minister should not leave
as this would place both Foreign Ministers of friendly powers and
Foreign Ministers of non-aligned powers, who came here at our
invitation, in a very difficult position. It would leave Gromyko, in effect, in control of the
situation. The Secretary should insert a very strong passage in his
proposed speech4 denouncing these actions of the Soviet Union in no
uncertain terms, state that he had come to propose the broad general and
complete disarmament plan, then ask how he could be expected to put
forward such a plan in all seriousness in view of these known
provocative actions of the USSR. In fact, the Secretary of State and the
British Foreign Minister should leave immediately after the opening of
the conference unless events would make it seem advisable for them to
stay. Certainly they should leave if there is no forthcoming response
from the USSR. Lord Home observed
that if you and he left before making your proposed speech at the
opening of the conference it would give some of the non-aligned Foreign
Ministers an opportunity of saying that the US and UK had turned and
converted a disarmament conference, to which they had come in good
faith, into a Donnybrook over West Berlin. He felt that not only would
countries of these Foreign Ministers be hurt and grieved but he did not
think we would be in as good a position at the Security Council.

Under-Secretary Shuckburgh wanted
to know if we had actual confirmation that the chaff had been dropped in
the Berlin Corridor and I advised that we would let him know as soon as
we received information on this score.

I have asked Mr. Kohler to
advise.

AHD

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 396.1–GE/3–1362. Secret. Drafted by Dean and also sent to Bohlen, Kohler, Hillenbrand, Manning, Spiers, and Martin.

2 Presumably
reference is to telegram 1726 from Berlin, March 13, which reported
that Soviet planes had dropped chaff in the southern and central air
corridors to Berlin early that day. (Ibid., 862.72/3–1362)

3 For text of this statement (U.N.
doc. A/4879), September 20, 1961, see American
Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp.
1091–1094.

4 For text of Rusk's opening statement to the
Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, March 15 (U.N. doc. ENDC/PV.2), see ibid., 1962, pp.
1146–1150.

10. Memorandum of Conversation10. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
13, 1962, noon.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Mr. Gromyko

Mr. Soukhodrev

SecDel/MC/57

The Secretary and Mr. Gromyko met
for one hour prior to the luncheon hosted by the Secretary.

The Secretary opened the conversation by expressing his appreciation of
Mr. Gromyko's coming before lunch
to talk very privately on one or two points.

The Secretary stated that he thought it might be useful to explore
whether communications could be established across the gulf which
appeared to separate the two sides. He observed that it was not clear
what each side had precisely in mind when it made statements. Recalling
the President's meeting with Mr. Khrushchev in Vienna and the subsequent exchanges of
views, the Secretary stated the US had supposed that when Mr. Khrushchev raised the question of
Berlin and Germany his problem was to stabilize the situation from the
standpoint of Soviet interest, particularly with regard to those parts
of Germany which were under Soviet control and responsibility. The
United States has refrained from protesting or interfering unduly
because it had recognized that the situation perhaps warranted attention
from the Soviet viewpoint. However, the Secretary noted, the present
situation no longer warranted this kind of assessment of what Mr.
Khrushchev had meant. What
was now being done and said indicated an intention to do what the
President had said in Vienna the US could not accept, i.e., diminish the
Western position in Berlin and Germany while strengthening the Soviet
and Bloc position in that situation. The Secretary observed that if
there were no intention to move against the vital interests of the West
in Germany and Berlin, other things might fall in place and could be
adjusted. He stressed, however, that if there were an intention to drive
the West out of Berlin, then there was a serious problem at hand both in
Washington and Moscow.

Referring to the question of the so-called respect for the sovereignty of
the GDR, the Secretary stated that this
raised no problem if it meant that access should not interfere with the
internal affairs of East Germany. On the other hand, there was a grave
problem if this meant that East Germany could interfere with access. The
Secretary stressed the view that both Mr. Gromyko and himself should be able to clarify the
language they used with each other. If there was no problem, both sides
could see what political action could be taken; conversely, if there was
a problem, then one would have to proceed on that basis.

The Secretary went on to say that the same point could be illustrated in
other ways. For example, Moscow had talked a great deal about a peace
treaty. The Secretary said that a peace treaty between Moscow and Pankow
was of no particular concern to the US if it was clear that such a
treaty would not attempt to do what it could not do, namely, dispose of
Western rights and access. He recalled in this connection that this had
been recognized in the formula of the 1955 Zorin-Bolz understanding. A treaty with such a formula
would not create crisis or tensions. Turning to the question of
recognition of the GDR, the Secretary
recalled Mr. Gromyko's statement
to Ambassador Thompson that the
West already recognized the GDR. He said
that it was true that the US acted on the basis that there was a place
called GDR and that there were
authorities which were in control there. From that standpoint, there
should be no problem. However, both sides should explore what lay behind
their statements, so that they could see what each side had in mind and
that they could communicate efficiently and see how to deal with the
situation, rather than stay apart through lack of understanding.

Mr. Gromyko said he had listened
attentively to the Secretary's remarks and that his impression was that
the Secretary had essentially repeated what he had said before. Mr.
Gromyko claimed that he had
tried to detect new points in the Secretary's remarks but had failed to
see such points. With reference to the meaning of the phrase “respect
for the sovereignty of the GDR”, Mr.
Gromyko stated that both
sides should agree that, in matters relating to communications and
access to West Berlin, specific questions should be decided in
accordance with the accepted international practice, i.e., all questions
pertaining to transit by land, air, and water should be resolved in
accordance with that practice. While that practice was a long
established one and had concrete content, it might find different
expression in different documents. In brief, it meant that states across
whose territory transit took place must be respected and be allowed to
live and develop as sovereign and independent states. Mr. Gromyko reiterated his view expressed
previously that it was possible to reconcile such respect with the
requirement of free access. Thus, if the United States Government and
the other Western Powers were prepared to agree that in reaching an understanding on
unrestricted access, an understanding must also be reached with regard
to respect for the sovereignty of the GDR in accordance with International Law, then the way to
agreement was open. Conversely, if the US sought agreement on free
access which would ignore the sovereign rights of the GDR, then the way to agreement was closed.
Mr. Gromyko said he did not know
whether his remarks would dispell the Secretary's doubts, but said the
Soviet Union did believe it possible to reconcile these two
requirements. He said that when both sides got down to elaborating
specific agreements, this would be formulated in specific language. In
this connection, he noted that Ambassador Thompson had received the Soviet draft of a possible
formula.2

Referring to the Secretary's remarks regarding diminution of Western
rights, Mr. Gromyko contended
that they were unfounded and that it was wrong to pose the question in
this manner. He claimed that assertions that the Soviet Union intended
to drive the West out of West Berlin, to detract from the vital
interests of the West, or even to take hold of West Berlin either for
itself or East Germany were completely unfounded. The USSR was convinced
that a German peace treaty and the settlement of the West Berlin
question on the basis of such a treaty would not entail any loss for any
of the Western powers. The USSR did not believe that a peace treaty and
the creation of a free city of West Berlin would lead to the weakening
of the Western position, or of the US position in particular. On the
contrary, the USSR believed that such a settlement would strengthen the
positions of all concerned since it would remove forever the source of
tension and the fever now shaking all of Western Europe. He reiterated
that it was incorrect to put the question in a way that implied that
somebody was to take something and somebody was to give. He expressed
the view that a settlement of this problem would lead to a settlement of
relations between the US and USSR.

Mr. Gromyko then referred to the
principle of respect for the existing way of life in West Berlin, which
had been mentioned by the Secretary the day before. He claimed that this
principle was part of the Soviet position, which was based on the
premise that West Berlin should enjoy the social order desired by its
population and that there should be no interference from the outside. He
professed bewilderment as to why the US had such
“Mont Blancs” of doubts with regard to Soviet intentions and said he
assumed the US had mountains of files with papers ascribing to the USSR
the intention to dupe the other side and all sorts of other cunning
motives. He recalled Mr. Khrushchev's efforts in Vienna to persuade the President that a settlement of this
problem was in the interest of both sides.

The Secretary stated there was a big difference between the two types of
approach. One thing was to propose a solution and say that it was good
for the other side; it was another thing to recognize that each side had
vital interests and to see how the problem could be resolved in what
both sides believed to be in accord with their interests. He stressed
that the US could not accept the Soviet proposition that the Soviet
proposal was in the US interest. He expressed the view that both sides
could accept that each of them had vital interests in Central Europe and
that they should see how those interests could be adjusted.

Reverting to the question of the so-called respect for the sovereignty of
the GDR, the Secretary noted the fact
that the West had had over many years agreement with the USSR with
regard to access rights. He stated that it was not incompatible with the
sovereignty or rights of any authority to accept such an agreement. The
understanding between Moscow and Pankow fully protected this point. As
to access by air, the Secretary noted that it was proper practice today
to have transit across territories take place without the slightest
interference from those on the ground. Therefore, there should be no
incompatibility in this matter, unless there was an intention to impose
restrictions and control over such rights.

The Secretary said that we had no difficulty with the known fact that
East Germans administered certain parts of access and coordinated
traffic on water, rail, and the Autobahn. He noted that there was
already a considerable amount of direct East German participation in
this matter. Therefore, there should be no practical problem.

Finally, the Secretary stated that he could accept Mr. Gromyko's statement that there was no
ground to suppose that the USSR was trying to diminish the position of
the Western Powers. He expressed readiness to sit down and to discuss
the problem on that basis. He recalled that he had mentioned several
points the day before,3 although there might be some others,
which needed to be discussed along these lines.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished the
Secretary to understand correctly his statement that adoption of the
Soviet proposals for a peace treaty, even if such a treaty were to be
signed only by the Soviet Union with the GDR, for the creation of a free city of West Berlin, and
for free access to that city under conditions of respect for the
sovereignty of the GDR would be in the
interest of all concerned. The Soviet Union believed that such a
settlement would not undermine or diminish the position of any state
because it would ease tensions rather than worsen the prospects for peace and security.
Furthermore, the Soviet Union strongly believed that such a settlement
would even strengthen the positions of all concerned since it was in the
interest of peace.

Finally, Mr. Gromyko stated that
he had noted that the Secretary, in referring to the sovereignty of the
GDR, had used formulations which
raised quite a few questions in his mind. The Secretary had mentioned
that access had been operating so far and that there had been no
problem. However, there were many things in the past which no longer
existed. At one time, the Germans could not even cross the street
without first obtaining permission from either American or Soviet
soldiers. Those things were due to Germany's unconditional surrender.
Yet the situation had changed, both in East and West Germany; therefore,
we must proceed on the basis of the existing situation, although some
may not like it, a situation which was highlighted primarily by the
existence of two German states.

The Secretary interjected that there was also Berlin.

Mr. Gromyko continued that the
Soviet Union did not wish to pocket anything as a result of a
settlement. He observed that he liked the Secretary's statement of
yesterday that the US and USSR had been allies against Germany and that
Germany should not make them enemies. He concluded by saying that both
sides had fought against Germany and must draw certain conclusions from
that fact.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/3–1362. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July
9. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's suite at the Hotel Richmond. A detailed
summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 29 from Geneva,
March 13. (Ibid., 611.61/3–1362)

2 Gromyko had given Thompson the draft declaration at
their meeting on January 12; see vol. XIV, Document 264.

3 See Document 8.

4 At 11 p.m. on March 13 Rusk cabled the President a summary
of the day's events. The Secretary said that he had pressed
Gromyko to state whether
the Soviets intended to diminish the Western position in Berlin, but
Gromyko had been evasive.
Rusk indicated that he
intended to develop the modus vivendi further since Gromyko had shown some interest in
it. (Secto 26 from Geneva; Department of State, Central Files,
611.61/3–1362)

11. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State11. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
13, 1962, midnight.

Secto 27. Eyes only President and Acting Secretary. USBER—Eyes only Clay.
General Clay called me KY–92 this evening
(confirmed Berlin Tel 36)3 to express concern about effect air corridor
situation on morale West Berliners. I urged him send telegram4 topside Washington in order to get his views
clearly before you. Unfortunately, I cannot establish effective KY–9
communication with Norstad from
here.

Key question is effect on West Berlin morale both of present level Soviet
actions and countermeasures we may take. I see Clay's dilemma as to
attitude he should take in Berlin. If he says there is no physical
danger to air access (which he believes is true) he might invite
increased Soviet action. If he says there is danger he could start
panic. I have some sympathy his suggestion that we send armed aircraft
through corridors but have some concern that this might create panic
regarding air travel we are trying to avoid. In this connection believe
it would be important obtain estimate Bonn as to whether introduction
fighters would affect willingness Panam and other civil airlines
continue operations under these circumstances. My own first reaction,
however, is that we should not refrain from sending occasional armed
aircraft through fear of escalation corridor situation because (a)
indefinite prolongation present Soviet practices cannot be accepted and
(b) strong line taken by Home and me to Gromyko ought to be backed up with some sort of
reaction.

Suggest State, Defense with full access contingency planning Joint Chiefs
and ambassadorial group consider urgently what we should recommend to
you on suitable steps. Concerted administrative harassments communist
bloc airlines at free world terminals, as already planned for somewhat
different circumstances, might be one such measure. Extending Norstad's tripartite authority to use
air space above ten thousand might be another. Fighter escort military
transport scheduled during period Soviet activity might be another.

I am reluctant to make exact suggestions from here since Geneva cannot be
headquarters this problem. But I feel we should devise steps to be used
in immediate future if our warning to Gromyko produces no tangible result in air
corridors.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192,
Chron. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Rusk and concurred in by Kohler. Repeated to Berlin.

2 This conversation
had taken place at 7:40 p.m., but the record in the Rusk Files indicates that it was not
monitored. (Ibid., Telephone Conversations)

3 Telegram 36 from
Berlin to Geneva, March 13, reported that Clay was “seriously
disturbed” by General Norstad's proposal to regulate civilian transport
schedules in the face of Soviet harassment. (Ibid., Central Files,
962.72/3–1362)

4 At this point in the source text Rusk wrote: “Clay's telegram is
attached,” but it was not, nor has it been further
identified.

12. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant (Weiss) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Kitchen)12. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
(Weiss) to the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Kitchen)1

Washington, March 14,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin

1. Following the Berlin Task Force meeting this morning, a smaller group
was convened in Mr. Davis' office
to discuss current happenings in the Berlin air corridors.

2. The sequence of events is about as follows:

a. Norstad requested and was
granted authority to schedule civil, as well as military, air transport
flights.2

b. General Clay raised a major objection to this authority (Berlin 1729,
TS)3 on the
grounds that adjustment of civil schedules would have a highly adverse
effect on the Berlin population and would be looked upon as a major
inroad on access.

c. This problem seemed fairly well under control by virtue of (i)
Norstad's previous
conservative attitude toward attempting to adjust flights of even
military transports and (ii) caution expressed in the cable giving him the authority to adjust
civilian flights, to the effect that such adjustments should be kept to
a minimum.

d. In Berlin's 17334 concern is expressed over the
continued Soviet harassment, with the proposal that fighters be put in
the corridors and that a transport be flown above 10,000 feet.

e. The Secretary cabled (Secto 27)5 that he talked to Clay.
He stated that he was sympathetic to the idea of fighters and that he
believed that we could not indefinitely delay responding to Soviet
actions. However, he also stated that he did not want the authority for
calling the shots on Berlin to be transferred to Geneva, but rather
wanted Washington to be aware of his views.

f. Subsequently a call from Geneva (Hillenbrand to Ausland)6 disclosed that the Secretary was forwarding a second
message which amplified, and perhaps modified, some of his previous
views. Also, Hillenbrand indicated that discussion with Stoessel
revealed that Norstad was
sending a message to McNamara.
Exact content uncertain.

g. Mac Bundy called requesting
State's views indicating he was going to be talking to the President. In
brief, Ausland indicated that in connection with use of fighters in the
corridors there were three points to be assessed (i) the effect of such
action on Berlin morale, (ii) possible effect on the Geneva Conference
and (iii) consequences for escalation. He also indicated that it might
be more logical to first fly above 10,000 feet and then resort to
fighters if this seemed necessary.7

3. The purpose of our meeting was to discuss all of the foregoing events.
In the course of our discussions these points were brought out:

a. With regard to use of fighters, Norstad had been very reluctant to resort to this in the
past for two very good reasons (i) once used we have played what amounts
to almost our last trump before actual fighting and, (ii) militarily,
Norstad is not sanguine
about the outcome. Also the question was raised as to the various
alternative ways that fighters could be employed. Although armed escort
is possible, it is difficult and would probably not be a first choice.
On the other hand, simply flying armed escorts occasionally through the
corridors, though it might sound a warning, would have no direct effect
whatsoever on Soviet tactics of
scheduling specific transport flights in the corridors, which is what
has given rise to our annoyance.

b. With regard to flying over 10,000 feet, the question was raised as to
whether this should be first done with a military or civilian aircraft,
and if the latter, whether empty or with passengers.

4. I raised the question of necessity to distinguish carefully the basis
for our taking a further action. Clearly the Soviet harassment has had
no significant effect upon our access. In fact, in this regard, up to
this point in time, one might say that the Soviets are failing in their
activity. On the other hand, the need to respond to the Soviets might
nevertheless justify an action. In this event, I raised the question of
a possible ultimatum of breaking up the Geneva Conference within a
specified period if the Soviets did not cease and desist.

5. Our meeting has been temporarily adjourned pending receipt of the
second message from the Secretary and Norstad's message to McNamara.8 The White House has asked for an interim reply by
2:00 p.m., as to where matters stand. It is then likely that we will
attempt to reach a more definitive position before the end of the
day.

p.s. Norstad's cable has just
been received. He strongly recommends against either going above 10,000
feet or using fighters. He feels that the Soviet attempts have been
ineffectual and that accordingly a response beyond that heretofore
utilized is not required. (We have also received a telephonic message
from Geneva indicating that the Secretary supports Norstad's view.) Accordingly, I do not
believe anything will go out on this matter tonight. However, I have
suggested to EUR that we send a cable to
the Secretary in Geneva pointing out that in light of the Norstad position, the question really
boils down to whether we feel it is necessary, as a matter of principle,
to respond to the arrogant Soviet actions which result in our
negotiating in Geneva under duress. If we do, then rather than take
action in the corridors we might better give the Soviets a direct
warning to the effect that unless the harassment in the corridors ends
we will end the discussions at Geneva. This course of action would only
be logical if one assumes that the Soviets do not desire a break-off in
the Geneva talks. This is a point which must be weighed in the balance,
and we have obviously not had time to do so.

1 Source: Department of State, Central
Files, 762.00/3–1462. Top Secret. Drafted and initialed by Weiss.

2 Norstad asked for the
authority in SHLO 5–00207; a copy
of the JCS telegram granting the
authority was transmitted to Paris in telegram 4889, March 13.
(Ibid., 762.72/3–1362)

3 Dated March 13. (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 1333 is the same
as telegram 36 to Geneva; see footnote 2,
Document 11.

5 Document 11.

6 No record of this conversation has been
found.

7 No record
of Bundy's conversation with
Ausland has been found, but at 5 p.m. Ball called Bundy to review the latest
discussion within the U.S. Government, including his own
conversations with Secretary Rusk. Their conversation followed the lines
described in numbered paragraph 3 of this memorandum. (Kennedy
Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations)

8 One of these two
messages (probably the second) is ALO BW 247, March 14, received in
the Department of State at 6:29 p.m. (Department of State, Central
Files, 762.0221/3–1162) The second message has not been further
identified.

13. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State13. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
14, 1962, 11 p.m.

Secto 34. Eyes only for Acting
Secretary from Secretary. Ref Tosec
25.2 In putting forward
elements of possible modus vivendi to Gromyko, I have taken into consideration Ambassador
Thompson's view that it would
be tactically unwise at this stage to disclose categorically to Soviets
that we would be prepared to accept GDR
personnel at checkpoints. While I agree it may be useful to indicate
that our approach is consistent with “respect for local rules and
regulations,” I consider it important that Soviets not be aware of our
full position on GDR personnel at
checkpoints until we have more evidence of likelihood of Soviet
willingness to reach agreement. Otherwise, effect might well be to cause
them to abandon effort reach agreement and proceed with their separate
peace treaty.

I have, however, as indicated para 12 Secto 29,3 made points that we have no difficulty with
known fact that East Germans administer certain parts of access and
coordinate traffic by water, rail and Autobahn, that there thus already
was considerable amount of direct East German participation in this
matter, and that therefore there should be no particular problem.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.61/3–1462. Secret.

2 Tosec 25, March 13, is summarized
in this telegram. (Ibid., 611.61/3–1362)

3 See the source note, Document
10.

14. Editorial Note14. Editorial Note

On March 15 Assistant Secretary of State Kohler hosted a working luncheon for Deputy Foreign
Minister Semenov. Kohler opened their conversation by
stating that since he and Semenov
were primarily responsible for Germany at the working level, it might be
useful to talk about it informally. Following a brief exchange on the
need to clarify whatever points could be clarified, Kohler turned to the Soviet harassments
in the air corridors to Berlin, and stated that the Soviet Union seemed
to be making a deliberate attempt to interfere with Western access.
Semenov stressed that everything the Soviet Union was doing was perfectly legal, but after being
confronted with all the details, he came close to admitting the
charge.

Kohler and Semenov spent a considerable amount of
time discussing the meaning of “respect for the sovereignty of the
GDR” and how this might be
reconciled with free access to Berlin. Then Kohler presented in broad outline the U.S. concept of a
modus vivendi. At the end of the conversation Semenov thanked Kohler for his views, but concluded
that the United States still was not taking into account the Soviet
position on West Berlin.

A 17-page memorandum of this conversation (SecDel MC/24), March 17, is in
Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1562.

15. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State15. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
17, 1962, 2 p.m.

Secto 53. Eyes only for President and
Acting Secretary. Have had brief additional talks2 with Gromyko alone in connection normal activities conference
and will be having bilateral dinner with him on Tuesday. Meanwhile,
members of his delegation have shown interest in exploring further with
Kohler and Bohlen3 implications my presentation “modus vivendi” approach
last Tuesday. I am not taking initiative for full exploration with
Gromyko over this week end in
order to give him chance to get Moscow reaction to what has been said
already. However, I expect to step up pace of private talks during
coming week. Senior member Soviet delegation expressed some concern to
Thompson that I might be
leaving next week end because he said “Moscow moves very slowly”.4 I should like to leave open exact date of my
return because if we seem to be
making any headway on Berlin, that should be overriding claim on my
time.

[Here follow two paragraphs on disarmament.]

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.61/3–1762. Top Secret; Niact. According to
another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot
65 D 533, CF 2060)

2 The additional talks have not been further
identified.

3 Regarding Kohler's conversation with
Semenov, see Document 14.
A memorandum of Bohlen's conversation with Semenov on March 16 (SecDel MC/29)
is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF
2074.

4 This conversation has not been further
identified.

16. Memorandum of Conversation16. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
18, 1962, 12:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

United States

Mr. Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Bohlen

U.S.S.R.

Mr. Semenov

Mr. Kovalev

Mr. Suslov (Gromyko's
personal assistant)

SUBJECT

Berlin

SecDel MC/33

The following points of some interest in regard to the Soviet position
emerged. I shall not set down the repetition of past positions which
Semenov, who did all the
talking for the Soviets, covered. The chief points stressed by Mr.
Semenov in reply to our
questions seemed to be the following:

1. The real reason why the Soviets desire to change the existing
situation in Berlin is to do away with the Allied control represented by
the occupation regime in order to eliminate certain types of activity in
the city, i.e., RIAS, intelligence
operations and comparable matters. In discussing RIAS, for example, Mr. Semenov mentioned that they “knew” that
this was used as a source of operational instructions to agents in the
GDR. He mentioned that Berlin, in
its present state, created a constant source of friction with the Soviet
Union and implied that this was one of the major reasons why they
desired a change in its status.

2. The free city concept seemed to be a means of bringing about an end to
what he referred to as “organic links” with the FRG. He mentioned that in the Soviet concept all private as
against state ties could be maintained, citing as an example the case of
Austria. He emphasized the fact that despite the Allied veto of the
incorporation of West Berlin into the Federal Republic this was merely a
paper veto and the relationship in fact is as though West Berlin were a
Land of the Federal Republic. He referred again to the fact that this had not always been the case and
mentioned specifically the B-mark question of the late 40's. He admitted
on this point that one of the main purposes of the Soviet Union was to
prevent the extension of what he termed German revanchist and
militaristic activities in West Berlin. He compared these activities in
West Berlin as the end of a cable whose source was West Germany.
Semenov laid great stress on
the danger that the German militarist sentiment and activity would
succeed in bringing the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. into conflict and that it
was to avoid this possibility that the Soviet proposals were
directed.

3. Semenov laid considerable
stress on the allegation that Western Berlin as now constituted is, in
effect, a “NATO base”, largely, it
appeared, because of the NATO
declaration to the effect that an attack on the forces in Western Berlin
would bring NATO into action.2 He said that this
NATO connection was incompatible
with the solution of the Berlin situation that they envisaged.

4. Originally, Mr. Semenov stated
that the question of the presence of Allied forces in the city was one
that should be left for the ministers to discuss, but later on in
discussing our objections to the concept of a free and neutral city, he
said that this might be reconciled with the presence of Western
forces.

5. On the subject of access he was evasive and did not answer a number of
questions which we put to him as to what the Soviets really meant by
this reiterated statement; i.e., whether this would involve GDR control over the traffic of persons and
goods to and from West Berlin.

Mr. Semenov throughout stressed
the dangers of German militarism as a source of U.S./U.S.S.R. conflict
and asserted several times that the Soviets had no intention of harming
U.S. interest. He was, however, impressed by our statement that whatever
might be the Soviet intentions, the objective results of the course of
action which they proposed would inevitably result in a loss of Western
influence and position in regard to Berlin. He had no particular answer
to our statements that the East Berlin leaders have frequently made
specific what their intentions in this regard were, and said we should
not pay too much attention to statements of others, mentioning alleged
statements of some of our military in Berlin. He stressed throughout the
importance of reaching some understanding while admitting the great
difficulties which stood in the way of its achievement, and his outline
of Soviet objectives in regard to Berlin was somewhat more precise than
in previous discussions with the Soviets although containing nothing
exceptionally new.

It seems clear that Soviet objectives are: (i) to eliminate Berlin as an
Allied control center, (ii) to bring to an end what he claimed to be the
organic links to the FRG which, in their
version makes it a hot bed of “revanchist and militaristic” propaganda
and activities incompatible with the establishment of “normal”
relationships between our two countries and the general purpose of
stabilization of the German situation on the basis of two Germanies. The
Soviet insistence that Eastern Berlin and what went on there was “not a
question” but a situation in fact which was definitely set forth. The
only time he reacted sharply was when reference was made to our right,
in view of the Soviet actions in East Berlin, to the incorporation of
West Berlin into the Federal Republic, and he remarked “You just try
that!”

The general impression of the conversation was that the Soviets are
anxious to explore possibilities of a mutually acceptable solution.
Semenov gave a somewhat
clearer outline of Soviet reasons in the various suggestions they had
put forward. There was no give, however, nor clarification of the phrase
“respect for the sovereignty of the GDR
in respect to access rights.” He referred on a number of occasions to
unrestricted access but declined to be specific as to how this would
relate to East German sovereignty.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/3–1862. Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Bohlen on March 19. The meeting was
held at the Hotel du Lac.

2 For text of this declaration, December 16,
1958, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, p. 560, or Department of
State Bulletin, January 5, 1959, p. 4.

17. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State17. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
19, 1962, midnight.

Secto 65. Eyes only for President and
Acting Secretary from Secretary. After informal meeting of heads of
disarmament delegations this afternoon,2 Gromyko asked me to stop by his
office. He handed me paper,3 saying he had been
thinking about our discussion of general principles applicable to Berlin
situation, and he had tried to put down what they might look like. He proposed we try to agree on
general principles and implementing agreements here in Geneva, so that
if agreement reached it could be referred to Heads of Government.

After examining paper briefly, I commented that there were obviously a
number of points on which we were very far apart and which would have to
be discussed further. We would have paper containing our own position
and two papers would then have to be considered together.

I am inclined not to treat this as formal document requiring transmission
to Allies at present stage, since Gromyko and I will be discussing at dinner tomorrow
evening. Though the outlook is dim, I shall do my best to make some
progress.

Our preliminary estimate of Soviet paper (text of which being transmitted
in separate telegram) is:

1) Although some formulations are new and relate to our previous
discussions, paper as whole is essentially restatement in guise of
principles of basic Soviet position on Germany and Berlin as it has
developed over past three and one-half years. With Berlin portion
cribbed liberally from proposed statute of a free demilitarized city of
West Berlin handed Ambassador Thompson by Gromyko on January 12, 19624
language completely disregards very flat negative positions we have
communicated Soviets during series of conversations here on following
points:

a) Presence of Allied forces

b) Rejection of free city concept

c) Attempt to associate Western Powers overtly with peace treaty
approach, and

d) Banning of certain activities in West Berlin on discriminatory basis
which might provide justification for subsequent intervention.

2) Concept of viability of West Berlin is borrowed, but in context which
implies this essentially an economic matter.

3) Soviet “principles” no longer allow, as one of possible alternatives,
retention of token forces of three Western Powers along with Soviet
units. This may be response to our insistence that we could not consider
reintroduction of Soviet forces into West Berlin.

4) Apparent concession in allowing West Berlin free city authorities to
determine who may or may not visit city is offset by need for agreement
with GDR as well as by entire context.
Soviet language does not resolve ambiguity between alleged willingness
to allow free access and insistence on respect for GDR sovereignty. Moreover, reference to
internal legislation and provisions of free city statute presumably
intended to exclude categories forbidden in final paragraph of section
2.

5) Language of procedures to be followed by “military traffic” is vague
but would not necessarily be incompatible with observance of present
procedures by GDR officials at Land
check points if Soviets intend as fallback formulation also to apply to
Allied military units. However, limitation of volume of military traffic
to actual needs of these contingents seems directed towards removing
possibility civilian air traffic under military aegis and under existing
basic procedures.

6) Soviets have taken our term “international access authority” and
attached it to completely different concept involving no administrative
functions and presumably Soviet veto in event cases arise when authority
is to have last word.

7) Language on non-transfer of nuclear weapons, although lacking
precision, seems designed to prevent any development of NATO nuclear deterrent.

8) Language on NATO-Warsaw Pact
non-aggression treaty raises GDR
recognition problem. Moreover, Federal Republic and GDR are linked in such a way as to make
procedure suggested certainly unacceptable to Federal Republic.

As to giving Soviets US principles paper, our present thought is not to
hand it over during session tomorrow evening but to devote this to
pointing out that Soviet statement of principles is unacceptable along
lines suggested above. In light of this conversation, will then make
recommendations as to whether advisable give our paper to Soviets.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.61/3–1962. Secret; Priority. According to another
copy, this telegram was drafted by Hillenbrand and concurred in by Bohlen and Kohler. (Ibid., Conference Files:
Lot 65 D 533, CF 2060)

2 The
U.S. Delegation reported on this meeting in Disto 54 from Geneva,
March 19. (Ibid., CF 2061)

3 A copy of this
paper, which had nine numbered paragraphs and was entitled “General
Principles,” was transmitted in Secto 66 from Geneva, March 19.
(Ibid., Central Files, 762.00/3–2062)

4 See footnote 2, Document 8.

5 In his next telegram to the President,
Secretary Rusk offered the
following additional analysis: “Seems obvious this merely
restatement their standard position in guise of our suggestion about
modus vivendi. Deeply regret unable report any appreciable progress
Berlin thus far. Unless you have other views, I intend to have
further talk with Gromyko
alone tomorrow night and make it quite clear we cannot accept any
such far-reaching diminution Western position. Will then return to
our modus vivendi as only way out of situation where we find
ourselves unable to agree. I see no possibility peaceful settlement
this problem unless Soviets really understand our complete
determination to stand behind your clear statements to Khrushchev and Gromyko that we cannot accept
significant reduction Western position. Only if this is accepted by
them can many questions rapidly fall into place.” (Secto 67, March
19; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/3–1962)

18. Memorandum of Conversation18. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
20, 1962, 7:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Mr. Gromyko

Mr. Semenov

Mr. Kovalev

Mr. Bondarenko

Mr. Sukhodrev

SecDel/MC/61

Mr. Gromyko hosted a dinner at the
Soviet Mission.

Following a brief conversation on how the disarmament conference should
proceed, in the course of which the Secretary had pointed out the
relationship between the Crisis around Berlin and the possibility of
achieving disarmament, Mr. Gromyko suggested that no crises should be created and
claimed that the Soviet proposals were designed to knock the ground from
under crises. He compared the present situation to the walking on a
tight rope, which was fraught with all sorts of possible surprises. A
situation where there was no peace treaty, where troops were stationed
in West Berlin, where the occupation regime prevailed in that city, and
where the sovereign rights of the GDR
were encroached upon, may generate situations neither of the two sides
wanted.

The Secretary responded by saying that, in his view, the situation we
were facing today was as follows: The Soviet Union had made some
proposals since 1958 which were unacceptable to the West in the literal
sense of the word. The fact that the Soviet Union had pursued those
proposals for three years might be an indication of the importance the
Soviet Union attached to them, but this did not make them more
acceptable. The Secretary expressed the view that the exchanges between
the US and the USSR which had taken place since the
Kennedy administration had taken office
indicated that there was no movement toward agreement. What the United
States had said at Vienna and in the subsequent exchanges, apparently
had made little impression in Moscow. However, the Secretary emphasized,
everything that had been stated by the US was really meant and meant
seriously. The Secretary said that when we had come to Geneva it was
quite apparent that the two sides
were not in agreement and that there was very little prospect of finding
agreement. Therefore, the question now was how to deal with the fact of
disagreement. He suggested that one way would be to start from the
existing situation. The Soviet Union had also suggested this approach
but without taking into account the complete set of facts. The Soviet
Union had said that there were two Germanies, but there was also the
fact that Berlin, and particularly West Berlin, also existed. The
Secretary emphasized that unless there was a radical change in the
Soviet attitude expressed since 1958 with respect to the vital interests
of the West, it was difficult to see how an understanding could be
reached, and thus our problem was to find ways of handling disagreement
without conflict which would have disastrous consequences for both of
our countries and the whole Northern Hemisphere as well.

Mr. Gromyko responded that if the
United States expected a radical change in the Soviet position, i.e.,
abandonment by the USSR of its proposals for a change in the West Berlin
situation, for a German peace treaty, and for respect of the sovereignty
of the GDR, then this was in vain since
the USSR would never agree to such a proposition. Both sides could and
must seek a solution that would meet the interests of both sides. Such a
solution would provide for: (1) a German peace treaty—perhaps without
Western participation, which would be regrettable; (2) a change in the
abnormal situation in West Berlin, a situation which had ensued from
Germany's surrender; and (3) a change in the situation with regard to
respect for the sovereignty of the GDR,
which was now quite intolerable. He asserted that if both sides desired
to reach agreement, agreement could be reached. On the other hand, if
there was no such desire, the situation was quite different and the USSR
would have to take alone such steps as it had mentioned previously on
numerous occasions.

The Secretary observed that the conversation was moving towards
clarification. The Soviet Union had said that the West should withdraw.
We had said that we had a position in West Berlin which we would
maintain. These positions were in contradiction and the problem was what
we should do. We were prepared to deal with the factual situation, and
we were also prepared to deal with the theoretical situation by
advancing proposals on how the German situation should be resolved
permanently. What we could not accept was when the USSR said one thing
should be taken on the basis of facts and another on the basis of
theory. Neither side must act like a mother giving a spoonful of bitter
medicine to her child and saying “Take it, it's good for you”. Each side
knew what its vital interests were and they must prevent a clash neither
of them wanted. The Secretary recalled the President's remarks to
Adzhubei that some problems
may be affected by time. Berlin may become more manageable with time.
However, the Secretary pointed out, this should not be interpreted as a desire to
procrastinate. He stressed that the USSR had denied Western vital
interests for more than 3 years and the US did not like that delay. If
we were to hurry, hurry toward agreement was one thing; but if the hurry
was not toward agreement then Moscow and Washington must think what they
were hurrying to.

Mr. Gromyko observed that bitter
medicine sometimes helped the patient. Remarking that taste was a
subjective matter, he professed bewilderment why the Soviet proposals
were considered bitter. The USSR held the opposite view, since its
proposal for a free city of West Berlin in connection with a German
peace treaty was designed to eliminate a source of friction, and there
was nothing bitter involved here. He asserted that the West always
ascribed sinister motives to the USSR.

Referring to the Secretary's remarks that the Soviet Union had been
refusing over three years to recognize the Western rights in Berlin, he
claimed that this was not so and that the USSR was merely trying to
eliminate the abnormal situation which had resulted from Germany's
unconditional surrender. As to the Secretary's remark about facts and
theory, he contended that this was a somewhat arbitrary way of
interpreting the situation. The USSR believed that there were main facts
as well as subsidiary or secondary facts. The decisive fact was that two
Germanies existed as independent states. 17 years had passed since World
War II without a peace treaty and the USSR had concluded that a change
was necessary. As to the Secretary's query how the USSR claimed to
proceed on the basis of facts but sought change, he asserted that there
was no contradiction here. All the USSR wanted was to normalize the
situation in Germany and Berlin and draw a line under World War II
through the conclusion of a peace treaty and by solving the West Berlin
problem on that basis. The Soviet Union had been repeating this phrase
because it wanted to convince the West. After all the Soviet Union was
negotiating and there was nothing else it could do in that situation
other than write and talk.

Mr. Gromyko contended that the
USSR was negotiating with the US in the hope that agreement could be
reached. The United States had also said that it wanted agreement. The
Secretary had said today that perhaps an understanding could be reached
on the basis of the existing factual situation. But such an
understanding would also represent agreement. The Secretary had said in
New York that both sides should agree on the factual situation, but it
was quite clear that agreement must somehow be recorded and formalized.
A peace treaty, even without Western participation, would do that, while
agreement on other matters could be formalized with Western
participation. If the US were not to say that it wished agreement, the
USSR would proceed differently. But since the US stated that it wanted
agreement, the USSR was negotiating with it.

The group then moved to the adjoining room for coffee.

The Secretary resumed the conversation by stating that he wished to draw
a distinction between negotiation and action. We had no doubt that any
government was free to raise any proposals as a matter of negotiations,
even though the other side might regard those proposals to be
outrageous. However, we were most concerned when suggestions were raised
which contemplated action without the consent of the other side. If
Moscow desired to stabilize the situation on the basis of the existing
facts, we had considerable understanding for this. This would be a
reflection of events which had taken place during and since the war.
However, it was our view that the heart of the existing situation was
our presence in West Berlin and the freedom of access to West Berlin. It
would be one thing to stabilize the situation and record it in a treaty
on the basis of the existing situation in West Berlin and the existing
access, as had been done in the Zorin-Bolz understanding, whereas it was quite a
different thing to propose a treaty providing for change in the
situation and contemplating action. This was so elementary to us that we
could not understand why the other side did not regard it as elementary
as well.

Referring to the Soviet paper received yesterday,2 the Secretary stated it was disappointing since
it provided no basis for discussion. The paper took no account of what
the President had said in Vienna or of US statements through the various
channels. It merely reflected the Soviet position advanced three years
ago and no solution was possible for that basis. Reiterating that both
sides could either reach agreement on the basis of the existing
situation or make proposals on how the situation should be changed and
then negotiated, the Secretary stated that the US had not done the
latter because it believed that the prospects of understanding were
better on the basis of the situation existing now and in the near
future.

The Secretary then strongly emphasized that it was important to be clear
as to what was the heart of the matter here. He stated that the United
States was in no sense prisoner of the FRG; in other words, it was not merely following with
reluctance the lead from someone it was not responsible for. What we
were concerned with here were the vital interests of the United States.
The Secretary said he assumed that Mr. Gromyko acted on the same basis in his relations with
East Germany, and stressed again that what we were talking about was US
national interests.

The Secretary then referred to some points discussed over the past weeks.
He expressed the belief that reconciliation of the freedom of access and
of what the USSR called the sovereignty of the GDR, should not present a problem, since similar arrangements were made throughout the
world almost every day. With regard to the status of West Berlin, he
said that we preferred to refer to Berlin as a whole, but the USSR said
that this was not a subject for discussion. As to West Berlin, the
United States view was that West Berlin was not part of West Germany. It
was a separate territory under our responsibility but free to choose its
way of life and establish relations with the outside world. With
reference to Mr. Gromyko's
interest in the question of frontiers, the Secretary stated that this
should not present a great problem either. He reiterated most
emphatically that the US was in Berlin and that it will stay there, and
stated that it will be well if this was clearly understood. The United
States would stay in Berlin until there was a broad change, such as an
all-German settlement, a general settlement of East-West relations or a
general settlement in the disarmament field. However, under present
circumstances, the US would stay in West Berlin. As to the Soviet Union
suggestion that UN troops be stationed in
West Berlin, the Secretary said that if Mr. Gromyko meant US, UK and French troops, we might go so
far as to think about it. Otherwise, such an arrangement would not be
possible.

Mr. Gromyko said that the heart of
the matter was whether the two sides wished to negotiate seriously or to
procrastinate. The USSR proceeded on the premise that both sides desired
to reach real understanding. The US had referred to difficulties with
some of its allies. This was something for the United States to judge,
but the USSR was negotiating with the US as the representative of the
West, since it knew that the US had influence with its allies. The USSR
had been negotiating with the US most seriously; otherwise it would not
have displayed such scrupulous and tolerant attitude throughout all the
exchanges since Vienna. As Mr. Khrushchev has stated to the President, Germany was the
only source of friction between the United States and the USSR, and if
that source were eliminated everybody would sigh with relief.

Mr. Gromyko continued that he was
gratified that the Secretary believed it possible to reconcile the two
requirements related to access. Since the USSR also believed in that
possibility, a mutually acceptable solution should be feasible. On the
other hand, the question was to what kind of West Berlin access should
lead. [sic] The USSR categorically refused to accept the United States
proposition that the Western presence should be continued and that no
change should be introduced. He contended that while earlier the US had
stated that access was the main problem, now that a possibility of
resolving that problem had emerged the US stated that there should be no
change in West Berlin.

The Secretary interjected that this was nothing new. As the President had
stated to Mr. Khrushchev, we
could not accept any diminution of the Western position in Berlin.

Mr. Gromyko went on to say that US
statements to the effect that the West was present in West Berlin to
protect the interests, and what it called the way of life of West
Berlin, ignored Soviet statements that the USSR was also in favor of
such protection. He contended that the Secretary was now circumventing
this element of the Soviet position completely, whereas in New York he
had asked questions on how West Berlin's freedom would be ensured. He
said that judging from the Secretary's statements, the US did not
appreciate the steps the Soviet Union had made to narrow the gap between
the respective positions of the two sides and toward reaching an
understanding. He cited the Soviet paper of March 19 as one of such
steps, and asserted that it took into account some of the considerations
expressed by the US and general principles mentioned by the Secretary.
He said that it was good to hear that the Secretary believed that there
was no problem with regards to frontiers and some other matters, and
this was a positive factor. The Soviet paper of March 19 had been
advanced in order to narrow the gap between the position of the two
sides; however, the Secretary had now said that this proposal was almost
a step backward. He expressed the hope that the United States would
study the paper most carefully and give a reply to it.

Referring to the question of access, Mr. Gromyko noted that the US had repeatedly stated that it
was not clear how access would be organized in practice, and how respect
for the sovereignty of GDR should be
understood in connection with the transit of persons and goods. He
contended that the Soviet position on this score had been explained in
Vienna, New York and Washington, as well as to Spaak, Fanfani, and some
American journalists who must have informed the US Government.
Nevertheless, the US appeared still not to have a completely clear
picture of how this problem would be handled in practice. Taking into
account all this, and in particular the private talks the Secretary and
he, Gromyko, had last week and
the day before, the Soviet delegation had considered the matter and had
decided that it would be useful to provide the United States with
additional clarification with regard to access and transit so that
nothing would remain unclear. Mr. Gromyko then produced a paper saying it was a working
paper which he hoped the US would study.3

The Secretary responded that he first wished to comment on the paper
received the day before. He stated that he was quite sure that if that
paper were referred to the United States and allied governments they
would have a negative impression of the paper. Therefore, he did not believe it useful to treat the
paper as a formal expression of Soviet views. He said that in terms of
the discussion in Geneva, he was inclined to suggest to Mr. Gromyko to take the paper back, but was
not doing so because that would have a connotation in diplomatic
practice which he did not intend. The Secretary expressed the view that
flexibility should be maintained in these contacts until both moved
toward agreement.

The Secretary then raised the question of how both sides should proceed
further. He reiterated emphatically that when the President had stated
that our vital interests included: (1) our presence in West Berlin; (2)
freedom of access as it had been understood for many years; and (3)
freedom of West Berlin to choose its own way of life, he used the word
“vital” in its literal sense. The Secretary then suggested that the time
had come when exchange of unilateral papers was not nearly as important
as discussion of vital interests as seen by each of the two sides and
represented by them here and as the search for reconciliation of those
interests if possible. He observed that this was the real task of
foreign ministers. He then suggested that perhaps starting Thursday as
much time as possible be devoted to that purpose, leaving Wednesday for
whatever communications either side might need with its government. He
stated that the President was anxious for him to come back from Geneva
with an idea of how the world would proceed from here, and remarked that
he was not sure that the situation had been considered in all of its
ramifications. Referring to the Soviet paper of today, the Secretary
stated that he was inclined not to receive it unless he had some
indication as to its contents, because he did not see any value in
exchanging papers which could not serve as a basis for agreement.

The Secretary continued that he wished to emphasize one point. Over 200
million people live in the USSR and about 180 million in the US. The
question was how we should relate these interests to the broad interests
of our people. In the framework of the broad interests of our peoples,
these problems were peripheral. However, some of these marginal problems
may become central overnight. This was not a matter of logic of one side
because the other side may not follow the same logic. Both sides must
reconcile their interests and prevent a clash which would create danger.
The Secretary observed that, in terms of history, the problem discussed
here was not such as it was now being built up. Nevertheless, both sides
must see how to reconcile their respective interests involved.

Mr. Gromyko wondered whether he
had understood the Secretary correctly that he was not interested in the
Soviet views on access. He noted that if the Secretary was concerned
about the form of the document, he should take note of the fact that it
was only a working paper.

The Secretary expressed the view that both sides while in Geneva had an
opportunity of finding out their respective views. If papers were exchanged a procedure would be
instituted which would be more formal than it was wise under the
circumstances. He stated that we were of course interested in Soviet
views, but suggested that caution with regard to papers was in order. If
the latest Soviet paper was of a personal nature, he might perhaps read
it and return it with annotations; however, he did not wish to receive
at this point more formal papers involving his and other governments. In
other words, the Secretary said he was concerned about the procedure
leading toward a solution and not a procedure that would inflame the
situation further. Over the past three years, too much literature had
been exchanged and too little agreement had been reached.

Mr. Gromyko replied that if the
Secretary had difficulties from the standpoint of formal procedure, he
could give the paper to the Secretary on a personal basis or read it to
him.

The Secretary inquired about the length of the paper. Mr. Gromyko replied it was 3–1/2 pages
long.

The Secretary then suggested that perhaps Mr. Gromyko and himself might designate their associates to
look at the paper. Mr. Gromyko
declined the suggestion, saying that Mr. Rusk was the Secretary of State and he the Foreign
Minister and that it was they who should handle this matter.

The Secretary then agreed to receive the paper as a working paper given
to him by Mr. Gromyko on a
personal basis. He noted that if the paper contained no basis for
discussion, Mr. Gromyko might
consider it as not having been given.

Mr. Gromyko reiterated that the
paper was merely a working paper and was not an aide-memoire or a formal
note.

Referring to the Secretary's remark on the number of people living in the
USSR and the United States and their interests, Mr. Gromyko professed surprise at the trend
of that remark, which he claimed implied that the USSR wanted to pocket
West Berlin. He asserted that the USSR had no need for West Berlin,
which was populated by only 2,200,000 people. The USSR only wished a
peace treaty and a solution of the West Berlin problem on the basis of
such a treaty. The USSR sincerely wished an understanding with the
United States in this respect.

The Secretary interjected that he had not meant to imply what Mr.
Gromyko had just referred to,
but had merely wished to state that the two governments had a
responsibility for their peoples and must consider their interests in
the world. He also noted that he did not wish to imply anything with
regard to the balance of power.

Mr. Gromyko continued by asserting
that a solution of the question of a German peace treaty would be in the
interest of both sides and in the interest of peace in Europe. The
Soviet Union had told the US its ideas with regard to a possible solution of that problem. It
had also stated its preference for a solution on the basis of agreement
with US. Likewise, the Soviet Union had expressed readiness to sign a
peace treaty without Western participation but with an understanding
with the West with regard to such matters as frontiers, etc. Mr.
Gromyko reiterated that he
categorically rejected attempts to portray the situation as if the
Soviet Union or the GDR wished to get
hold of West Berlin. With regard to the Secretary's suggestion for
further discussion on Thursday, Mr. Gromyko wondered what significance should be attached to
that date, asserted that he was prepared to negotiate Wednesday,
Thursday or any other day. He said that he might be mistaken but he was
under the impression that the Secretary wished to communicate with his
Government and that thereupon he would be prepared to engage in more
detailed negotiations.

The Secretary replied that there was no magic about Thursday but noted
that the conference schedule and other engagements would not make it
possible to meet the following day. He stressed, however, that he was
prepared to continue the discussion even tonight. The Secretary then
observed that he had planned to stay in Geneva about 10 days. Although
he had some important appointments in Washington, if profitable
discussions should develop he would be prepared to stay as long as
necessary because this was the most important point on the agenda and
also one of the most important aspects of disarmament among other
things. He wondered whether Thursday afternoon would be a convenient
time for a further meeting.

Mr. Gromyko replied that he was
available for further discussions at any time while in Geneva. He
observed that the Secretary's departure date was something for the
Secretary to decide. Referring to the Secretary's previous remarks, he
contended that the Secretary had implied that he did not regard the
question of a peace treaty and of West Berlin as very important. The
USSR could not agree with such a view. He said he wished to reiterate
what Mr. Khrushchev had said to
the President in Vienna, namely, that the USSR regarded this problem as
the most acute and extremely crucial one. He contended that in speaking
of the German problem the Secretary and other US officials sometimes
seem to use words and formulations lightly. Conversely, the USSR had
been displaying a more serious attitude and weighed its words.

The Secretary stressed that he did not wish that there be any
misunderstanding on Mr. Gromyko's
part. He reiterated that Western presence in West Berlin, the freedom of
access to West Berlin, and West Berlin's freedom to choose its own way
of life were vital interests of the United States and of the West, and
emphasized that the word “vital” meant life or death. He said that he
did not wish to minimize the importance of this problem but only to
place it in the context of the broader interests of our peoples and to point out the necessity
of resolving the problem without conflict. He stated that the two
governments should not engage in a dangerous game on top of the roof of
a house in which millions of people were going about their daily work.
There must be no such dangerous game because this was the matter of our
vital interest which we intended to treat as such.

Mr. Gromyko contended that if
there was anybody engaged in such a game, it was not the USSR. The USSR
approached the problem with all seriousness and responsibility. However,
it believed that this was the area where the interests of the two sides
collided most acutely and that therefore, the situation required
solution. Although there were some other areas, such as Laos, where
settlement was still outstanding, those were areas where the interests
of the two sides did not actually collide. He reiterated his assertion
that the USSR approached this problem most seriously; it could be
noticed that the other side approached it lightly and indulged in strong
words.

The Secretary stated that he did not quite understand the meaning of the
word “lightly”. He observed that perhaps there was a misunderstanding in
Moscow. For three years the USSR had been making proposals to which the
United States and the West had said “NO”. This was not light and neither
was the President's July 25 speech light.4 The Secretary emphasized that it would be
a serious mistake if anyone in Moscow believed that the US was joking in
this matter.

Mr. Gromyko responded that this
was exactly what he had in mind. It was a mistake to believe that the
use of strong words by US military or civilians sufficed to change the
position of the USSR. It was this that he called approaching the problem
lightly.

Mr. Gromyko then reiterated that
the USSR's choice number 1 was to resolve the problem on the basis of
agreement with the West and that the Soviet Union would act without the
West only if no such agreement were reached. He asserted that the USSR
had come to Geneva in the hope that something could be done to bring the
positions of the two sides closer together. The US had said that it was
prepared to continue the discussions; the USSR was also prepared and
therefore we should see what results could be achieved.

The Secretary said that with regard to Mr. Gromyko's remark he wished to point out that in a real
sense it was quite impossible to act alone.

It was agreed that the next meeting would take place at 3:00 p.m. on
March 22.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/3–2062. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July
9. A detailed summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 73 from Geneva, March 21.
(Ibid., 611.61/3–2162)

2 See footnote 2, Document
17.

3 A
copy of this paper, which comprised 10 numbered paragraphs on
various types of access to Berlin, was transmitted in Secto 71 from Geneva, March 20.
(Department of State, Central Files, 962.72/3–2062)

4 For
text of President Kennedy's address to the
Nation, July 25, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: John F. Kennedy,
1961, pp. 533–540.

19. Memorandum of Conversation19. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
22, 1962, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Mr. Gromyko

Mr. Sukhodrev

SecDel/MC/60

The Secretary opened the conversation by saying that so much had been
said by the two governments on Germany and Berlin at Vienna and since
then that it was not easy to know where to turn now. He recalled Mr.
Khrushchev's and Mr.
Gromyko's statement that the
Soviet proposals were not directed against the United States and were
not designed to reduce the Western position in Berlin. While not wishing
to talk about the intentions of the other party, the Secretary stated
the US believed that the objective results of the Soviet proposals at
Vienna and since then would indeed greatly reduce or at least limit the
Western position in Berlin. He emphasized that it was the objective
results we were most concerned about. The Secretary referred to the
President's statement at Vienna that the effect of the Soviet proposals
would be very far-reaching and negative not only in Berlin and Germany
but also throughout the world. He stressed that we had commitments and
responsibilities in Berlin and Germany and that they were fundamental to
us. In the light of what we believed the direct and immediate effect of
the Soviet proposals would be if we agreed to them, the US could not
agree that those proposals would be beneficial to it, as Mr. Gromyko had contended. The United
States had to look at its position and its interests. It had defined its
vital interests and believed that the effect of the Soviet proposals,
including some elaboration thereof in Geneva, would injure them deeply.
For example, the presence of the West and its forces in West Berlin was
of vital interest to us, but the Soviet Union had stated that they must
be withdrawn or share their responsibility with Soviet troops.

Turning to the question of access, the Secretary recalled his earlier
statement that if our vital interests were recognized there would be no
problem making access arrangements compatible with what the Soviet Union called respect for the
sovereignty of the GDR. However, the
Soviet paper on access2 indicated
that there was apparently some misunderstanding on the Soviet part. The
Secretary stated he had not meant that access should be subject to East
Germans but that it could be compatible with the complete management of
East German affairs by local authorities.

Referring to the question of the viability of West Berlin and the
maintenance of its way of life, the Secretary stated that it was clear
to us that the objective of the Soviet proposals was to undermine and
destroy the freedom of West Berlin. This was implied not only in Soviet
statements with regard to access, but also in those regarding the
freedom of persons to travel to and from Berlin, as well as regarding
West Berlin's relations with the outside world, particularly West
Germany. Thus the Soviet proposals did not provide for the maintenance
of the freedom of West Berlin for any period of time.

The Secretary continued by emphasizing that we of necessity must think
very hard of the objective effect of the various proposals. The
suggestion that a line be drawn under World War II sounded very good.
However, when it turned out to be a reduction or even elimination of the
Western position in West Berlin it was another matter. Some other
phrases in Soviet proposals implied that they also would have a similar
effect on the Western position. In the light of all this, the Secretary
suggested that perhaps possible alternatives should be examined. The
first alternative would be to do nothing. The second alternative would
be to allow a dangerous crisis to develop. The third alternative would
be to continue efforts along the lines of the efforts conducted so far
and to see whether agreement was possible. Finally, the fourth
alternative would be to look at the wide gap between the positions of
the two sides, recognize that it was very difficult to reach agreement,
and see how disagreement should be handled. Commenting on these
alternatives, the Secretary stated that, although he believed that
neither the Soviet Union nor the United States would shirk a crisis, he
was confident that both recognized that a crisis was not in their
interests. On the other hand, efforts to find agreement had not been
productive thus far and it was difficult to say now whether they would
be productive in the future. As to the question of how to handle
disagreement, the problem was to find a method not involving the
interests of the West or requiring a formal withdrawal of Soviet
proposals.

Mr. Gromyko contended he regretted
very much that negotiations had so far been unsuccessful. He claimed
that in spite of the fact that the Soviet Union had made certain
proposals designed to facilitate agreement, the United States Government appeared not to be serious
in its intention to strive for an understanding. Referring to the
Secretary's statement that the Soviet proposals were objectively aimed
at undermining the Western and, in particular, the United States
position in Berlin, Mr. Gromyko
asserted that the Soviet Government had believed and continued to
believe that the solution of the problem of a German peace treaty and
the settlement of the West Berlin situation on the basis of such a
treaty would not lead to the undermining of the Western or US position,
if that position was correctly understood. He recalled his statement
that the United States should not fear anything from the implementation
of the Soviet proposals if the United States was genuinely desirous of
achieving a detente and of strengthening peace. Thus, he contended, if
the interests of the big powers were understood correctly, the Soviet
proposals would not lead to the undermining of the positions of any
power, including the US. Moreover, the Soviet Union believed that a
settlement on the basis of the Soviet proposals would be beneficial to
all concerned and would be in the interest of peace. The Soviet Union
did not believe that withdrawal of Western forces from West Berlin and a
settlement of the question of a free city of West Berlin on the basis of
a peace treaty would in any way diminish the position of the Western
powers; on the contrary, their position in Europe and throughout the
world would be strengthened because that would be a major act by the
Western powers to contribute to a relaxation of tensions and to the
strengthening of peace. On the other hand, if the US proceeded from the
premise that the situation should remain unchanged, i.e., that the
occupation regime in West Berlin should remain as if nothing had
happened since World War II, that the situation with regard to
communications where the sovereignty of the GDR was being ignored should continue, and that there
should be no peace treaty, then it must be stated categorically that the
USSR would never agree to that. The USSR believed that changes were
needed and it would be very good if an understanding were reached on
those changes and if the changes were implemented on an agreed
basis.

Mr. Gromyko then recalled the
Secretary's remarks that it was possible to make freedom of access
compatible with what the USSR called respect for the GDR sovereignty. He asserted that the USSR
also believed this to be possible, but wondered what content the
Secretary injected in his remarks. When the USSR said that there should
be respect for the sovereignty of the GDR, it meant that such respect should be in deeds and not
words. However, the Secretary appeared to inject a different content
because he qualified his statement by saying there would be no
interference in East German internal affairs, thus implying that
questions of access were not related to the sovereignty of the GDR. If this interpretation of the
Secretary's position was correct, then the US conception differed completely from the Soviet
conception. In any event, the US position was not quite clear.

Mr. Gromyko continued by asserting
that the USSR had given the US, both in Moscow and Geneva, clarification
as to its understanding of all these problems, starting with the crucial
problem of a German peace treaty and down to the problem of transit
through the territory of the GDR. The
USSR had given the US detailed views on these matters, including two
papers3 here in
Geneva. The USSR had done so in the hope that the US would duly
appreciate it and believing that clarification would facilitate
understanding. However, the Secretary's remarks seemed to indicate that
the US failed to see the main point in the Soviet proposals, because the
Secretary had implied that something like a blockade would be
established around West Berlin as a result of Soviet proposals. Mr.
Gromyko contended that the
USSR had no such intention either with respect to the movement of
freight or to the movement of persons. All the USSR called for was such
respect for the sovereignty of the GDR
as was accorded to all states through the territory and air space of
which transit took place. Therefore the US should not look in the Soviet
proposals for what was not there and what the USSR did not intend to
include.

Commenting on the Secretary's alternatives, Mr. Gromyko asserted that he did not know
why the Secretary had mentioned the first alternative. He said that
there was no question of leaving the situation without change. The
United States knew full well that the USSR, together with some other
states, would sign a peace treaty with the GDR and any attempt by the US to convince the USSR to leave
the situation unchanged, i.e., to put the matter of a peace treaty
aside, would be futile. Referring to the Secretary's second alternative,
Mr. Gromyko stated that if the US
and its allies moved toward crisis, evidently a crisis would be
precipitated, but it would be the responsibility of the Western Powers.
With regard to the Secretary's third and fourth alternatives, Mr.
Gromyko claimed that the
distinction between the two was artificial and that they were
practically the same. He said that both sides should see where they were
close and what separated them. For its part, the USSR was prepared to
seek a possibility of understanding and this was attested to by its
patience in negotiations. If such readiness also existed on the other
side, mutual efforts should be continued. Mr. Gromyko then said that, if he had
understood the Secretary correctly, the Secretary appeared to have
mentioned at the end of his remarks the possibility of the Soviet
Union's withdrawing its proposals. He said that if the Secretary was
joking, then of course he
could understand that remark; on the other hand, if the Secretary was
serious, he could not possibly understand it. In any event, the correct
assumption was that the Soviet would not withdraw its proposals.

Mr. Gromyko then asserted that the
USSR was concerned about whether the United States Government believed,
as the Soviet Government did, that it was best to seek an understanding
on an agreed basis. If the United States did not wish to proceed on the
basis of agreement, then the situation was quite different. However, Mr.
Gromyko said, he accepted the
Secretary's statement that it would be good to agree and to avoid
complications between our two states. He said that he agreed with the
Secretary's remarks that both countries had a great deal of work to do
at home, and that Germany should not make them enemies. He wondered why
then the United States took a position which was not facilitating
agreement and why it was looking for devious schemes and motives in
Soviet proposals. He reiterated his previous contention that neither the
USSR nor the GDR needed West Berlin and
that the GDR was making a sacrifice by
agreeing to the creation of a free city of West Berlin on its territory.
He called upon the United States to adopt a more sober position with
regard to the Soviet proposals and the Soviet steps to meet the US half
way. He observed that it was not useful to stay in place and that this
was not the purpose of the USSR in Geneva. Of course, to stay put was
better than to go backwards, but it was worse than to move toward
understanding.

The Secretary emphasized that the President desired a solution of this
and other problems on the basis of agreement. However, this was not
possible by simply accepting Soviet proposals, particularly such
proposals as cut at the heart of the interests of the West and of the
US.

The Secretary expressed the hope that agreement could be reached on the
basis of understanding and that the Soviet Union also desired
understanding. This had been discussed in Vienna and there was no doubt
as to the US position on this point. The Secretary also emphasized that
he had no inclination to delve into Soviet motives; what we were
concerned about were the objective effects of Soviet proposals, and
those effects we must consider very seriously.

Referring to the so-called respect for the sovereignty of the GDR, the Secretary stated that he wished to
remind Mr. Gromyko of the US view
that, under the circumstances prevailing at the end of World War II and
since then, no one was in a position to create sovereignty in East
Germany which would have priority over our position in West Berlin and
our rights of access. He emphasized strongly that this was not in the
hands of the Soviet Union, whose position and interests in Germany stemmed from the same fact and
stood on the same basis as our position and interests did, namely, the
surrender of Nazi Germany.

The Secretary then recalled the US suggestion for an international access
authority and stated that it had been made because we believed this was
one way of reconciling freedom of access with East Germany's concern for
its internal affairs. Noting that the international access authority
would involve territories under three jurisdictions—the FRG, East Germany, and West Berlin—the
Secretary stated there would be very simple arrangements with regard to
jurisdiction to be accepted by the three government authorities. He
observed that the very acceptance of such arrangements would be
compatible with the notion of sovereignty and that there would be no
interference with the day-by-day activities in the FRG, West Berlin, or East Germany. The
Secretary then stressed that an international authority such as
conceived by the US would be quite different from an authority under the
administrative arrangements by East Germans and subject to a four-power
commission which would probably operate under the rule of unanimity,
although the Soviet proposal contained no specific reference to such
rule. Such an arrangement would expose access to all the hazards to
which Ulbricht might wish to subject it. There was no assurance that the
four-power commission could resolve any problems that might arise.
Although we were prepared to work on this and see whether it perhaps
provided some possibility, we did not see in this arrangement adequate
guarantees for West Berlin's future. Furthermore, the Soviet paper
indicated that the establishment of an access authority was related to
the withdrawal of Western forces from West Berlin, and this was of
course a major obstacle from our standpoint. The Secretary then noted
that the United States had never held the view that East Germany would
not have a normal and active part in the provision of access facilities,
such as rail, Autobahn, canals, and in the air. The latter would involve
only the question of overflights. The Secretary said that exclusion of
the East Germans in these matters would be impractical and
unnecessary.

Turning to Mr. Gromyko's comments
on the alternatives he had indicated, the Secretary stated that he
wished to stress most emphatically what the President had told Mr.
Khrushchev in Vienna, namely,
that it was not the US who was pressing this problem to a crisis. It was
not the United States who had brought up the problem in its present form
and therefore we could not accept the responsibility. As to Mr.
Gromyko's comment that the
distinction between the third and fourth alternatives rested on weak
ground, the Secretary said that he wished to illustrate his point. Thus
far we had apparently been working on the third alternative. There was
no need to assume that the alternative was necessarily at a close,
although it had not yielded much result. However, there was no agreement
in sight today; nor was there a basis for agreement. Nevertheless, both sides must seek to resolve
the problem. It was in the light of this that the possibility had been
suggested to Mr. Gromyko of
reaching agreement on certain simple and short principles, some of which
our two governments had already agreed to quite recently, in any case
more recently than at the end of World War II. If the heads of
governments of our countries could agree on those principles, each
principle would open the way for additional negotiations. There would
also be stipulation as to what would happen in the meantime. The
Secretary said that since Mr. Gromyko might not have obtained a clear picture of this
idea when it was first mentioned to him, he had prepared a paper4 which would clarify
what was meant. The paper covered several subjects of interest to both
the US and the USSR. The Secretary then handed the paper to Mr.
Gromyko, noting that it was
being given as a working paper within the framework of personal
conversation. He pointed out that the contents of the paper did not
require confirmation by the USSR of Western occupation rights in West
Berlin, rights which we believed needed no confirmation. The contents of
the paper did not stand in the way of a peace treaty but provided for a
framework where a peace treaty with East Germany would not inflame the
situation.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to make
a few observations. Reverting to the question of access authority, he
wondered why the Secretary had mentioned three jurisdictions. He
professed that he could not understand the reason for mentioning the
West German jurisdiction. He asserted that the question was that of the
sovereignty of the GDR, but the US was
trying to involve the jurisdiction of West Germany despite the fact that
the Secretary himself had correctly stated that West Berlin was not
related to West Germany.

As to the question of a peace treaty with the GDR, Mr. Gromyko
recalled US statements to the effect that it was up to the USSR whether
to sign such a treaty or not. However, he wished it to be clearly
understood that the USSR did not regard the conclusion of a peace treaty
with the GDR merely as a formal act, but
rather as a major political act which must be accompanied by certain
changes, by certain measures, and by the solution of certain questions
the USSR had repeatedly mentioned to the Western Powers. It would be one
thing if the USSR signed a peace treaty with the GDR with prior understanding regarding the solution of
other questions with the US and apparently its allies as well. Then
everything would go smoothly. On the other hand, as the USSR had
repeatedly stated, if there were no such understanding, the situation
would be quite different. The US had stated on many occasions that when
the Soviet Union signed a peace treaty with the GDR, there should be
a prior understanding as to what the situation would be and what
measures should accompany such a treaty. The USSR agreed with this and
this is why it was negotiating. It would be well if agreement could be
found.

Referring to the Secretary's remark that it was not quite clear how
decisions would be taken in the four-power commission of the access
authority, Mr. Gromyko stated
that there were of course certain aspects which would have to be
resolved through additional consideration and discussion. However, he
thought that in principle it was quite clear that the objective of that
proposal was to facilitate agreement with regard to access and the
status of West Berlin.

As to the paper given to him by the Secretary, Mr. Gromyko said that he was prepared to
consider it as a working paper, just as the two Soviet documents were
working papers, but wished to inquire whether the paper had been
prepared with due account being taken of the two Soviet documents. He
asserted that this was of substantial importance because the Soviet
papers had been drafted with the objective of facilitating agreement. He
said that he would have comments on the US paper at a later date and
facetiously asked what he should tell to his allies now that he had
received a US paper.

The Secretary replied that this was up to Mr. Gromyko himself. He said that his paper was not in
direct response to the two Soviet papers. It was an illustration of the
approach he had mentioned at his first meeting with Mr. Gromyko. The Secretary also observed
that we could of course discuss access, perhaps within the context of
the Soviet papers, but stressed that the linkage to the withdrawal of
Western troops created a formidable problem.

Mr. Gromyko observed that there
was not much point in exchanging papers unless account was being taken
of their respective contents.

The Secretary reiterated that his paper was not in response to the Soviet
papers but was rather in the context of earlier discussions. Noting that
he had already made some observations on the two Soviet papers, the
Secretary wondered whether it might perhaps be profitable if some of his
and Mr. Gromyko's associates
discussed them further, although he would be prepared to do that
personally with Mr. Gromyko. He
said that a number of points required clarification, such as, for
instance, the question of the unanimity rule in the access authority, if
we were fully to understand the Soviet papers.

Mr. Gromyko replied that either
procedure was acceptable. Reverting to the question of access authority,
he emphasized that the Soviet proposal was linked to the withdrawal of
Western forces from West Berlin and their replacement with neutral or
UN troops. The Soviet proposal for access authority could be
considered only in that context, because it was not a separate
proposal.

The Secretary replied that this was how we understood the Soviet proposal
and that in that sense it did not advance us very far. He strongly
emphasized that the presence of Western forces in West Berlin was
fundamental to us.

Mr. Gromyko responded that if this
was fundamental to the US, the USSR also believed that it was one of
several fundamental questions, such as the question of a peace treaty,
which was primary and decisive, the question of respect for the
sovereignty of the GDR, the question of
the status of a free city of West Berlin, etc.

The Secretary concluded the conversation by recalling his statement that
many problems would fall into place if the central questions were
resolved.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/3–2262. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July
9. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's suite at the Hotel Richmond. A detailed
summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 92 from Geneva,
March 23. (Ibid., 611.61/3–2362)

2 See footnote 2, Document 18.

3 Regarding these Soviet papers, see
footnote 2, Document 17, and footnote 2, Document 18.

4 Document 20.

20. Paper Prepared in the U.S. Delegation20. Paper Prepared in the U.S. Delegation1

Geneva, undated.

DRAFT PRINCIPLES

The US and USSR have been discussing a wide range of subjects. They have
agreed, in regard to certain of these subjects on (i) certain general
principles to which their governments subscribe; (ii) procedures for
continuing negotiation on the basis of these principles by a Committee
of Foreign Ministers' deputies, which will be established specifically
for this purpose, and which France and the UK will be invited to join;
and (iii) certain interim steps to meet immediate dangers in the
meantime.

1. Berlin

(a) General Principles: They believe that West
Berlin should be free to choose its own way of life, that its viability
should be maintained, and that its access should remain free and
unhindered.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree to study
proposals for improving the situation in Berlin consistent with these
principles and the vital interests of both sides in the aforementioned
Committee of Foreign Ministers' deputies.

(c)Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare
that long established access procedures should remain in effect.

2. Germany

(a)General Principles: They believe that the
German people have the right to determine their own future and to
reestablish the unity of Germany if they so desire, and they wish to
facilitate the exercise of this right in a way that will enhance the
security of all European peoples.

(b)Future Negotiations: They agree that the
authorities in West and East Germany should be invited to establish
mixed technical commissions, consisting of officials designated by these
authorities, to increase cultural and technical contacts, promote
mutually beneficial economic exchanges, and consider a draft electoral
law and other steps toward German reunification.

(c)Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare
that they will ensure that any arrangements into which any of them may
enter with any part of Germany will be consistent with the declarations
recorded in this announcement, and that any peace treaty which they may
conclude with a united Germany will be consistent with the declarations
noted under 3 and 4, below.

3. Nuclear Diffusion

(a)General Principles: They believe that further
diffusion of nuclear weapons into the control of national governments
not now owning them would make more difficult the problem of maintaining
lasting peace.

(b)Future Negotiations: They agree to seek, in the
above-mentioned committee (or other appropriate forum) to develop
policies regarding non-diffusion of nuclear weapons to which all states
owning nuclear weapons might agree and to which states not now owning
nuclear weapons might also subscribe.

(c)Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare
that they will not themselves relinquish control over nuclear weapons to
any individual state not now owning such weapons and will refrain from
assisting any such state in manufacturing them.

4. Non-Aggression

(a)General Principles: They believe that force
should not be used to change existing frontiers and demarcation lines in
Europe or for any other aggressive purpose.

(b)Future Negotiations: They agree to seek in the
above-mentioned committee (or a sub-committee thereof) (i) to develop a
suitable declaration regarding non-aggression between the NATO and Warsaw Pact Powers; and (ii) to
consider measures which might be taken to enable the governments
represented on that Commission to communicate and establish their
non-aggressive intent in the event of grave crises and otherwise to
reduce the risk of war by accident or miscalculation.

(c)Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare
that they will not themselves use or support use of force to change the
external borders of Germany or the demarcation line inside Germany, and
they note with approval past declarations of the Federal Republic that
it will not use force to achieve the reunification of Germany or to
settle international disputes.

5. Procedures

Once the proposed Committee of Foreign Ministers' deputies has been
established, the Foreign Ministers of countries represented on it should
meet periodically, as seems useful, to review its work.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/3–2062. Confidential. The source text bears no drafting
information, but is attached to a March 21 memorandum from Kohler to Rusk, which states that it had been
worked out after communications with Washington. The source text
bears the handwritten notation: “As handed Gromyko.”

21. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State21. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to
the Department of State1

Bonn, March 22,
1962, 6 p.m.

2285. Geneva for Sec Del. USAREUR for
Gen Clarke. I regard Vopo
shooting US Military Liaison vehicle2 as an extremely serious development
following as it does the wounding under similar circumstances of a
member of the British Armed Forces3 and believe that serious
counter-measures should be taken against Soviet Military Mission in West
Germany. I recognize that any
measures we may take may produce comparable steps by Russians against
our Mission in Potsdam thus severely restricting their normal
intelligence activity. Nevertheless I recommend that Gen Clarke's protest to Marshal Konev be followed immediately by
serious counter-measures against Sov Military Missions in West Germany
including restriction of Sov Missions to their compounds until a
satisfactory reply has been received from the Sov authorities.4

Although I understand British have not instituted any counter-measures I
have not discussed this with British and French Embs in Bonn except to
protest to Sov authorities.

Dowling

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0021/3–2262. Secret; Priority. Received at 3:17
p.m. Also sent to Geneva and USAREUR and repeated to Berlin, London, Paris, and
Moscow.

2 On March
20 and 21 a U.S. Military Liaison Mission vehicle was detained and
shot at by Vopos in the Gotha area. A summary of the incident was
transmitted in telegram 1795 from Berlin, March 22. (Ibid.,
762.0221/3–2262)

3 On March
10 the driver of a British Military Mission vehicle had been wounded
by Vopos, and Soviet officials' cooperation had been deemed
“inadequate” in helping the victim. (Telegram 1764 from Berlin,
March 17; ibid., 762.0221/3–1762)

4 On March 22 General Clarke sent a letter of protest
about the incident with the USMLM vehicle to Marshal Koniev, and on
the following day outlined specific measures he would take if no
reply were received by March 27 or if the reply were unsatisfactory.
(Telegram 2300 from Bonn, March 24; ibid., 762.0221/3–2462)
Clarke reported on March
27 that the Soviet reply, received that day, was unacceptable. (SX
2552 from Heidelberg; ibid., 762.0221/3–2262) Two days later the
Chief of Staff, USAREUR,
informed the Soviet MLM at Frankfurt that its personnel were
restricted to the Mission except for official duties and that U.S.
escorts would accompany any Soviet traffic. (SX 2601 from
Heidelberg, March 29; ibid., 762.0221/3–2962)

22. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State22. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
23, 1962, 2 a.m.

Secto 91. Eyes only for the President
and Acting Secretary. No Other Distribution. Separate telegram will give
details my conversation with Gromyko alone today.2 Two points seem clear.
First, Gromyko shows no
inclination to break off talks and register an impasse. Despite several
firm and possibly provocative statements by me with respect to nature of possible crisis, he did
not respond with belligerence or threats. Second, there seems to be no
movement in Soviet position toward Western vital interests. He made it
perfectly clear that minor variations in access proposals he had
submitted were organically dependent upon removal Western forces from
West Berlin.

At reception following our conversation Gromyko indicated some interest in “modus vivendi” paper
I had handed to him.3 He commented that
certain subjects such as status of West Berlin had been omitted. I told
him that we could discuss such questions. We agreed our respective
colleagues might have preliminary discussion at technical level of his
two recent papers and our paper before our next conversation. (This
being arranged.)

There is no doubt that Gromyko
understands conditions under which, from our point of view, they could
sign peace treaty with GDR without precipitating crisis. He again stated
clearly, however, that they are not interested in a peace treaty as pure
formality but one which would either be based upon a prior agreement
with West or one which would carry with it full implications of GDR sovereignty with respect to access and
other questions.

I am aware that you hoped that conversations with Gromyko would clarify whether we are
moving toward a crisis or toward a possible agreement. Nothing has been
said at Geneva which indicates that we are moving toward an agreement.
Whether this means we are moving toward a crisis is still obscure. Fact
that Gromyko seems interested in
continuation talks is at least relevant. Suggest intelligence community
be specially alerted for other evidence of Soviet intentions.4

As to what happens next after this round of talks, judgment should be
deferred pending Gromyko's response to “modus vivendi” approach. Will
report further in next day or so.

Unless there is some significant movement in their position in next two
days, I plan to leave Geneva Monday afternoon.5 In my final talk with Gromyko I would not register impasse
but would merely say that I would report in full to you on our
conversations.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/3–2262. Secret; Niact. Received on March 22 at
11:18 p.m. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by
Rusk and concurred in by
Bohlen, Thompson, and Kohler. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 193,
Chron)

2 See Document 19.

3 Document 20.

4 At 5:37 p.m. on March 23 the Department of State
cabled Secretary Rusk at
Geneva that the intelligence community was reviewing Soviet
intentions on Berlin, but the evidence available did not appear to
indicate a Soviet intention to precipitate a crisis, although air
and ground access to the city would continue to be harassed. (Tosec 128; Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/3–2362)

5 March 26.

23. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State23. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, March
23, 1962, 6 p.m.

1799. Geneva eyes only for Sec Rusk. Bonn eyes only for Dowling. From Clay. While the
tightening of the rope around our neck in West Berlin has never stopped,
the rate was accelerated with the air corridor harassments which began
in early February prior to Geneva. The shooting of member of British
Military Mission and shooting at car of member of our Mission which
could have resulted in wounding or murder of occupant cannot be
considered as separate isolated events but as a part of a pattern.
Delays in clearing convoys, demands to search trucks, continued tailings
in East Berlin all fit into this pattern. Also, visa charge tried out as
test marks the initial inclusion of West German traffic in the pattern.
With Geneva further evidence of Soviet intransigence its failure is
almost certain to bring the rope still tighter. Notes may be fine for
the record, but to stop this pattern we must be much more determined and
stronger on the ground and in the air than we have been to date. I am
convinced that retaliatory action against Soviet Mission is far more
effective than a note and if we are not prepared to protect our own
Mission to this degree we should withdraw it.

I think too we must be ready if harassment increases to show our strength
in the air; to refuse to accept delays on the Autobahn; and to meet each
restriction in German traffic with countermeasures of blockade and
harassment elsewhere.

I hope that I am proved wrong and that we do not have to face increasing
pressures. We are not going to stop Khrushchev and Ulbricht by wailing at the wall. Today, after thirteen
years of pressure, we have no immediate course of action to meet any
challenge. We must get our house in order so that we can move instantly,
even if unilaterally, as hesitation and delay can quickly force us into
a position where our only choice is war.

Lightner

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0221/3–2362. Secret; Priority. Received at 2:40
p.m. Also sent to Geneva and Bonn.

24. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State24. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
25, 1962, 11 a.m.

Secto 104. Eyes only President and
Acting Secretary. No Other Distribution. On Soviet initiative Semenov and colleagues saw Kohler and Bohlen Saturday afternoon for further discussion modus
vivendi paper.2 Further talks same group taking place Sunday
morning. While there is no specific indication of any Soviet change on
points of substance they showed considerable interest in our present
approach. There is still some apparent confusion in their minds between
(a) reaching agreement on points of substance and (b) determining how to
deal with the fact of disagreement without moving toward crisis.
Presumption is I will see Gromyko
perhaps Monday for further talk on basis preliminary exploration by
experts. While we could be proved wrong within hours, our present
impression is that they do seem to wish to keep things open at Geneva to
avoid a break here, possibly with summit in mind. While Gromyko has not mentioned summit on his
initiative, I did remark to him that our modus vivendi paper was an
effort to envisage what Chiefs of Government could come out with if they
should discuss Berlin.

On Saturday Semenov was seeking
clarification number of points probably at Moscow's request. There is no
doubt but that Gromyko is in
contact with Moscow and is not merely handling question on basis
instructions with which he departed for Geneva. Will report promptly on
Sunday's conversation.3

Still tentatively planning leave here late Monday or more probably
Tuesday. However, I would not wish to leave if there is possibility of
moving Berlin matter by another two or three days. Will communicate with
you prior to any announcement my departure.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/3–2562. Secret; Niact. Passed to the White
House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by
Rusk and concurred in by
Thompson, Kohler, and Bohlen. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 193,
Chron)

2 A 17-page memorandum of this
conversation (SecDel MC/52) is ibid., Central Files,
762.00/3–2462.

3 At 8 p.m. on March 25
Rusk reported that the
Sunday morning session had produced no appreciable change in the
Soviet position except that the Soviet paper on access was not
necessarily conditioned on withdrawal of Western forces from Berlin.
(Secto 106 from Geneva; ibid.,
110.11–RU/3–2562) A 14-page memorandum of this second conversation
(SecDel MC/51) is ibid., 762.00/3–2562.

25. Memorandum of Conversation25. Memorandum of Conversation1

Geneva, March
26, 1962, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary

Mr. Kohler

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Mr. Gromyko

Mr. Semenov

Mr. Sukhodrev

SecDel/MC/59

Mr. Gromyko invited the Secretary
to speak first, saying that it was an unwritten tradition in the Soviet
Union to have the guest speak first.

The Secretary said he wished to make one or two preliminary comments. He
said that we had not responded initially and immediately to the Soviet
paper on access because it was our view that it contained a fatal
defect, i.e., the link between access and withdrawal of Western forces
from West Berlin. That link was also apparent in what Mr. Gromyko had said orally. The Secretary
emphasized that any proposal contingent on the withdrawal of Western
forces was impossible and misleading because of the importance we
attached to the presence of Western forces in West Berlin. Referring to
the US suggestion for an international access authority and to the
Soviet suggestion for such an authority, the Secretary believed that it
might be possible to explore this in order to see whether some solution
could be found, but emphasized again the greatness of the problem
created by the linkage.

The Secretary observed that this was an illustration of the fundamental
problem in communications between our two governments. The Soviet
proposals were obviously in conflict with the vital interests of the
West. A series of communications and conversations both sides had had so
far on these problems had made it obvious that there was no movement
toward agreement. However, it was not in the interests of the two sides
merely to say that no agreement was possible and let things develop
toward a crisis. Therefore, the US had tried to list the points on which
it believed agreement was possible, at least in general terms. If both
sides agreed on general principles, they could proceed to discuss other
problems.

The Secretary said that personally he did not believe that there were
many points of difference; however, they were points involving vital
interests and if they could be
handled and managed, other problems would fall into place. In spite of
the differences of emphasis and detail, the Secretary thought agreement
should be possible on the questions of the status of West Berlin,
boundaries, non-aggression, practical arrangements to reconcile access
and what Mr. Gromyko called the
sovereignty of GDR, and non-diffusion of
nuclear weapons. He stressed, however, that the stumbling block was what
we considered our vital interests.

Referring to the US paper on general principles,2 the Secretary said that
it was not in direct response to the Soviet papers on principles and
access, but was designed for a different purpose. While the Soviet paper
on general principles restated Soviet proposals, we believed that
account must be taken of the differences existing on the various
problems and that we must see how to handle them. Thus our paper did not
require withdrawal of Soviet proposals or acknowledgement by the USSR of
our vital interests in any new form. On the other hand, our paper
contained points on which both sides should be able to agree and which
could serve as a basis for further discussions.

Mr. Gromyko then launched into a
lengthy statement frequently referring to what appeared to be a talking
paper. He started out be restating the Soviet Government's belief that
the Soviet proposals for a German peace treaty and the creation of a
free city of West Berlin on the basis of such a treaty were aimed at a
detente and at an improvement in international relations, particularly
those between the great powers. He asserted that the Soviet Government
wished good relations with the United States, including friendship, and
that the peoples of our two countries would be grateful to their leaders
if they were to bring about such relations. He stated that the Soviet
Union had rejected and still rejected any attempts to depict the Soviet
insistence on a peace treaty and on the creation of a free city of West
Berlin as pursuit by the USSR of some narrow aims. The Soviet Government
also flatly rejected assertions that the USSR or the GDR wish to take hold of West Berlin. Mr.
Gromyko observed that such
aims were alien to Soviet policy. He then said that the Soviet Union was
proceeding on the basis of the fact that there was an absolutely
abnormal situation in Germany and West Berlin, due to the fact that
seventeen years after World War II there was still no peace treaty and
the occupation regime continued to exist in West Berlin as if nothing
had happened since the war. The Soviet Government believed that this
abnormal situation was in conflict with the best interests of peace in
Europe and throughout the world and was in conflict with the interests
of improving relations among states, including those between the US and
the USSR. He contended that the Soviet Government had never signed and could not sign a
commitment providing for a perpetuation of the occupation of Germany or
West Berlin, whereas what the Western Powers now sought in West Berlin
was tantamount to the occupation of that city for an indefinite period.
He reiterated that the Soviet Government could not agree to any such
thing. Seventeen years had passed since World War II and a line should
be drawn under that war; the drawing of such a line should not be a mere
formal act but should involve changes stemming from a peace treaty.

Mr. Gromyko asserted that the
Soviet Government proceeded from the facts of the existing situation,
where two sovereign and independent German states existed, and suggested
that all states must take account of those basic facts in shaping their
policy with regard to Germany and, to a large extent, with regard to
Europe in general. The Soviet Union proceeded from this basic fact and
the purpose of a peace treaty was to bring the situation in Germany and
Berlin into accord with the present as distinct from the past.

Mr. Gromyko continued that it was
most important now to have a German peace treaty and to resolve the
status of West Berlin on the basis of such a treaty by agreement of all
states concerned. As to the contents of such status, the Soviet
Government had made proposals on the subject and they were well known.
He said that he wished to emphasize the Soviet Government's preference
for an agreed solution of the problem of a German peace treaty and of
the status of West Berlin on the basis of such a treaty. He stressed
that the USSR would sign a peace treaty unilaterally and take
appropriate steps without agreement on the part of the Western Powers
only if the latter refused to reach agreement. However, the USSR
preferred an agreed solution and the search for such a solution was the
purpose of the present negotiations.

Mr. Gromyko then stated that the
questions of a German peace treaty and of a free city of West Berlin
were closely related to the question of respect for the sovereignty of
the GDR. He said that the USSR could not
accept any agreement not providing for such respect. The Soviet Union
could not agree to any arrangements which would be based on a situation
where certain states would completely disregard the sovereignty of the
GDR because of their feeling of
animosity toward that state. He said that while many countries had a
social order and policies which the USSR did not like, the Soviet
Government respected their sovereignty in dealing with them, and
whenever the Soviet Union had to resolve certain problems with those
countries it did so on the basis of respect for their sovereignty. The
GDR should not be an exception from
that rule. The Secretary's statement that unrestricted access and
transit of persons and goods could be reconciled with respect for the
GDR's sovereignty represented a
correct thesis. The Soviet Government held the same view and had said so
in New York and to Ambassador Thompson in Moscow. However, the
main problem was the content and the interpretation of this formula. He
asserted that the Soviet Government feared there was an intention merely
to pay lip service to the sovereignty of the GDR and to flout it in practice. If this was the case, it
would be regrettable and it would not facilitate agreement.

Referring to the Soviet paper on transit, Mr. Gromyko claimed that it had been prepared in order to
meet repeated US requests that the Soviet Union spell out its views with
regard to the question of respect for the sovereignty of the GDR in connection with the transit of
persons and goods. He contended that the paper set forth the detailed
views of the Soviet Government on the subject of civilian transport, but
the US pretended not to have noticed the paper and merely said that its
main defect was the link to the Soviet proposals on the status of West
Berlin. Although it was true that there was a Soviet proposal on the
status, the US now had an opportunity of considering the problem of
transit thoroughly and of replying to the Soviet views on transit as
such. Of course, transit would be to such a West Berlin the status of
which would have to be agreed. However, the Soviet Union had now stated
its views on transit and on the question of how sovereignty and transit
could be reconciled, as both sides had said that they could.

With reference to the question of the presence of Western forces in West
Berlin, Mr. Gromyko said that the
Soviet Government had proposed several variants of the solution of this
problem, which were well known. He claimed that the Secretary's remarks
indicated that the West regarded West Berlin only as a military
springboard and a military base. The USSR was compelled to draw
appropriate conclusions from this.

Mr. Gromyko then said that the
Soviet Government had repeatedly stated its position with regard to the
questions to be resolved in connection with a peace treaty, such as
borders, non-transfer of nuclear weapons to and non-production of such
weapons in the two Germanies, and non-aggression. That position was well
known and there was no need to repeat it. The Soviet Union had tried to
present its views on these matters in compressed form in the USSR
working paper on general principles. Of course, the paper contained
certain points which were not regarded favorably by the United States.
However, the US paper also included certain points representing US
unilateral positions and took no account of Soviet positions.
Furthermore, the US paper even represented a backward step in certain
areas.

Mr. Gromyko then reviewed the US
paper paragraph by paragraph. With regard to paragraph 1, he said that
the title “Berlin” appeared to reflect a desire to slip in the idea of
one Berlin, something which was not negotiable. He said the United
States itself had admitted that West Berlin was a separate entity and he
contended that East Berlin was an organic part of the GDR. Referring to the phrase “for improving
the situation” in
subparagraph (b), he wondered what it meant. He suggested that it might
mean an increase in the number of occupation troops or agreement on a
perpetuation of the occupation. He asserted that the real question was
that of eliminating the occupation and of removing the situation fraught
with dangers and risks; the present situation yielded no good to anyone,
including the United States, from the political, military, economic, or
any other standpoint. With reference to subparagraph (c), he said it
emphasized preservation of the present access procedures whereas the
USSR proceeded on the basis of the need for respect for the sovereignty
of the GDR and of reconciling the
concept of the GDR sovereignty with free
access. He said it would be intolerable if the sovereignty of the GDR was not respected. Mr. Gromyko asserted that there was no
justification for the US apprehensions with regard to possible actions
by the GDR in the event that the Soviet
proposal was adopted, because if the USSR reached agreement with the US
and its allies, it would consult its own allies, including the GDR, and the GDR would undertake appropriate obligations. Therefore,
there was no ground for fears. He expressed the hope that the US would
study the Soviet proposals on access, including access authority, and
duly evaluate them. He reiterated the Soviet desire to reach agreement
and said he wished to stress again that only if there were no agreement
between the two sides would the West have to deal with the GDR. He reiterated that the US should now
carefully study the consideration expressed by the USSR.

Referring to paragraph 2 of the US Draft Principles, Mr. Gromyko noted that subparagraphs (a) and (b)
referred to German unification. He said the Soviet Government's view was
that this was an internal matter for the Germans themselves to resolve
by agreement between the GDR and the
FRG and asserted that conclusion of
a single peace treaty or of two separate peace treaties would facilitate
a rapprochement between the two German states. He claimed that this
paragraph was an illustration of the incorrectness of the US assertion
that the paper set forth agreed views. The Soviet views on the question
of German unification were known to the US, but the paper set forth the
US' own views. With reference to subparagraph (c), Mr. Gromyko said that it was the Soviet
view that any agreement with any part of Germany must be consistent with
the understanding, including the results of the present negotiations
between the two sides on the questions relating to a German peace
settlement, if such an understanding was reached. On the other hand, if
there were no such understanding, then the USSR would have no
alternative other than to act on the basis of a peace treaty with the
GDR. However, that would be the case
only in the event that there was no agreement between East and West.

Commenting on paragraph 3, Mr. Gromyko contended that it substituted the question of
non-armament of the two German states with nuclear weapons and of
non-production of such weapons in those states with the question of a
much broader, international scope. Yet conversations both here in Geneva
and in New York had dealt with this problem with specific reference to
the two Germanies. Mr. Gromyko
said that the USSR was not opposed to the idea of preventing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons on a global scale and noted that the
Soviet vote for the respective UN General
Assembly resolution, as well as the Soviet Government's communication on
this question to the acting Secretary General of the United Nations,
reflected that attitude. However, for reasons that were well known, it
was important that one problem not be replaced with the other or made
contingent upon its solution. Moreover, the formula in the US paper was
unsatisfactory because it did not preclude such interpretation as would
allow armament with nuclear weapons of such Bundeswehr and other
non-nuclear nation forces as were formally not under the control of
“national governments” but were considered as part of NATO forces. He stated that the language
of this paragraph should not allow such interpretation. He noted,
however, that the USSR would not object to the inclusion of such a broad
formula in the principles, if they were agreed, provided that it
contained the phrase “including the two German states.” Furthermore, it
must also be understood that the solution of the broad problem must not
hold up the application of this principle to the two German states. Of
course, if there were no delay with regard to the broad problem, there
would be no difficulty. Mr. Gromyko then stated that the Soviet position was that
nuclear weapons should not be transferred either directly, through third
parties, or through military organizations; this should apply to both
the universal formula and the formula restricted only to the two German
states.

Turning to paragraph 4 of the US paper, Mr. Gromyko said that reference to non-use of force in
sub-paragraph (a) was a minimum minimorum. On the other hand, the USSR
believed that borders must be legally formalized. The positions of the
two sides were also different with regard to the question of demarcation
lines, because the USSR did not make any distinction between external
borders of and the line between the two Germanies. He contended that it
would be in the interest of peace if the internal line were formalized
as a border. Noting that so far neither side had proposed either orally
or in writing any modus for such formalization, Mr. Gromyko thought that both sides would
have to work out such a modus at a later date. As to sub-paragraph 4
(b), Mr. Gromyko said that a
declaration on non-aggression was an acceptable form of obligation from
the Soviet standpoint. However, he professed puzzlement in regard to the
provision under (ii) and wondered why language causing puzzlement and
even apprehension should be included. A non-aggression agreement was a clear commitment
involving politico-moral obligations to which nothing should be added
that complicated the matter. With respect to sub-paragraph (c), Mr.
Gromyko said that the USSR
could not accept reference to past statements by the FRG. He noted that this point related to
paragraph 8 in the Soviet draft principles. It was quite evident that
the two German states must make some kind of statements. Furthermore, in
the spirit of fairness, if reference was made to past statements by the
FRG, then past statements by the
GDR should also be referred to.

Observing that those were the Soviet views on the US working paper, Mr.
Gromyko said that he wished
to point out that, in developing its own proposals, the USSR had
attempted to narrow the gap between the US and the Soviet positions. He
regretted that the Soviet action had not met with due response on the
part of the US and expressed the hope that the US would pay greater
attention to the study of Soviet proposals and would find in them what
it had not yet been able to discern. Of course, it was possible that the
US had already discerned certain points in the Soviet proposals but was
unwilling to speak about them. Mr. Gromyko then claimed that the Soviet basic proposals for
a German peace treaty and the solution of the West Berlin situation on
the basis of such a treaty, as well as the additional Soviet proposals
made here in Geneva in both written and oral form, were designed to
facilitate an understanding between the two sides. He said that the main
goal was to eliminate the differences between the two sides and to
remove the obstacles to agreement between them in Europe, where their
interests collided and where dangers existed.

Mr. Gromyko said that he wished to
conclude by recalling Mr. Khrushchev's statement in Vienna that Central Europe,
West Berlin, and the question of a German peace treaty and of the status
of West Berlin on the basis of such a treaty were the only areas in the
world where the US and the USSR interests were in direct collision. If
this problem were settled, that would lead to a radical improvement in
the relations between our two states and in the situation in Europe
generally. In this connection, he also recalled the Secretary's
statement in New York that an improvement in the relations between our
two states would be of historic significance.

The Secretary responded by saying that he wished to reciprocate the
comments Mr. Gromyko had made at
the beginning and at the end of his remarks. He stated that the two
Governments should try to reach agreement on these problems. Berlin and
Germany were undoubtedly the most critical problems and if they were
resolved prospects would open for an improvement in the relations
between our two states with regard to many other matters. The Secretary
felt that it was important that both countries reach agreement on these
problems and not let them affect
adversely their relations in other areas, including disarmament, where
the US was determined to make every effort to reach positive
results.

Noting that Mr. Gromyko had
touched upon a great number of points, the Secretary said that he would
not deal with all of them in detail, but wished to make certain
observations on some of them. The Secretary appreciated Mr. Gromyko's detailed comments on the US
paper on general principles. However, he wished to emphasize that Mr.
Gromyko was not right in
saying that our principles took no account of Soviet positions and even
represented a backward step as compared to earlier discussions. In fact,
discussions between our two sides over the period of the past months had
been taking place in a somewhat one-sided manner which was
disadvantageous to the US. The USSR had put forward proposals with
regard to what it believed to be the right way of drawing a line under
World War II. The United States had also had proposals as to how a line
under World War II should be drawn, i.e., by unification through free
elections, and with Berlin as the capital of a unified Germany. However,
we were not putting those proposals forward because that would mean a
mere exchange of proposals without agreement. Rather, we had based
ourselves on the factual situation. On the other hand, when under these
circumstances the Soviet Union said that a line should be drawn under
World War II, it clearly had in mind changes which were to a serious
disadvantage to the West. The Secretary observed that this brought him
to the key point, i.e., the presence of Western forces in West Berlin.
He stressed strongly that the US could not accept the view that there
was an anomaly in the presence of Western forces in West Berlin; that
was no more abnormal than any other aspect of the situation in Germany.
Neither could the US accept the view that lines of influence had been
drawn in Germany and that Western presence east of those lines was
abnormal. Arrangements had been made at the end of World War II, and
they provided for Western presence where it existed today. The Secretary
recalled the clear and forceful statement by the President in Vienna
with regard to the great effect on the Western position that would take
place if we permitted ourselves to be driven out of that area. He
observed that he did not say that the USSR intended to drive us out, but
noted that the objective effect of the Soviet proposals would be just
that. This had also been made clear by the President in Vienna.

The Secretary went on to say that he could not agree that there was
ground for fears that West Berlin was a military base. The Western
forces in West Berlin were minute in the present military situation.
They had minor arms, no nuclear weapons, and insecure communications. No
military leader in the East or West would regard West Berlin as a
military base. The troops in West Berlin were there exclusively for
political purposes, namely, to
stabilize the situation in Germany, and such stabilization worked to the
advantage of both the USSR and the US. Mr. Gromyko and his colleagues had stated from time to time
that the Soviet proposals concerning Berlin were good for the West. The
Secretary said that he wished to tell Mr. Gromyko sincerely that the presence of Western forces in
West Berlin was good for both the United States and the USSR. However,
neither side should tell the other what was good for it; each of them
should decide this for itself and then both should talk to each other on
that basis.

Turning to the question of transit, the Secretary noted that Mr.
Gromyko had used the phrases
“transit as such” and “transit to such a Berlin the status of which was
to be agreed upon”. He also observed that any proposals on transit must
not necessarily be linked to the withdrawal of Western forces from West
Berlin. As to the compatibility of free access with the so-called
sovereignty of the GDR, the Secretary
said this was something both sides had said should be possible, but he
was not sure that a common formula had been found for working this
problem out. He stated that the expressions “free access” and “exercise
of sovereignty” contained the seeds of basic contradiction, unless
agreement with respect to free access did not involve the exercise of
sovereignty in any manner that would frustrate the agreement. In this
connection, the Secretary referred to the first two sentences in
paragraph 2 of the Soviet paper on transit and wondered how they could
be reconciled. He supposed that both sides would work out a new
understanding with regard to access, which would then be subject to
agreement by East Germany. The Secretary recalled his remarks that East
Germans would of necessity participate in access procedures; however, in
a broader sense, the exercise of sovereignty, as far as East Germany was
concerned, would consist in agreeing to access. On the other hand, if
“sovereignty” meant assumption of control over access in any geographic
area, then access would be vulnerable. The United States had proposed an
international access authority which it believed could overcome this
problem. Mr. Gromyko had made a
different proposal with regard to such an authority, which would not
necessarily overcome that problem. The Soviet proposal assumed disputes
and provided for a four-power commission to arbitrate. This, the
Secretary noted, also involved the question of whether that commission
would act under the unanimity rule. However, the Secretary stated, if
transit was not dependent on the withdrawal of Western forces from West
Berlin, then he thought that there were some points here which brought
the two sides closer together and we could see how to move toward
agreement, because he did not believe there was an inherent problem in
the matter of reconciling access with the activities of the authorities
in East Germany.

Referring to the US paper on principles, the Secretary said he supposed
that the general principle under the heading “Berlin” was something both
sides had said over the past several months. As to the word
“improvement” in sub-paragraph (b), he said there was no basis for
suspicion here, because if satisfactory arrangements were found, that
would represent improvement; he could not imagine that arrangements
agreed upon by both sides would not constitute improvement. As to
paragraph 2, the Secretary recalled Mr. Gromyko's comment that it contained a one-sided
formulation. However, the Secretary observed, Mr. Gromyko would surely recognize that
this was basically what both sides had been saying, and had said more
formally in 1955,3 although the paragraph omitted
reference to free elections. The United States agreed that reunification
was something for the German people to accomplish; however, we believed
that the victorious powers had a residual responsibility for the
solution of the German problem. In any event, the language of paragraph
2 was formulated in such a way as to reflect what we believed to be the
Soviet position as well.

As to Mr. Gromyko's comments on
the question of nuclear diffusion, the Secretary recalled Mr. Gromyko's statement in New York that
the two Germanies should not have nuclear weapons and his own statement
that this presented no problem because it was our national policy to
oppose the proliferation of nuclear weapons to any national government,
including the two Germanies. He expressed the view that this problem was
something that could be worked out promptly. If there should be any
delay because of some difficulties, we could see what could be done, but
we preferred the general formula rather than to point at this or that
individual state. As to indirect transfer, the Secretary stated we had
no intention of giving nuclear weapons to the Bundeswehr or any other
national forces, directly or through third parties. He reiterated that
the US was opposed to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and said that
we had gone to considerable length to safeguard that policy.

The Secretary then recalled the President's remark to Mr. Adzhubei to the effect that some
questions might be easier to resolve with the passing of time. He said
that he wished to note that this did not mean procrastination, because
when two sides were in disagreement it was difficult to tell which side
was procrastinating in not agreeing with the other. However, many things
could happen with time and create a situation where problems would be
easier to resolve. For instance, the situation in East Germany had been
stabilized in many respects and the flow of refugees had been stopped. Steps could be made
in the disarmament field which would create a situation where solution
of various problems might be easier. Also, the confrontation in Berlin
could be reduced. The Secretary noted that our main problem was that we
were dealing here with a dangerous confrontation of interests and
particularly with proposals which we believed seriously affected our
interests. Both sides should avoid affecting their mutual interests and
develop the situation with regard to Berlin on that basis.

The Secretary then observed that Mr. Gromyko had made some twenty-five points and that he had
not responded to all of them. He said that he wished to study Mr.
Gromyko's remarks against the
background of the previous conversations and then report to the
President. He expressed the hope that Mr. Gromyko would do the same and said that both sides
should see how to move toward agreement on this critical question.
Reverting to paragraph 1 of the US draft principles, the Secretary added
that reference to “improving the situation in Berlin” related to
possible arrangements with regard to traffic, family ties, and other
possible improvements affecting both parts of Berlin. He noted that the
first part of paragraph 1 referred to West Berlin. The Secretary
observed that this wording was not an attempt to conceal an all-Berlin
proposal, although the US was prepared to make such a proposal at any
moment.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to
comment on some points made by the Secretary. Referring to the
Secretary's remark with regard to the link between access and the status
of West Berlin, Mr. Gromyko said
that there was indeed such a link in the Soviet proposals. He said that
transit arrangements would be superimposed on an agreed status of West
Berlin and noted that the Soviet proposals with regard to transit did
not exist outside such an agreement.

Mr. Gromyko then expressed
satisfaction at the Secretary's remark that there were some points of a
positive nature in the Soviet paper on access. As to the question of the
voting procedure in the proposed four-power commission, Mr. Gromyko stated that this was a subject
for later discussion and that he did not wish to commit himself now.
However, he believed that the voting procedure should be such as to
satisfy all parties and at the same time not be in conflict with the
sovereignty of the GDR. As to the
purpose of the international authority, he viewed that authority as
arbiter acting in situations such as those discussed in Geneva in
1959.4

Referring to the Secretary's comment on the first two sentences in
paragraph 2 of the Soviet paper on transit, Mr. Gromyko said that if there were no contradictions there would
be no problem. He contended that such contradictions exited whenever
international obligations were assumed: while one party must abide by
its obligations the other party must respect its sovereignty. This was
nothing new and was not an insoluble problem. In fact, the US itself,
through Ambassador Thompson, had
referred to international agreements, in particular the Chicago
Convention.5 Mr. Gromyko said he was happy to hear the Secretary say that
such arrangements were made on a daily basis. He went on to say that it
was inconceivable to imagine a situation where the GDR would take control over access in the
face of such obligations as it would have assumed with regard to access
arrangements, including international authority. Thus the Secretary's
fears were not justified.

As to the duration of an agreement on transit, Mr. Gromyko said that the USSR proceeded on
the basis that if there was agreement on the status of West Berlin,
civilian transit arrangements would remain in force for the duration of
the status.

Turning to the question of nuclear diffusion, Mr. Gromyko said he thought the Secretary
apparently understood the difference between the two variants and the
Soviet apprehensions in this matter. He reiterated that the Soviet Union
did not wish any delay in the development of global arrangements to
cause delay in the arrangements with regard to the two German states. He
said that every effort should be made to develop global arrangements,
but these two questions should not be linked.

As to the President's remark to Mr. Adzhubei, Mr. Gromyko said it was true that time could be an ally, but
observed that sometimes it could also be an enemy and could work against
the improvement of relations between our two states. The Soviet
Government believed that time was ripe for removing the dangers inherent
in the West Berlin situation. Therefore, both sides should seek methods
of reaching a speedy agreement. However, the USSR was opposed to
negotiations for the sake of negotiations; it was in favor of serious
negotiations. The USSR had agreed to bilateral exchanges of views and
continued to favor such exchanges. It hoped that such exchanges would
lead to positive results which would provide a basis for agreement on
the question of a German peace treaty.

The Secretary inquired what dangers Mr. Gromyko saw in the West Berlin situation and suggested
surely it was not the presence of Western forces.

Mr. Gromyko responded by
reiterating that the situation in West Berlin was an abnormal one, since
it was frozen as it had emerged in the first days after the war. The US
might like that situation, but the USSR did not. There were many
unsatisfactory aspects to this situation, such as the presence of
Western forces in West Berlin, the continuation of the occupation status
in West Berlin, disregard for the sovereignty of the GDR, and many other questions still
remaining unresolved—such as frontiers, nuclear weapons, etc.

Perpetuation of this situation was not in the interests of the US either,
as least as the USSR saw those interests; nor was it in the interests of
peace in Europe. The Soviet Union proceeded on the basis of facts and
wanted the present situation to be in line with the actual situation in
Germany. Mr. Gromyko asserted
that there were few examples in history where for seventeen years after
the war there had been no peace treaty and where the situation, such as
that in West Berlin, had been preserved in the same form as it had
existed three days after the war. He contended that the acuteness of the
abnormal situation was compounded by such factors as the existence of
nuclear weapons, rockets, etc., which might give rise to accidents. He
wondered why one should play with this kind of a situation and why one
should not remove these time bombs left over from World War II, so that
all nations could breathe freely and live in peace and tranquillity.

The Secretary referred to Mr. Gromyko's remark with regard to the link and said that
he had understood from Mr. Gromyko's statements in earlier conversations that the
Soviet proposal for access was specifically related to the withdrawal of
Western forces. He observed that the presence of Western forces was
considerably different from status and that it was conceivable to reach
agreement on a status that would be different from removal of Western
forces from West Berlin.

In response to the Secretary's question, Mr. Gromyko drew a diagram indicating three elements:
access, status, and troops. He drew lines between access and status and
between status and troops, but observed one could also draw a line
directly from access to troops. He said that the USSR had given the US
its views as to how it understood access in relation to status. Thus
access would lead to such West Berlin the status of which had been
agreed. [sic] As to the Soviet proposal on status, it was well known and
it included substitution of Western forces with neutral or UN troops.

The Secretary observed that Mr. Gromyko's clarification was not very helpful, because it
still very much linked access to withdrawal of forces, which was not
negotiable. Referring to Mr. Gromyko's remark about tensions, the Secretary said that
tensions arise from the fact that the USSR had been asking for something
we could not give it. This was the heart of the matter. Furthermore,
both sides had commitments concerning Germany and in that respect both of them were
interested in the factual situation.

The Secretary reiterated that both sides would like to think about what
had been said in Geneva and said he wished to report to the President
upon his return to Washington. Referring to Mr. Gromyko's remark with respect to
bilateral exchanges, the Secretary said both sides should get in touch
after they had carefully reviewed what had been said, because it was in
the interest of both sides to do everything they could in order to
settle these problems. The Secretary noted that he was not suggesting
any particular channel and invited Mr. Gromyko to make suggestions.

Mr. Gromyko said that the channel
for bilateral contacts could perhaps be worked out later. He remarked in
passing that if the US preferred to use Moscow there would be no
objection. In any event, the USSR would wish to know what prospects
there were and therefore the question of the form of contact should be
considered by both sides in the near future. He said that this stemmed
from the USSR's desire to have serious negotiations to seek
possibilities for agreement rather than negotiations for the sake of
negotiations.

The Secretary replied that the US was also against negotiations for the
sake of negotiations and stressed the necessity of seeking solutions. He
expressed the hope that he could come to Moscow some time, but said he
was not sure if that fitted this situation.

Mr. Gromyko concluded the
conversation by saying that the Secretary would be welcome if he found
it possible to visit Moscow, including in connection with this problem.
However, this was of course something for the Secretary himself to
decide. He remarked that the Soviet Foreign Minister had been to
Washington whereas the US Secretary of State had not been to Moscow.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/3–2662. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on July
9. The meeting was held at the Soviet Mission. A detailed summary of
this conversation was transmitted in Secto 114 from Geneva, March
27. (Ibid., 611.61/3–2762)

2 Document 20.

3  Presumably Rusk is
referring to the Directive of the Heads of Government of the Four
Powers to the Foreign Ministers, July 23, 1955; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol.
V, pp. 527–528.

4 For documentation on the Geneva
Foreign Ministers Meeting May 11–August 6, 1959, see ibid.,
1958–1960, volume VIII.

5 For text of the Convention on
International Civil Aviation, signed at Chicago on December 7, 1944,
see 61 Stat. 1180.

26. Telegram From the President's Special Representative in Berlin (Clay) to the Commander in Chief, United States Army, Europe (Clarke)26. Telegram From the President's Special Representative in Berlin
(Clay) to the
Commander in Chief, United States Army, Europe (Clarke)1

Berlin, March
26, 1962, 6 p.m.

1076. POLADUSAREUR for Clarke. Bonn for Ambassador. Geneva
for SecDel. From Clay. Reference: Bonn 785 Berlin, 2300 Dept.2 I do not want to belabor the shooting incident.
However I must say that sending a letter of protest while doing nothing
is the surest way to make it meaningless.

That the GDR police would shoot up an
occupied American military vehicle is shocking to the thinking German
and I might add to me, also, when we do nothing but write a letter of
protest while we wait for a reply. That this was done by GDR police was much more damaging to our
prestige than had it been done by Soviet personnel.

I appreciate the importance of the intelligence you obtain from our
Mission, but you must also appreciate the loss of American prestige
which is involved and its effect on the confidence of the German
people.

We seem to think that unless there is public hue and cry there is no
threat to morale. Thus, we argue that air harassments have not damaged
morale as air traffic has increased. This is far from the real truth as
the Germans who influence public thinking are watching every move in the
air to see what we will do. These same Germans are equally concerned to
find out how we will react to this most flagrant GDR attack. Secret harassment of Soviet Missions will be no
answer as an effective response must be evident to the public, nor will
reactions so long delayed as not to be instantly identified with the
cause.

I must admit that as I am queried by responsible Germans and Americans, I
do not find them particularly impressed by our firmness and
determination when I tell them that we have reacted by writing another
note.

1 Source: Department of State, Central
Files, 762.0221/3–2662. Top Secret; Priority. Also sent to Bonn,
Geneva, and to the Department of State as telegram 1817, which is
the source text.

2 See footnote 3, Document
21.

27. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State27. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, March
26, 1962, midnight.

Secto 113. President and Acting
Secretary from the Secretary. No Other Distribution. As I wind up this
round of talks with Gromyko on
Berlin, I have the following summary reactions prior to full report on
my return:

1. Soviets have not changed their proposals in any significant way since
Vienna summit.

2. Gromyko has carefully avoided
threat and bluster on the one side and any temptation to declare an
impasse on the other. Bearing in mind your conversation with me just
before my departure,2 I
presented Gromyko with several
opportunities to clarify completely their real intentions, specifically
to discover whether they are determined to move to a crisis. He
consistently backed away.

3. Although they can change their minds overnight, they clearly left the
impression that they wished to continue talks on a bilateral basis and
are flexible as to exact means. Gromyko underlined that we could consider Dobrynin as a
fully reliable channel with full confidence Khru-shchev. In doing so,
however, he did not rule out any other channel and renewed this most
informal invitation to me, for example, to visit Moscow if it should
prove convenient.

4. My associates and I believe that in our talks here, including expert
level consultations, we accumulated a great deal of “raw data” which we
must carefully review to determine what the most promising line of our
next approach might be.

5. Although Gromyko did not accept
our modus vivendi approach in these discussions, his criticisms of our
so-called principles were not fundamental and I think some revision of
this approach might be a good next step whatever the channel.

6. Despite preceding paragraph, Soviets are still pressing for major
agreement on essence of their proposals and are reluctant to abandon
them even tacitly for a modus vivendi. I am more than ever convinced
that what we have described as our vital interests in Berlin are just
that and that Soviets look upon
our attitude as a formidable obstacle and are reluctant to challenge
these interests frontally.

7. Gromyko and I did not reach
formal agreement on any point but it is obvious that there are a number
of points on which we could agree. Similarly, we did not reach a degree
of disagreement on any point which precludes further discussion.

Upon my arrival at airport I plan to make most minimum statement pending
full report to you.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/3–2662. Top Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. Passed
to the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was
drafted by Rusk. (Ibid.,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2060)

2 According to
Kennedy's and Rusk's Appointment Books, the President, Secretary
of State, and their principal advisers had met at the White House
from 11 a.m. to noon of March 9, to discuss, inter alia, disarmament
and Berlin. No other record of this meeting has been found.

28. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Mission at Berlin28. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Mission at
Berlin1

Geneva, March
27, 1962, 4 p.m.

21. Eyes only Acting Secretary. Eyes only for Clay from Secretary. Before
leaving Geneva, I wanted you to know that, although our talks with
Soviets will continue, we made no real headway towards any substantive
agreement on Berlin which we could accept. As indicated in the joint
American-Soviet statement issued this morning,2 it is fair to say
that some progress was made in clarifying points of agreement and points
of difference, but points of difference remain fundamental.

I did obtain impression, however, that Soviets do not wish to have
confrontation now and desire to maintain contact with us on Berlin.
Whether this is consistent with continuing harassments in air corridors
and on ground access routes is an obviously related question. I have
this morning emphasized to Gromyko that increased Soviet air corridor activity
today is inconsistent with spirit of our joint statement and that we
cannot help but draw judgments not only from what Soviets say about
desiring peaceful solution but also from what they do.3

I have not tried to comment specifically from Geneva on your recent
messages making recommendations to Dept and USAREUR. However, in a related matter, I have today urged
strongly on Lord Home
desirability of our instituting certain naval counter measures in
response to Soviet harassments of Berlin access. I shall now be
reporting to President and, after consultation with our Allies, we shall
then have to give thought to next diplomatic round. I am glad that, in
meantime, from all evidence Berlin morale and elan remain good though
subjected to strains and doubts of which you have made us aware.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/3–2762. Secret. Also sent to the Department of
State as Secto 116, which is the
source text.

2 For text of this statement, see American Foreign
Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 691.

3 No other record of this conversation with Gromyko has been found.

29. Minutes of the Meeting of the National Security Council29. Minutes of the Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, March 28, 1962, 10:30 a.m.

[Here follow three pages of discussion of nuclear testing and
disarmament.]

The Secretary then turned to Berlin. Here we are no nearer the substance
of an agreement but there is a change in tone. At the beginning of the
meeting the Soviets had been willing to talk, but the initiative for
conversations had come from us. At the end of the meeting the initiative
had come from them, and Gromyko
had made it plain in his closing statements that they are committed to
further bilateral conversations. Yet they are still trying to convert us
to their basic view and have not yet really considered our arguments in
favor of a modus vivendi which recognizes the fact of basic
disagreement.

But the Soviet Union has made proposals on access which, if they could be
separated from their unacceptable position on Western troops in West
Berlin, would be helpful and worth considering carefully. They also
showed some interest in our actions of a modus vivendi.

On the other hand, we did not get much help from Gromyko on harassments in Berlin. He
professed ignorance of these harassments both at the beginning and the
end of the meeting. The Secretary recalled his firm dealings with Gromyko on the chaff issue and remarked that he had been
troubled to discover only later that chaff had been dropped in these
areas many times before, although perhaps in not so dangerous or
calculated a fashion. The President remarked that he also was troubled,
and in response to the President's question the Secretary said that
Lord Home seemed also not to
have known the history of chaff when he made a still stronger statement
to Gromyko. The Secretary
remarked that he had made it plain to Gromyko at the end that we would listen both to what the
Soviets said and to what happened in Berlin.

In summary, the Secretary indicated his belief that we must match the
Soviets in patience and in persistence in these discussions. They were
quite willing to play their long-playing record over and over again, and
we should be ready to do the same thing. We should keep at it, clearly
and continuously. These discussions had not moved very far because
Gromyko had been bound
closely by his instructions, but we had kept right on showing our views
of the way of moving the problems forward. The conversations had been
courteous and sober. Gromyko had
personally been affable and friendly. The meeting took place with no
indication of an impasse. The Secretary reported that the Germans and
the French had been kept informed—although he later asked all concerned
to protect the fact of contact with the French (because General de
Gaulle is not informed of it).

Mr. Kohler added that the German
attitude had been excellent. The Secretary concluded by saying that
there was a lot of raw material from these conversations and that he and
his associates hoped to study it closely in the next few days and see if
we could formulate new proposals which might remove some suspicions. But
progress would be slow. The Secretary believed he had brought back a
thin piece of bacon, but we could go on from here.2

[Here follow four paragraphs of discussion of unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National
Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the
President. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting
information.

2 At 4 p.m. Rusk
also reported to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on his
discussions at Geneva. For text of his statement and related
questions, see Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee (Historical Series), 1962, vol. XIV, pp. 335–357.

April-May 1962: Differences Between the United States and the Federal Republic of GermanyApril-May 1962: Differences Between the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany: Document List

Document 30: Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, April 3, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–462. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was attached to an April 4 memorandum from Rusk to the President, which stated that the extensive new language was drawn largely from the texts of the two Soviet documents presented in Geneva or from verbal accounts of Soviet views. A preliminary draft of the paper, which has the same numbered paragraphs but no preamble, is attached to a March 30 memorandum from Klein to Bundy. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda, Klein) A copy of the fourth revision, also dated April 3, which was drafted that morning at a meeting at the Department of State attended by Klein, Bohlen, Kohler, Thompson, and Hillenbrand, and is the same as this paper except for two paragraphs, is ibid.

Document 31: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, April 6, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–662. Secret; Priority.

Document 32: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–762. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 33: Editorial Note

Document 34: Memorandum of Conversation

Bonn, April 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 740.5/4–1362. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. The source text bears no drafting information, but the memorandum was drafted in Washington on April 16 presumably in the office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs. The source text is attached to a memorandum from Kohler to Rusk, April 16, in which the Assistant Secretary stated that the Secretary would find the account “both interesting and disturbing.” Kohler added that he was “a little upset that there was not more response by Nitze and Dowling to some of the rather farfetched statements of the Chancellor.” Dowling transmitted a 2-paragraph summary of the conversation in telegram 2477 from Bonn, April 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.62A/4–1362)

Document 35: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 13, 1962, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–1362. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cash and initialed by Kohler. The meeting was held in Kohler's office at the Department of State. It is described briefly in Ruckblenden, p. 550.

Document 36: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 14, 1962, 11:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–1462. Secret. Drafted by Cash and initialed by Kohler. The meeting was held in Kohler's office at the Department of State.

Document 37: Letter From Chancellor Adenauer to President Kennedy

Bonn, April 14, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Germany. No classification marking. The source text is labeled “Unofficial Translation.” The letter was delivered to Kohler by Grewe at 11:45 a.m. on April 14, who stated that it had been prepared before the press leak, but it had not been outdated because of the leak. (Memorandum of conversation, April 14; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–1462)

Document 38: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, April 14, 1962, 1:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.62A/4–1462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Kohler and Hillenbrand and approved by Rusk. The source text indicates that Rusk discussed it in substance with the President.

Document 39: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 16, 1962, 2:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–1662. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Rusk. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 2363, April 17. (Ibid., 375/4–1662)

Document 40: Letter From Foreign Minister Schroeder to Secretary of State Rusk

Bonn, April 16, 1962.

Document 41: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, April 25, 1962, 1:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 375/4–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hillenbrand and approved and initialed by Kohler.

Document 42: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, April 28, 1962, 4:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 375/4–2862. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Holloway; cleared by R/PM, SOV, S, S/S, and Hillenbrand; and approved and initialed by Kohler. Also sent to Paris and repeated to Moscow and Berlin.

Document 43: Summary of Discussion

Washington, April 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–2862. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but possibly Secretary Rusk, who was also present, drafted it. The meeting was held at the White House.

Document 44: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 30, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Brandin and approved in the White House on May 7. On April 29, in preparation for this meeting, Bundy sent a memorandum to the President stating that Brentano needed to take away from the conversation the following four points: 1) the United States was determined to defend Berlin, and the President, not the German press, was in charge of this defense; 2) the United States found Schroeder both reliable and able; 3) German critics of the U.S. position were generally ill-informed; and 4) the Kennedy administration was not likely to be swayed by politically inspired leaks, and those responsible for them would lose influence with the United States. (Ibid.)

Document 45: Memorandum of Conversation

Athens, May 3, 1962, 1–3:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–362. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Kohler and approved in S on May 6. The meeting was held at the Ambassador's residence. A summary of this conversation was transmitted in Sectos 24 and 31 from Geneva, May 4. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2104)

Document 46: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 5, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany. Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy.

Document 47: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, May 9, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–962. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution.

Document 48: Editorial Note

Document 49: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, May 12, 1962, 7:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–1262. Secret. The source text indicates that the telegram was drafted by Bundy, but he told Rusk in a telephone call at 3:48 p.m. that the President had “worked hard on it in an effort to communicate sharply with the old gentleman.” (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192) It was cleared by Tyler and Hillenbrand and initialed by Rusk.

Document 50: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, May 14, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–1462. Secret; Niact. Passed to the White House.

Document 51: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, May 14, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–1462. Secret; Priority. Passed to the White House.

Document 52: Editorial Note

Document 53: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, May 16, 1962, 12:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–1662. Secret; Priority. Drafted by the President.

Document 54: Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 17, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

Document 55: Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, May 22, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, Negotiations. Secret.

Document 56: Editorial Note

Document 57: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, May 24, 1962, 7:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/5–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hillenbrand, cleared by Tyler, and approved and initialed by Kohler.

Document 58: Letter From Chancellor Adenauer to President Kennedy

Bonn, May 25, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The source text is labeled “Unofficial Translation.” Attached to a May 29 transmittal note from the German Embassy.

30. Paper Prepared in the Department of State30. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, April 3,
1962.

Fifth Revision

DRAFT PRINCIPLES, PROCEDURES, AND INTERIM STEPS

(Amended to Reflect Geneva Discussions. New Language
Underlined)

The parties have discussed certain issues related
to the reduction of tensions and the strengthening of peace. They
have sought to deal with these issues in a way which would
accomplish two things:

First, it would create a useful framework for
continuing negotiations concerning aspects of these issues on which
differences remain to be resolved. To this end, the parties have
agreed in regard to each of the issues under discussion: (i) on
general principles, which will serve as a basis for continuing
negotiations, and (ii) on procedures to govern these continuing
negotiations. In this connection, a Committee of Foreign Ministers'
Deputies will be established which France and the UK will be invited
to join.

Second, it would permit them to take interim action
concerning urgent aspects of these issues on which the parties are
already of the same view. To this end, the parties have agreed on
certain interim steps to deal with aspects of these issues that pose
immediate dangers. These interim steps do not purport to settle the
questions for all time but they are needed to meet pressing problems
until more comprehensive agreements can be reached in the
above-mentioned negotiations.

There follows, therefore, in regard to each of the
issues under discussion, a statement of (i) general principles to
serve as a basis for future negotiations; (ii) procedures for these
future negotiations; (iii) interim steps to be taken in the
meantime.

1. Berlin

(a) General Principles: They
agree that the Committee of Foreign Ministers' Deputies should, in
its continuing negotiations, take account of the general principles
that, pending the reestablishment of German unity:

(i) West Berlin should be free to choose its own way of life;

(ii) the parties should undertake to respect the
social order that has taken shape therein;

(iii) its viability—including the stability and
prosperity of its economy—should be maintained.

(iv) Unrestricted communication will be assured
between West Berlin and West Germany in a manner which respects the
functions, activities, and prerogatives of the competent authorities
and which permits the competent authorities in West Berlin to
determine who may or may not enter West Berlin. Subject to the
foregoing, an International Access Authority should be established
to perform specified functions in order to ensure this unrestricted
communication.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree to study
proposals relating to West Berlin in an effort to
reach agreements which would give effect to these principles in a
way consistent with the vital interests of all parties in the
aforementioned Committee of Foreign Ministers' Deputies.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime, they declare that access procedures
in effect on January 1, 1962, will remain in
effect. Rules and regulations of the competent authorities,
including sanitary laws and regulations, which the Committee of
Foreign Ministers' Deputies agrees are compatible with the principle
of free access between West Berlin and West Germany, will be
respected. Included among procedures in effect on January 1, 1962,
is the fact that transit will proceed along the same communication
routes presently used, and will be subject to compliance with the
existing procedures, whereby:

(i) transit vehicles and their passengers are not
allowed to deviate from the established transit routes;

(ii) passengers in transit are not allowed to go
beyond the limits of the communications routes used for
transit;

(iii) passengers in transit are prohibited from
giving or receiving any articles; and

(iv) no one may board vehicles in transit to
Berlin.

They also declare that they will seek agreement of
the authorities in West and East Berlin to establish an all-Berlin
technical commission, to be composed of officials appointed by the
Governments of West Berlin and of East Berlin, to deal with such
matters as the handling of traffic, sewage, and public
utilities.

2. Germany

(a)General Principles: They believe that the
Germans have the right to determine their own future, and they wish to
facilitate the exercise of this right in a way that will enhance the
security of all European peoples.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree that the
authorities in West and East Germany should be invited to establish three mixed technical commissions, consisting
of officials designated by these authorities, to increase cultural and
technical contacts, to promote mutually beneficial economic exchanges,
and to consider a draft electoral law or other steps toward German
reunification, respectively.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime they declare
they will insure that in any arrangements into which any of them may
enter with any part of Germany account will be taken of the provisions
in this paper agreed by the parties in advance, except to the extent
that these provisions may be modified by agreement such as may result
from the continuing negotiations within the Committee of Foreign
Ministers' Deputies.

3. Nuclear Diffusion

(a) General Principles: They believe that further
diffusion of nuclear weapons into the control of national governments
not now owning them would make more difficult the problem of maintaining
lasting peace.

(b) Future Negotiations: They agree to seek in the
above-mentioned Committee (or other appropriate forum) to develop
policies regarding non-diffusion of nuclear weapons to which all states
owning nuclear weapons might agree and to which states not now owning
nuclear weapons might also subscribe.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime, as states now owning nuclear weapons, they
declare they will not themselves relinquish control over any nuclear
weapons to any individual state or regime not
now owning such weapons; including any state or
regime exercising functions within the area referred to in 4. (c)
below; they will not transmit to such state or regime information,
equipment, or material necessary for their manufacture; and they
will urge states or regimes not now owning nuclear weapons to
undertake not to try to obtain control of such weapons belonging to
other states or to seek or receive information, equipment, or
material necessary for their manufacture.

4. Non-Aggression

(a) General Principles: They believe that force
should not be used to change existing frontiers and demarcation lines in
Europe or for any other aggressive purpose.

(b) Future Negotiations: With
a view toward strengthening peace and European security, they
agree to seek in the above-mentioned Committee (or a Sub-committee
thereof):

(i) to develop a suitable declaration which the NATO and Warsaw Pact Organizations might make to register their renunciation of the use of force for
the settlement of international questions, and, specifically, the
renunciation of the use of force to change existing boundaries and
demarcation lines in Europe, and,

(ii) to consider measures to reduce the risk of war by accident or
miscalculation.

(c) Interim Steps: In the meantime they declare
they will not themselves use or support the use of force to change the
external and internal borders of Germany including the existing borders of West Berlin,
and they note with approval declarations by German
authorities in the same sense.

5. Procedures

(a) The parties note with approval declarations by
the competent German authorities, assuring their allies that they
will act in conformity with the above provisions regarding access
and other matters relevant to their functions and prerogatives.

(b) Once the proposed Committee of Foreign Ministers' Deputies has been
established: (i) the Foreign Ministers of the countries represented on
it would meet periodically as seems useful to
review its work; (ii) if and as warranted, the
Heads of Government could meet to consummate concrete agreements
reached by the Foreign Ministers and their Deputies in the proposed
Committee.

1 Source: Department of State, Central
Files, 762.00/4–462. Secret. The source text bears no drafting
information, but it was attached to an April 4 memorandum from
Rusk to the President,
which stated that the extensive new language was drawn largely from
the texts of the two Soviet documents presented in Geneva or from
verbal accounts of Soviet views. A preliminary draft of the paper,
which has the same numbered paragraphs but no preamble, is attached
to a March 30 memorandum from Klein to Bundy. (Kennedy
Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda, Klein) A copy of the fourth
revision, also dated April 3, which was drafted that morning at a
meeting at the Department of State attended by Klein, Bohlen, Kohler, Thompson, and Hillenbrand, and is the same as this paper except
for two paragraphs, is ibid.

31. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State31. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, April 6,
1962, 4 p.m.

1891. Eyes only for Rusk from
Clay. While it is much too
soon for positive diagnosis and probably for this message, the change in
Soviet attitude since the final Rusk-Gromyko talk
must be given real significance. At this point, I am inclined to believe
that it marks the full end of the wall crisis and that we have won this
round which started just after the wall was in place.

I believe that the Soviets and East Germans had to erect a wall to stop
refugee flow but that it was hoped also it would panic West Berlin and
lead to Allied disagreements, particularly with FRG. Thus, harassments against Allies were stepped up in
the belief that Allied failure to react would aid in creating panic in
West Berlin.

We met their harassments promptly and while I sometimes thought with less
strength than was desirable, I must admit with sufficient strength to
nullify any real fears they might have developed in West Berlin and to
convince the Soviet representatives that harassments to be effective
would truly involve the risk of war. Meanwhile, West Berlin, temporarily
stunned by the wall, recovered its morale and maintained a thriving
economy. It was evident that harassment alone could not destroy West
Berlin.

I do not pretend to know what the next Soviet move will be other than to
continue talks in a less oppressive atmosphere. However, I doubt if
harassments will remain the order of the day and I would predict a
stable and quiet situation here for several months. If there are no
negotiations or if negotiations take place and fail, we may expect
another Berlin crisis. If it comes again some months from now, I would
expect it to be directed against the West Berlin economy rather than
against the Allies.

I would urge even now that we increase our effort to sharpen our counter
measures, particularly to enable economic sanctions and blockades to be
placed in effect promptly. I think we have won a battle but not the
campaign and that we now have an interlude in which we can get ready for
the next battle.

Once again, I repeat that I think the immediate crisis in Berlin created
by the wall is over and that we have won this round. While it is still
only a battle and not the campaign, you have my sincere congratulations
for bringing it about.2

Lightner

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/4–662. Secret; Priority.

2 In telegram 1892 from
Berlin, April 6, Clay
elaborated further on signs in Berlin that indicated a definite
change in the Soviet position. Citing Soviet cessation of harassing
flights, their agreement on the status of military missions,
overtures to discuss the impasse over visits by the Soviet and U.S.
Commandants, and general friendliness of Soviet representatives,
Clay stated that the
West could agree to cut down the number of convoys using the
Autobahn in an effort to meet these Soviet advances. (Ibid.)

32. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk32. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, April 7,
1962.

SUBJECT

Further Berlin Negotiations

The President reached the following decisions at the meeting on Berlin in
the Cabinet Room on April 7 at 10:30 a.m.2

1. The revised draft of April 33 was approved for discussion with our principal
allies, preparatory to discussions with Ambassador Dobrynin, which it is hoped that you
will be ready to undertake by the beginning of the week of April 16. The
President desires that such negotiations be well launched before the
resumption of atmospheric testing, which is now scheduled for the
beginning of the following week.

2. The President approved the following change in the document: in
paragraph 3 a., replace the words “national governments” by the words
“any national government.”

3. The President desires that every effort be made to minimize the
possibility of damaging leaks during and after the process of Allied
consultation. In this connection, he specifically approves the proposal
that there be no discussion of these papers on a multilateral basis.
Instead, there should be separate bilateral discussions with
representatives of Great Britain, France, and the Federal Republic.4

4. The President thinks it most important that the discussions take
place, in so far as possible, in an atmosphere of reduced tension such
as now exists. He believes that this point should be made with emphasis
at each stage of your discussions with Ambassador Dobrynin.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/4–762. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The source text
bears no drafting information.

2 According to the President's Appointment Book, Bundy, Ball, Kohler,
Bohlen, Hillenbrand, Thompson, Sorensen, the President, and the
Vice President attended the meeting. (Kennedy Library) In a
memorandum to the Vice President, April 6, Colonel Burris stated that the
President called it a negotiating discussion concerned with
political policies, and that no military personnel would be present.
He concluded that the purpose of the meeting was “to discuss the
general policies and courses of action, measures and
counter-measures, which should be taken in Berlin, Geneva, and with
NATO allies henceforth.”
(Johnson Library, Vice President Security File, Memos from Burris)

3 Although the
source text bears the handwritten notation “(attached)”, no draft
was attached to it; see, however, Document
30.

4 The second paper referred to here is the
proposal for an international access authority for Berlin that
Thompson gave to
Gromyko on February 1.
(See vol. XIV, Document 278.) Kohler gave copies of both papers
to representatives of the British, French, and German Embassies
during the afternoon of April 9. Memoranda of his conversations at
this time are in Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–1262.
The meeting with Grewe is also described briefly in Ruckblenden, p.
549.

33. Editorial Note33. Editorial Note

On April 12 General Clay, who
had returned to Washington for consultations, met just before noon with
Secretary of State Rusk, and later
in the afternoon with President Kennedy. No record
of either of these meetings has been found other than notations in
Rusk's Appointment Book
(Johnson Library) and the President's Appointment Book (Kennedy
Library). Following the meeting with the President, the White House
released a statement that said that although there was as yet no
settlement of the Berlin question, General Clay had reported that the morale and economy of the
city no longer required a full-time representative. With this in mind
Clay would return to Berlin
for a few weeks and then visit the city at frequent intervals in the
future. For full text of the statement, see Public
Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pages
325–326.

34. Memorandum of Conversation34. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bonn, April 13,
1962.

I–25394/62

PARTICIPANTS

FRG

Chancellor Adenauer

Dr. Globke

Mr. Osterheld

Mr. Kucherer

US

Mr. Nitze, ASD (ISA)2

Ambassador Dowling

Mr. McQuade, DOD

[Here follow two pages of discussion of defense matters and Soviet
missile strategy.]

Turning to the second subject, he [Adenauer] said that quite frankly it seemed to him that
the Defense Department normally depends upon the State Department and
State upon Defense. He realized that what he was about to say concerned
primarily the State Department but he would say it to me because I was
there and it did have Defense implications. The Chancellor said he was
shocked by the latest messages from State about negotiations with the
Soviets on Berlin. These proposals envisage insuring access to Berlin,
but include recognition of the Soviet zone regime. Furthermore, the
security of access would depend on Sweden, Switzerland and Austria. He
outlined the 5–5–3 “Board of Directors” of an International Access
Authority in which a majority vote would be determinative. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] The
whole idea is impossible. The DDR would
be one of the five Communist States and the FRG one of the five Western States. This constitutes de
facto recognition of the DDR. The latest
proposal includes elements of a solution of the Berlin problem, as such,
and also elements of an arrangement against the diffusion of nuclear
weapons. The Chancellor said he does not know what the UK and France
might think about these issues, but he is absolutely sure that De Gaulle would say no. The FRG got these proposals two days ago with
the request that its position be sent to Washington yesterday. These
views have now been sent and they are negative. Furthermore, the
Chancellor said, he feels that such a procedure for working out
positions on the Berlin issue is poor. There have been many months of
talks in New York, Moscow and Geneva in which we have made a series of
concessions, and now we want to continue talks in Washington. The
Soviets pocket our concessions and take it for granted that they can
talk without making any concessions. Perhaps De Gaulle is right; the negative outcome at every stage
makes the US role as negotiator for the three powers unsatisfactory.

The Chancellor then said that he regrets General Clay's departure. (This remark was in
a friendly vein and did not appear to be a complaint.) Nitze and Dowling responded with recognition of Clay's important role in Berlin, and
Nitze said he hoped to go to
Berlin tomorrow. The Chancellor said that it was a good idea at the time
to send Clay for it helped to
diminish unrest in Berlin arising from erection of the wall. He
understood that Clay was
discontented because he had no real position now and was sometimes
opposed to the views of the US Commander and even, at times, of the
Ambassador himself (general laughter).

The Chancellor commented that the latest US messages containing the 5–5–3
proposition for negotiations with the Soviets contributed to the unrest
arising from Clay's departure.
He reiterated his conviction that this message, if known to the public,
would create terrible unrest. Yesterday, he called in the Chairmen of
the three major parties in the Bundestag, including the Socialists, and informed them about these
messages. The unanimous judgment was against the step envisaged by
Rusk.

The Chancellor said that his remarks to us were meant only for those
concerned in Washington and not for the press. He is going to send
President Kennedy a message today to ask that there
be a pause in the negotiations with the Soviets so that the FRG will have time to re-examine the Berlin
problem and try to think of better ways to find a solution. From our
present knowledge of the Soviet position, it is quite useless to keep
coming back at them time and time again as we are now doing. The Soviets
pocket any concessions which we offer without giving anything in
return.

This morning, he said, a small group of people in his Government had
looked at the development of the Berlin situation and decided that the
prospects for resolution of the Berlin question in 1958 had been
considerably greater than they are now. The German position on the
Berlin question in this period may have contributed to this decline in
the prospects for a Berlin settlement, as it may have been too rigid.
The Chancellor now wants to re-examine the problem to see if it is not
possible to make some sort of offer to the Soviets which would be of
genuine interest to them. However, we must get some concessions from the
Soviets in order to make a deal. The Chancellor asked that nobody on the
US side say that Germany is undertaking such a re-examination until the
Germans see if any change in their position is possible.

Nitze said that he would be back
in Washington Sunday night and that he would see Rusk on Monday and give him a personal
report of this conversation.

The Chancellor said he would be glad to have this done. He requested
Nitze to emphasize that
Germany is anxious to examine all the developments since 1958 to see if
any new proposition that might be meaningful to the Soviets can be
developed. He does not want to give more details about the German views
until he can clarify his own thinking.

Nitze assured the Chancellor that
Washington would do nothing on Berlin without his agreement. The US
wants to work with Germany and with Britain and France. Nitze expressed the belief that the US
has conducted all of the talks with the Soviets about Berlin along the
lines of papers mutually agreed upon among the four powers, without any
concessions which deviate from these agreed papers, subject to certain
reservations contained in them. The US wants a joint position with the
FRG and the UK and, as far as
possible, with France. Therefore, if the Chancellor wants a delay in the
talks at this time, Nitze said he
felt sure that this would be seriously considered.

Dowling observed that the 5–5–3
proposal is, of course, only for consideration of the four Western
Governments. The views of the UK, France and the FRG are necessary before the US would think of presenting
these proposals to the Soviets. The purpose of the messages from
Grewe is to cause exploration
of this possible course of action among the four powers to determine
whether it would be wise to make such a proposal to the Soviets.

The Chancellor pointed out that if Germany should make proposals, France
might be more ready to agree to them than if the US did so. If specific
proposals were to be advanced and France should say no, the US would be
in a difficult position.

The Chancellor then said that we will continue to have trouble in Berlin
but that he was aware some time ago that it is impossible to predict
what difficulties the Soviets might make. He handed Ambassador Dowling a newspaper containing an
article (“Neue Zurcher Zeitung”, Friday, April 13, 1962, page 2, column
1) about the unrest caused by General Clay's departure. He said that we must do nothing to
increase such unrest.

Dowling pointed out that part of
the unrest arose because the story of Clay's departure leaked before Clay himself could explain his
purpose in leaving: that Clay
is leaving at his own request pursuant to a decision that he could do
more to help Berlin by returning to the US at this time. The premature
leak from Washington put his departure in the wrong light. Dowling said he talked with Clay ten days ago in Berlin and
Clay's ideas had changed a
bit; he was leaving with a sense of accomplishment. The Ambassador hoped
that Clay would have a chance
to talk with the Chancellor before finally leaving Berlin.

The Chancellor observed that he knew that Clay had wanted to leave as long ago as last November.
The Chancellor said that he himself knows that Clay's departure cannot be imputed to
the Administration but the public merely observes that he came at the
moment of crisis and is now leaving. This causes unrest. Another
official the other day had complained that the Ambassador himself might
soon be leaving.

The Ambassador laughed and said that he was misquoted by the press. At a
press interview he had said that someday he would have to leave, but not
now; right now he was staying, not leaving. The Chancellor said he
wondered where the Ambassador would be going. To the State Department?
Dowling said the press had
said so, but that George Ball
told him the other day that he had not even heard of the story. The
Chancellor said that if and when the Ambassador was to leave, he should
come and tell the Chancellor about it.

The Chancellor said he was deeply impressed by McNamara. Nitze said McNamara has tremendous energy and insight into how one
gets things done. The Chancellor said he is a very clear thinker.

The Chancellor then referred to the President's troubles with the steel
industry. There were references to the President's press conferences,
Nitze's speech in Hamburg and
visits with various officials of the German Government and the
conversation came to a close on a friendly note.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
740.5/4–1362. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. The source text bears
no drafting information, but the memorandum was drafted in
Washington on April 16 presumably in the office of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs. The source
text is attached to a memorandum from Kohler to Rusk, April 16, in which the
Assistant Secretary stated that the Secretary would find the account
“both interesting and disturbing.” Kohler added that he was “a little upset that there
was not more response by Nitze and Dowling to some of the rather farfetched statements
of the Chancellor.” Dowling
transmitted a 2-paragraph summary of the conversation in telegram
2477 from Bonn, April 13. (Department of State, Central Files,
611.62A/4–1362)

2 Nitze was in Germany to
address the Amerika-Gesellschaft in Hamburg on April 11. For his
account of the meeting, see From Hiroshima to Glasnost, pp.
206–207. Memoranda of Nitze's conversations with Carstens, Schroeder, and von Haase in Bonn
on April 13, and with Brandt in Berlin on April 14, are in the
National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 36, 16A
Germany.

35. Memorandum of Conversation35. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 13, 1962, 3:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

German Ambassador Wilhelm G.
Grewe

Mr. Horst Blomeyer-Bartenstein, First Secretary, German
Embassy

Assistant Secretary Foy D.
Kohler

Mr. Martin J. Hillenbrand,
GER

Mr. Frank E. Cash, Jr.,
GER

Ambassador Grewe began by saying
that he had received a lengthy telegram with preliminary comments on the
principles paper, and he might receive more. The Germans feel the need
of consultation on the paper. They note the concentration on West Berlin
and the recognition of vital interests of the Soviets in West Berlin.
Paragraph 1 (b) restricts the responsibilities to West Berlin but
acknowledges vital Soviet interests therein. The concept of the access
authority changes the legal position and makes it necessary to have a
common view among the US, the UK, and France. The Germans would like to
know how the British and French feel.

Mr. Kohler said that the British
are in accord, and the French don't have instructions on the
International Access Authority paper.2

Ambassador Grewe said the two
documents have a character different from the Geneva paper. They seem to
represent an exchange, and the principles paper is drafted in treaty
language from which it would be difficult to retreat.

Mr. Kohler said it was quite true
that the longer one talked the closer one got to negotiation.

Ambassador Grewe said the Geneva
version of the principles paper was indicative of general tendencies,
but the new version gave the appearance of covering the field of
negotiations. There was no mention of the things that remained
valid.

Mr. Kohler said this was not the
concept. This paper was intended to register disagreement rather than
agreement. What is not in the paper remains as it is.

Ambassador Grewe said that Bonn
realized this was the concept, but the Soviets will not understand the
text in the same way. Bonn would not be happy if the principles paper
were transmitted to the Soviets at the present stage. It offers
far-reaching concessions to the Soviets without receiving anything in
return. The Germans understand that the US is not as optimistic as the
press has been, and they think that in such a situation it would not be
wise to offer such a paper. Negotiations would not come about, but the
positions that were offered would be consumed and could not be offered
again.

Ambassador Grewe said the Germans
feel Western rights are not really secured by the present text. A method
must be found to make clear that continued existence of Western rights
form the basis of the paper.

With regard to the status of Berlin, there is a strong tendency toward
considering West Berlin as an independent entity. No mention is made of
the ties with the Federal Republic.

The German question as such is dealt with in a manner tending to equalize
the two parts of Germany. Much of the language comes too close to the
“two Germanies” theory of the Soviets.

Bonn cannot accept the concept of the mixed commission charged with
strengthening cultural ties. They also think that having the commission
which is to frame the electoral law consider other steps comes close to
the Soviet stand.

Mr. Kohler said that this wording
was precisely that of the Geneva paper, and therefore, he was astonished
at the German stand. Only three non-substantive words have been changed.
This had already been cleared with Foreign Minister Schroeder.

Ambassador Grewe said with
reference to nondiffusion in point 3, the Germans are not happy
concerning the reference to Germany, however ingenious it might be. They
feel the formula will fade, but the special reference to Germany will
remain. As to the substance, the present text goes considerably further
than the German statement of 1954,3 beyond which they are not
prepared to go.

Concerning European security in point 4 it is really not European
security, but general security that is at stake. The mention in 4 b)
could be very misleading indeed and could lead to a concentration on
Europe.

The Germans do not see a link between points 3 and 4 on the one hand and
points 1 and 2 on the other. This they consider very important inasmuch
as there is no reason to talk about 3 and 4 if there is no give on 1 and
2.

Mr. Kohler said the link exists in
our minds, and the points are not divisible. However, point 3 might come
out and get into the disarmament context. We have no intention of
getting into a nonaggression pact without a modus vivendi on Berlin.

Ambassador Grewe said he wished to
turn to the access paper where the crucial point concerned composition
of the Board. The Germans have very strong objections because they feel
that this would not provide for real freedom of access. The neutrals
would be under heavy Soviet pressure. Such an arrangement would not keep
the Berliners calm because it would fail to assure them that the air
routes remained free.

Ambassador Grewe said he noted as
a smaller point that the formula concerning the reestablishment of
German unity had been deleted.

The Germans were asking what really is the purpose of presenting the
papers at this stage where there seemed to be no serious readiness to
negotiate on the Soviet side. They wondered whether under such
circumstances it was really wise to present such a paper moving the
position in such a far-reaching way. We must also consider the fact that
the position would be further weakened in actual discussions.

Mr. Kohler said he had a couple of
preliminary comments. First of all, he said, we regard the occupation
rights as guaranteed by the presence of our troops and our military
posture in general. These rights are clearly nonnegotiable. It is not
necessary to confirm them. This was a deliberate omission. Much has been
omitted on both sides. This paper is not intended to cover many points.
We have included language concerning the “vital interests”, in which we
include the presence of our troops, access, and viability. It is not a
contribution to say that our rights must be put in.

Ambassador Grewe said that it was
not the German idea that there be an explicit reference to occupation
rights. The purpose was to avoid having such a paper used to deny
Western rights. This might be accomplished by accompanying unilateral
statements.

Mr. Kohler said such statements
are inevitable. Furthermore, the “legislative history” is quite
clear.

Mr. Kohler said the US feels the
current lull over Berlin may be connected with our decision on testing.
If, however, the Soviets are restrained in their reaction to our nuclear
tests this may be an indication of a tendency toward a modus vivendi. We
have gone to great pains to say we are just discussing, but we are
actually getting quite close to negotiations.

Ambassador Grewe said the Germans
do not oppose negotiation as such but feel we should be very cautious
with texts.

Mr. Kohler commented that it would
be hard to carry on the discussions orally with Dobrynin without a paper to focus on.
He said the German view would be brought to the attention of the
Secretary and the President, and we would be in touch with the Germans
further. We must try to find some solution to the problem of the
composition of the Board of Directors of the Access Authority. We feel
we would be in pretty good hands with the Swiss, Swedes, and the
Austrians.

Ambassador Grewe asked how Mr.
Kohler saw events
developing.

Mr. Kohler said he was not sure.
He would have to think about what the Germans had said and get in touch
with them.

Ambassador Grewe said the Germans
really would hope that no paper would be given to the Soviet Ambassador
on Monday.

Mr. Kohler said this would be
passed on.

Mr. Kohler said he would like to
add one more point concerning Berlin. We have made it clear that we are
not accepting a free, demilitarized, independent status. We thought the
language was harmonious with the existing status, but this is tricky
language.

Ambassador Grewe wondered why it
was necessary to give away this position at this stage. The Soviets
would surely come with their maximum position and we would have nowhere
to fall back.

Mr. Kohler said the Soviets had
tried this in Geneva, and had been told that no agreement was possible
on the kind of paper they were putting forward. It had been explained to
them that we were trying to go beyond this leaving out the disagreed
positions. We had tried to impress them with the fact that the basic
positions are nonnegotiable. We must see if a modus vivendi is possible
or if we must continue on a collision course.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/4–1362. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cash and initialed by Kohler. The meeting was held in
Kohler's office at the
Department of State. It is described briefly in Ruckblenden, p.
550.

2 During
the morning of April 13 Kohler had met with British Minister Hood. While accepting the two
papers, subject to minor revisions, Hood wondered if there were any “desperate urgency”
about resuming discussions with the Soviet Union. (Memorandum of
conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–1362)
Ambassador Ormsby Gore held a
similar conversation with Rusk
at 12:30 p.m. (Memorandum of conversation, ibid.) Kohler then met with French
Minister Counselor Lebel at 3 p.m., who stated that the French had
had reservations about the approach to the Soviets from the
beginning and that these reservations remained. Lebel handed
Kohler an aide-memoire
incorporating a number of French desiderata on parts of the papers
that the French regarded as “dangerous.” They too wondered if it
were necessary to give Dobrynin the revised principles paper. (Memorandum
of conversation; ibid.; aide-memoire; ibid., Presidential
Correspond-ence: Lot 66 D 204)

3 Presumably
Grewe is referring to
Protocol III (Control of Armaments) to the Brussels Treaty, October
23, 1954, by which the Federal Republic undertook not to manufacture
atomic weapons. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol.
V, Part 2, pp. 1446–1451.

36. Memorandum of Conversation36. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 14, 1962, 11:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Leak of Documents

PARTICIPANTS

German

Ambassador Grewe

US

Mr. Kohler

Mr. Cash

Mr. Kohler began the meeting by
commenting that a pretty full briefing was behind the stories out of
Bonn.2

Ambassador Grewe said yes that was
true. He said he had been in touch with Bonn, and that Professor
Carstens had assured him
firmly that there had been no briefing by any official German source and
that everything possible had been done to prevent a leak. The spokesman
of the Foreign Ministry had stated that the Bonn meeting was merely an
exchange of views. He had expressly denied any connection with further
talks on Berlin. He had said the Federal Government was fully informed,
but further details could not be given. In answer to a question he had
said the project of an international access authority had been under
discussion since the President's interview with Adzhubei. This was all that was said
officially. The text of the documents was known only to the small number
of people who attended the Chancellor's meeting including the three
floor leaders of the three parties. Thus, the Ambassador said, he was
really not in a position to agree that these stories were the result of
a German leak. The first information concerning the exist-ence of a
document was in an AP story in the Washington Post yesterday. Just
because a story has a Bonn dateline, he continued, does not mean that it
comes from a German source. The New York Times, for example, frequently
plants in Bonn stories acquired elsewhere. In addition, there are a
number of foreign missions in Bonn.

Mr. Kohler said in this case it
was pretty obvious that the story had not originated with the New York
Times.

Ambassador Grewe said he could not
say what the three floor leaders had done, but he and Professor
Carstens had done everything
possible to keep the documents secret. There had, of course, been much
speculation around the meeting in Bonn.

Mr. Kohler said it was pretty
obvious that this story came from an authoritative briefing.

Ambassador Grewe said he failed to
see what the Germans could have hoped to gain from a leak. It would not,
after all, improve the Ambassador's position, and that is well-known in
Bonn.

[2 paragraphs (3–1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

Mr. Kohler said this was a serious
problem, and the President and the Secretary had both been shocked.

Ambassador Grewe said he could
understand this

Mr. Kohler said that in Geneva
everything had been given to the Germans, including the draft principles
paper, and nothing had leaked. Thus, he had thought the Ambassador's
telegrams might be the source. He said we would just have to review the
situation and see if there were not a more secure means that could be
used.

Ambassador Grewe commented that
the US method of handling this consultation had been overly dramatic.
For two weeks the Germans had
heard nothing, and then they were given 48 hours in which to
respond.

Mr. Kohler said there had really
been nothing new in the revised documents. Ambassador Grewe demurred.

Mr. Kohler said he did not agree
that there was anything basically new. Furthermore, he did not see how
the Germans could disown the technical commissions, which they had
previously approved.

Ambassador Grewe said this was
unfortunate, and he didn't know how it had happened. In any event this
was not a crucial point.

Mr. Kohler said there was some
inclination in the US Government just to turn the whole problem over to
the Federal Government and let it handle the matter.

Ambassador Grewe repeated he could
not agree that the leak came from a German source.

Mr. Kohler said that the only
communication he knew of that had gone to Bonn on this subject was the
German message. None had gone to the US Embassy. Therefore, the source
had to be German.

[1 paragraph (2–1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

Mr. Kohler said he doubted that
this was the kind of message that would be broadcast by the Embassies
here. (Subsequent checks with the French and British Embassies indicated
that the French did not repeat their message to Bonn, but the British
did. The latter do not, however, regard themselves as primary suspects.)
Mr. Kohler continued by saying
that he thought the Secretary was going to send a personal message to
Foreign Minister Schroeder saying
how shocked we were about this and asking if he had any suggestions as
to how this could be prevented in the future. It is, after all, pretty
fantastic to read such an accurate account in the newspapers.

Ambassador Grewe said the Germans
feel that it would be a better method to be in permanent contact and not
to ask for a response on such short notice.

Mr. Kohler said he would report
this.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/4–1462. Secret. Drafted by Cash and initialed by Kohler. The meeting was held in Kohler's office at the Department
of State.

2 In the evening of April 13,
Kohler had telephoned
Grewe to say that all the
main newspapers carried stories that included the principal points
of the two U.S. papers. Kohler added that the top levels of the U.S.
Government were “distressed” and wondered if “purposeful
consultation is possible.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation;
ibid., 762.00/4–1362) Grewe
discussed the leak, telephone conversation with Kohler, and the Chancellor's
meeting referred to in this memorandum in Ruckblenden, pp. 549 ff.
During this meeting Grewe
also transmitted the Chancellor's letter (Document 37) to the President.

37. Letter From Chancellor Adenauer to President Kennedy37. Letter From Chancellor Adenauer to President Kennedy1

Bonn, April 14,
1962.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: Up to now the repeated attempts to open
negotiations with the Soviet Union on Berlin have failed. The latest
proposals of the Department of State comprise decisive elements
concerning not only Berlin but also the German question, which exceed
all previous offers made to the Soviet Union. I have considerable
objections against some of these proposals and I would urgently request
you, my dear Mr. President, to consider interrupting, for the time
being, the negotiations and using this time to reexamine all problems
concerning Berlin in common with the three powers.2

With kind regards,

Yours very sincerely,

Adenauer3

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
President's Office Files, Germany. No classification marking. The
source text is labeled “Unofficial Translation.” The letter was
delivered to Kohler by
Grewe at 11:45 a.m. on
April 14, who stated that it had been prepared before the press
leak, but it had not been outdated because of the leak. (Memorandum
of conversation, April 14; Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/4–1462)

2 On April 14 Kohler drafted a reply to the Chancellor's letter.
In the 4-page draft he reiterated the U.S. concern about the press
leak, expressed surprise that the Chancellor regarded the latest
paper as “something startingly new,” stated that Rusk did not plan to give Dobrynin a further paper at the
meeting on April 16, and tried to clarify the German misconception
about the nature of the paper. (Department of State, Presidential
Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204) On April 15 Rusk discussed the draft letter with the President,
and they decided that no reply would be sent at that time, but that
Hillenbrand would
telephone Dowling to inform
him that no paper would be given to the Soviet Ambassador. (Note
attached to Kohler's draft
letter; ibid.)

3 Printed from a copy that indicates that
Adenauer signed the
original.

38. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany38. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, April 14, 1962, 1:26 p.m.

2848. Eyes only for the Ambassador. Verbatim text. Please deliver
following personal message from me to Foreign Minister Schroeder at earliest opportunity:

Begin text: The President and I have been shocked at what we can only
consider a serious2 breach of confidence in the disclosure to the
press in Bonn of certain details of the secret working papers which we
have been discussing with your government since our meeting in Lausanne
early in March. In giving the revised versions of these papers to
Ambassador Grewe on April 9, we
impressed on him the need for utmost discretion in our consultations
regarding these matters and he informed us that this had been stressed
in his report to the Foreign Office.

As you are aware, these are subjects of considerable delicacy which can
only be discussed between governments on a basis of mutual confidence
that premature public disclosure and comment will not give a distorted
impression in a way which can only result in weakening our position as
against the Soviets. It is difficult to see how useful consultations can
be conducted without the assurance on each side that confidences will be
respected.

I know you will personally share my concern and will agree that we must
both, in the future, make every effort to insure that subjects of
highest importance which are under current discussion between us are not
permitted to become public in a way which can only be detrimental to our
common interests. We are considering what changes we might make in
present consultative procedures, and I should appreciate any suggestions
you may be able to make in this connection.

We fully recognize that this is not a problem limited to Bonn and that
all of us are subject to the human frailty which expresses itself in
unauthorized leaks. But I am quite sure that it is important for us to
devise procedures which will make it possible for us to continue in
close touch on such an important and dangerous matter as Berlin.

I am looking forward to seeing you in Athens. End verbatim text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.62A/4–1462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by
Kohler and Hillenbrand and approved by
Rusk. The source text
indicates that Rusk discussed
it in substance with the President.

2 At this point in the
source text the word “serious” replaces the word “flagrant,” which
is crossed out.

39. Memorandum of Conversation39. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 16, 1962, 2:34 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Dobrynin expressed a
preference for a conversation with me alone, hence I did not invite
even an interpreter to join us. The background of this particular
conversation was that I had said to Mr. Dobrynin, during his call prior to the presentation
of his credentials,2 that I hoped to have a talk with
him to bring both of us fully up to date on the conversations at
Geneva.

I first told Dobrynin that I was
glad to be able to review with him the present status of our discussions
of the Berlin and German questions and that lively press attention to
our interview might have thrown this first talk somewhat out of
proportion. I told him that we had not, for example, taken for granted
that our two Governments had agreed that there would be a “new round of
talks” in Washington between him and myself. My clear understanding of
the way Mr. Gromyko and I left it
was that we would be in touch with each other about how further
discussions might best go forward. I told him that we had no overriding
preferences about whether these matters should be pursued in Washington
or in Moscow; as he knew, Mr. Khrushchev had indicated to President
Kennedy3 that Mr. Dobrynin had the Chairman's full confidence and was
available for any exchanges we wished to undertake;4 similarly, Ambassador Thompson had our full confidence and
could be in touch with Soviet authorities in Moscow on the same basis.
Mr. Dobrynin indicated that he
had had no instructions from Moscow on this point but that he would
ascertain whether Moscow had any preferences and would be in touch with
me again.

I then proceeded to outline briefly where I thought we were in our talks.
I said that, in the interest of clarification, it might be useful to
think of our exchanges at three different levels.

The first had to do with what the Soviets have called “drawing a line
under World War II”. The Soviets had made proposals in 1958, and again
in June of last year in Vienna, about how the Soviet Government would
like to proceed with a permanent settlement on the German and Berlin
questions. I told him that the West, too, had ideas about how this ought
to be done. I mentioned proposals for reunification on the basis of free
elections and related elements of previous Western positions with which
he was familiar. I said that we had not pressed these proposals during
this past year because we did not see, realistically, any prospect of
agreement and that we did not think that it would improve the situation
for the two sides simply to engage in a propaganda contest over
irreconcilable positions.

The second “level” of exchanges had to do with the factual situation in
Germany. When we on our side have mentioned such matters as
reunification or all-Berlin arrangements, the Soviet side had spoken of
existing facts. Usually, these facts were stated by Soviet
representatives as meaning two Germanies. We, on the other hand, had
insisted that there was another fact—our position in West Berlin and our
free access to that city. I was glad that at Geneva the Soviet side
seemed to recognize that the facts in the situation include both the two
Germanies and West Berlin. One difficulty in our conversations thus far
had arisen from the confusion between these two levels of discussion.
When we talked about elements of a permanent solution, the Soviet side
said, “But look at the facts”. But when we turned to talking about
facts, the Soviet side said, “But these must be changed”.

A third level of discussion would concern itself with how we should
manage the fact of disagreement if it became apparent that we could not
come together either on a permanent solution or an agreement based upon
existing facts. The working paper on general principles which I handed
to Mr. Gromyko in Geneva was our
suggestion as to how we might deal with the existence of underlying
disagreement in such a way as not to move toward a dangerous crisis.

I then turned to the question of access and commented on the fact that we
had not gone into considerable detail with each other on our respective
proposals for an international access authority. Our difficulty with the
working paper on this subject which Mr. Gromyko handed me at Geneva was that it was tied
organically to the withdrawal of Western forces from West Berlin. We did
not wish to leave any wrong impression through a detailed examination of
a paper which seemed to be rooted in an underlying demand which we could
not accept, namely, the removal of Western forces from West Berlin. I
repeated to Mr. Dobrynin what I
had said to Gromyko in Geneva,
namely, that I did not see any fundamental difficulty in working out
access arrangements which were consistent with what they called “the
sovereignty of the GDR” and what we might call the responsibilities
of local authorities. Our international access proposals were aimed at
arrangements which would guarantee free access which would not interfere
with activities in East Germany. We still were of the opinion that this
was not an insoluble problem unless the Soviet side had in mind a type
of East German control over access which could be used to throttle West
Berlin.

I told Mr. Dobrynin that we were
not entirely clear from our talks at Geneva about the connection between
access arrangements and Soviet proposals for the withdrawal of Western
troops. Mr. Khrushchev had seemed
to make this connection quite specific. At Geneva, Mr. Semenov had indicated to Mr. Kohler that this was something “for the
Ministers”. When I questioned Mr. Gromyko on this matter he used a diagram to show that
access was linked to the status of West Berlin and that the question of
status was, in turn, linked to the presence of Western troops.

At this point Mr. Dobrynin said
that “as of now” he would have to say that the “present position” of the
Soviet Government was that agreement on access is linked to the presence
of Western forces in West Berlin. “What the future attitude of my
Government might be, I would not be in a position to say”, he added.

I told him that I thought there might be some point in our exploring
further the question of access provided it was understood by the Soviet
side that we were not thereby changing in any way our attitude on
Western troops. The latter was not a negotiable problem from our point
of view. But it might be worth finding out whether the question of
access could move toward more agreement even though the major issue
remained in the background.

He asked where I thought we stood on some of the other “broader
questions” which had been mentioned both at Geneva and in recent press
accounts. I repeated the point that I had made to Gromyko in Geneva, namely, that if we
could find a way of dealing with the central issues of vital concern to
the West, I felt that a number of these other matters would fall into
place. As he knew from reading the press of the last few days, we were
in the process of consulting our allies. He laughed and said, “That is
very evident”.

It became clear from Dobrynin's
conversation that he had had no instructions to continue further from
where Gromyko and I had left off
in Geneva, or, if so, had been instructed not to pursue the matter in
this particular conversation. We agreed therefore, not just to reiterate
to each other what Gromyko and I
had said to each other at Geneva. In the course of general conversation,
however, the following additional points came up:

Dobrynin said that West Berlin
was an outpost of the West capable of causing real trouble between us.
He was not thinking of it as a strong military base but as a situation
which could cause accidents or incidents of a dangerous sort. Therefore,
it was in the interest of both sides to eliminate this source of
trouble. He said that he was not clear just why we attach so much
importance to our position in West Berlin—whether it was a question of
prestige or just what it was.

I said that President Kennedy had covered this point
in considerable detail with Chairman Khrushchev in Vienna. The President had pointed out the
nature of our commitment to West Berlin and the effect upon our entire
position if we were to permit that position to be eliminated or
diminished. It would be wrong for the Soviet side to build its hopes
upon the results which President Kennedy had
clearly indicated we could not accept. I said that we felt that there
might be some wishful thinking in some quarters of Moscow derived from
the geographic location of Berlin. I had earlier told Mr. Gromyko that they could think about the
political problems of Berlin more accurately if they imagined Berlin to
be located on the demarcation line between the Federal Republic and East
Germany. The geographical isolation of West Berlin was irrelevant
because the Western allies were there and would remain there. I said
that it would not surprise me to know, for example, that some Soviet
military advice might be that this should be an easy problem; but it was
an easy problem, from that point of view, because the United States is
in West Berlin.

Mr. Dobrynin and I exchanged a few
words about President Kennedy's remark to Adzhubei that time might make some of
these problems easier to solve. Dobrynin recalled Gromyko's remark to me at Geneva that time could work
the other way. I said that I recalled that remark and that I had passed
it by because Mr. Gromyko had
referred to Hitler and I was quite sure that he did not intend to equate
us with Hitler. Mr. Dobrynin said
he was quite sure that was not Mr. Gromyko's intention. He asked how I saw time working to
improve this principal point of confrontation between the two
Governments. I said that time might ease their own pressures in East
Germany; that time might make practical relationships in Germany more
feasible and more conducive to a normal atmosphere; that time might make
it possible to make some significant advances in disarmament, about
which we were very serious. He asked me whether Berlin and disarmament
are linked. I said they were not organically linked but obviously
progress in one would help in progress on the other. He commented that
the reverse could also be true.

Again, on the effect of time I pointed out that President
Kennedy had moved early in his Administration
to try to create an atmosphere of calm in the relationships between our
two Governments and, particularly, to restore effective contact between us. Even though we
might not be able to agree on important issues, we had felt that
responsible contact at all times was important. Dobrynin agreed and said that this had
been much appreciated in Moscow and we mentioned the release of flyers,
the cultural agreement5 and the variety of exchanges we have had as evidence of
more effective communications. I told him that we thought that his own
assignment in Washington as Ambassador was a step in improving
communications, which he accepted with obvious pleasure.

I told Mr. Dobrynin that we were
not unaware of the fact that shortly after Geneva the situation in West
Berlin itself had significantly improved. I had said to Mr. Gromyko that we should be listening
with both ears—with one to what is said, and with the other to what is
done in Berlin; I was glad to see that matters had moved to a much more
normal position there since Geneva and that we felt this was a wholesome
contribution. He nodded acquiescence.

I told him that we were prepared to go ahead with conversations as
anticipated by Mr. Gromyko and me
at Geneva and that we were not on our side wishing to procrastinate—and
reminded him of my exchange with Gromyko on that subject in Geneva.

My net impressions of this one hour's talk with Dobrynin were (a) he was not under
instructions to pursue these questions on their substance; (b) he did
not attempt to leave any impression that the Soviets were in any hurry;
(c) he clearly did not attempt to leave any impression that they wished
to move the matter to a crisis or showdown; (d) he was amused but
entirely relaxed about the press flap out of Bonn; (e) he would report
our conversation and be in touch with me again about any suggestions
Moscow had about how the conversations might continue and (f) he thought
my outline of the three levels of discussion was a useful clarification
and had thought so when I first presented it to Gromyko in Geneva.

He seemed equally relaxed about Laos, which he mentioned on his
initiative just before leaving. I told him that it must be obvious to
them that we were making serious efforts to support the idea of a
negotiated coalition government, that we were having some difficulties
with the RLG leadership and that we thought that it might take a little
more time to bring the matter to a satisfactory conclusion.

I told him that I had told the press for background that they should not
expect too much from this meeting this afternoon, that this was our
first contact since Geneva, that one of the matters we would be
discussing was in what way we
might continue the discussions between our two Governments on these
problems.6

Dean Rusk7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/4–1662. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Rusk. A summary of the conversation
was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 2363, April 17. (Ibid.,
375/4–1662)

2 Dobrynin presented his
credentials on March 30.

3 See Document
37.

4 Presumably Rusk and Dobrynin are talking about the exchange of U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers and
Frederic L. Pryor, an American student, for Colonel Rudolf Abel on
February 10.

5 For text of the
U.S.-Soviet cultural agreement, signed on March 8, see 13 UST
1496.

6 On April 23 Dobrynin met with Rusk again and, in reply to the two
points raised by the Secretary, said that the Soviet Union was ready
to continue the discussions at whatever site the President of the
United States desired. He also confirmed that the Soviet Government
could not accept an agreement that furthered the stay of occupation
forces in West Berlin. (Memorandum of conversation; Department of
State, Central Files, 762.00/4–2362) Later that day Kohler telephoned Dobrynin to say that the President
preferred Washington for continuing the talks. (Memorandum of
telephone conversation; ibid.)

7 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

40. Letter From Foreign Minister Schroeder to Secretary of State Rusk40. Letter From Foreign Minister Schroeder to Secretary of State Rusk

Bonn, April 16,
1962.

[Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204.
Secret; Eyes Only. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

41. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany41. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, April 25, 1962, 1:16 p.m.

2936. Eyes only Ambassador. It seems clear from Carstens' “general” points of objection
reported your 25452
that Germans still do not fully understand nature of approach in US
“principles paper”. When you see Schroeder you should accordingly point out that, as
indicated by Secretary at Lausanne and in briefings given Germans at
Geneva, what we are trying to do is deal with existence of underlying
disagreement on elements of permanent solution and even on formulations
of existing facts in such a way as to avoid dangerous crisis. Our paper
attempted to set forth certain
principles which might be agreed by both sides, omitting those points on
which no verbal agreement could be reached, in an effort to create basis
for possible modus vivendi. In addition it would provide forum for
continuing discussion of questions which could not be agreed now but
which involve points of possible future conflict. Inevitably then, paper
would have conspicuous omissions. To insist on inclusion of every
Western point would merely result in Soviet insistence on inclusion
every Soviet point unacceptable to West, and effort to put Berlin
problem on back-burner by tactic indicated would inevitably collapse, as
it may in any event in face of possible Soviet intransigence.

As to Western unilateral declarations, we assume that unilateral public
explanations regarding omissions would be inevitable in case modus
vivendi on this basis ever reached which does not seem early likelihood.
However, we had not anticipated that these would have to be formally
drawn up in advance, or in any case at such an early stage as
present.

On specific point of mixed commissions, other than change of a few
non-substantive words, language in 2 (b) is identical with that
contained in paper given Gromyko
at Geneva to which Germans did not object. New language in paragraph at
end of Section 1 intended take care of Berlin Senat point re movement of
persons in Berlin.

Other specific points made by Carstens are practically all covered by changes included
in text of revised paper transmitted Deptel 2930,3
and would seem to leave no substantial points of difference between
us.

We had understood from your 25424 that Schroeder would be available Thursday instead of Friday.
However, since Secretary would not expect to see Dobrynin until Friday afternoon, in
view of time difference you could perhaps still give us quick prior
rundown on results your Friday discussion with Schroeder by KY–9
telephone.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 375/4–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hillenbrand and approved and
initialed by Kohler.

2 In telegram 2545, April
24, Dowling reported that in
a meeting that day Carstens
raised general objections to the lack of reference in the U.S. paper
to reunification, Western forces in Berlin, and FRG-Berlin ties, and specific
objections to the composition of the access authority, respect for
local authority, mixed commissions, the pledge on use of force, and
the mention of Germany in the nuclear diffusion ban. (Ibid.)

3 Dated April 24. (Ibid., 762.00/4–2462) This draft,
which attempted to take into account specific objections by the West
Germans, had substantive changes only in sections I and V.

4 Dated April
24. (Ibid.)

5 In his conversation with
Dowling on April 27,
Schroeder reiterated his
regret over the press leak, stated that he was aware of the
difficulties it caused the United States, and said he would like to
start by approving the revised principles paper (see footnote 2 above), subject to the
Chancellor's approval. He then repeated the objections made by
Carstens (see footnote 1 above), but accepted Dowling's comment that these
questions could be dealt with by unilateral declarations at the
appropriate time. He next made a few specific comments on the paper.
Dowling concluded that
Schroeder needed to
overcome Brentano's objections
and convince the Chancellor of the merits of the U.S. paper.
(Telegram 2578 from Bonn, April 27; Department of State, Central
Files, 375/4–2762; and memorandum from Klein to Bundy, April 27, summarizing Dowling's telephone conversation;
Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany)

42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany42. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, April 28, 1962, 4:55 p.m.

2964. Paris for Ambassador and Finletter. Eyes only Ambassadors and Hulick. Secretary met with Dobrynin for ninety minutes
Friday.2 Briefing procedures set
forth Deptel 29223 should be followed by
Ambassadors Dowling and Finletter in using following
summary:

Meeting's purpose was to give Dobrynin opportunity make known any further Moscow
information prior to Secretary's departure for various alliance
meetings. Dobrynin said Khrushchev interview with Cowles and Gromyko speech to Supreme Soviet4 had given
Sov position but he willing attempt clarification. Secretary picked up
Gromyko reference to alleged
American statement on lack of obstacle to “combining free access West
Berlin with demand respect GDR
sovereignty”. Secretary had commented on this at Thursday's press
conference.5 Dobrynin said word “demand” means
proposal, which Secretary accepted as adequate explanation for
present.

Secretary then reviewed US vital interests in West Berlin as immediate
questions and matters such as disarmament, non-aggression pacts,
diffusion nuclear weapons, etc., as broader questions. Repeated US
belief that if West Berlin vital interests agreed on, then others might
fall more easily into place. However, if Gromyko demand for end of Occupation is essential
element Sov position, then obstacles to agreement indeed formidable.
Secretary referred to Geneva principles paper and International Access
Authority proposal as possible sources progress, if these could be
discussed on basis essential needs both sides. Principles paper
deliberately omitted certain points of interest both sides but does
provide means for continuing discussion on disagreed matters. In
general, broader questions seemed susceptible movement and improvement,
which thus brought us back to essential elements. For Berlin, this was
our presence there. Secretary added that for disarmament, this was
verification question.

Dobrynin said he had nothing new
on German question. His instructions were clear that Sov position on end
of Occupation and Western troop presence remained as stated by Gromyko.

Secretary then examined Berlin problem against background developments in
European integration, pointing out that possibility intra-European wars
now gone after 500 years of intrigue, conflicts, etc. This was important
for USSR security, particularly when taken with close link US to Western
Europe. We believe presence US troops Berlin is actually a stabilizing
factor as long as Germany is divided. We do not agree with Gromyko that absence peace treaty in
Central Europe creates dangers. Unless Sovs intend push us out of West
Berlin, lack of permanent German settlement not dangerous. Obviously, if
Sovs do want to push us out, then situation indeed dangerous.

Dobrynin agreed that possibility
European wars now remote. He disagreed that situation in Europe was not
most important problem. Speaking “with deep conviction as Russian” he
said Sovs could not accept Western troops in Berlin. Possibility that
either German side could involve Sov and US troops in clashes was a
danger. This was really only US–USSR point of confrontation.

Secretary said direct contact of troops of responsible powers not
necessarily dangerous. No Man's Land such as Korea had proved more
dangerous.

Discussion then turned to reunification prospects and recognition GDR with no change in either side's
position. Secretary stressed we do not think division of Germany is good
for anyone. It is the Sovs who wished make division permanent.
Therefore, although practical situation obviously must continue as it is
for time being, we believe it important not to foreclose question of
reunification.

Secretary concluded that we had gone far to indicate agreement possible
on some points, but Sovs must first come to grips with problems of
access and presence. He suggested that conversation turn to these when
he comes back.6 Suggested also possible consider Geneva
principles paper, which unlike Sov paper, did not touch on controversial
points. For example, our paper omitted any confirmation of
Occupation.

Dobrynin agreed resume talks upon
Secretary's return, but pointed out he foresaw no change in Sov
positions in next ten days. Secretary said he foresaw no change in ours
either.

Conversation was cordial.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 375/4–2862. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Holloway; cleared by R/PM, SOV, S,
S/S,
and Hillenbrand; and approved
and initialed by Kohler. Also
sent to Paris and repeated to Moscow and Berlin.

2 A 7-page memorandum of this
conversation is ibid., 762.00/4–2762.

3 Telegram 2922, April 24, instructed Finletter to brief the NATO Permanent Representatives on a
restricted basis after Dowling had completed his briefing of German
officials. (Ibid., 375/4–2462)

4 For texts of Gardner
Cowles' April 20 interview with Khrushchev and Gromyko's April 24 speech to the
Supreme Soviet, see Pravda, April 27 and 25, 1962.

5 For a transcript of Rusk's press conference, April 26,
see Department of State Bulletin, May 14,
1962, pp. 795–802.

6 Rusk left Washington on April
29 to attend Alliance meetings in London, Athens, and Canberra. He
returned on May 11.

43. Summary of Discussion43. Summary of Discussion1

Washington, April 28,
1962.

SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION BETWEEN THE PRESIDENT AND PRIME
MINISTER MACMILLAN2

The President remarked that the Prime Minister and he had discussed
privately the course of the conversations on Berlin with the
Russians.3 The fact, which they had no
particular explanation for, that the Russians had relaxed pressure, made
it appropriate to move ahead; after his return from Athens the Secretary
would see Dobrynin again. The
President noted that he and the Prime Minister were in agreement on
these talks.

SUBJECT

Berlin and Germany

The Secretary, pointing out that we were in Berlin and were going to stay
there, stressed that both we and the British should point out to Bonn
and Paris that we had made no concession to the Russians. The course of
future discussions is another question. We had no apologies for the
stand we have taken, and the nervousness displayed by some of our allies
is out of place. In answer to the Prime Minister's question, the
Secretary said that in yesterday's talk with Dobrynin he had pointed out that we had gone some way to
meet the Soviets on points of interest to them. However, there were no
signs that they were prepared to give us any satisfaction; we were nose
to nose on the key issues. Dobrynin's attitude, which showed no obligation or
interest in accelerating things, was puzzling. There were some signs of
interest in a modus vivendi paper.

The Prime Minister commented that he had remarked to the President that
it was difficult to negotiate when we were under pressure, as we were
then accused of appeasement; we should press forward when we are not
under the disadvantage of pressure. As an agreement would involve too
much loss of face for the Soviets, we might end up with some sort of
modus vivendi, an agreement to disagree. The results, the Secretary
remarked, would depend on whether the Soviets have decided they cannot
make progress on their proposals. Our concern is their commitment to a peace treaty; if our
rights are not respected when such a treaty is signed, there will be a
dangerous situation. The Secretary suggested that the danger, which
would arise when pressure was resumed, could be lessened by remaining in
contact. In the meantime we should try to alleviate the nervousness of
our allies.

In response to the President's question, the Prime Minister said he had
no plans to see Adenauer.
Depending on his talks with Schroeder, the Secretary indicated he might see
Adenauer on his way home from
Athens. The President, indicating his concern that the Germans might at
some future time wish to put the blame on us, said that it was most
important that Adenauer show his
approval. The French had disassociated themselves from what we were
doing; it was important not to let the Germans do the same thing. The
Secretary said he thought Adenauer
was not receiving accurate reports, adding that we had one point of
disagreement with the Germans. Even without reunification in the near
future, we thought it was in our interest for the West Germans to
multiply contacts with East Germany, but the Chancellor seemed nervous
over doing so. Ulbricht's
personality was, apparently, a real stumbling block.

The Prime Minister mentioned his concern over the myth growing up and
about what the younger generation of Germans would think about our
policy. The President commented that such a myth, that we had let the
Germans down, had already grown up in connection with the Berlin wall.
In response to the President's question, the Prime Minister said that he
was already planning to see De
Gaulle in June, and he would go to see Adenauer if it would help, even though
it was becoming somewhat more difficult to talk to him. The Prime
Minister thought it important to get the younger Germans with us, as
Schroeder, a good man, was.
The Secretary remarked that we hoped to make some prog-ress with
Von Brentano, who would be
here shortly.

The Prime Minister, expressing great concern, said now was the time to
get an agreement, or a modus vivendi as the Soviets would not make a
formal agreement. Such a result might not be too far from what we had
considered and almost agreed on just before the new American
administration assumed office. These talks, he recalled, broke down on
the point of what would happen after five years. The Secretary said we
were trying to return to something similar, but using Deputy Foreign
Ministers. The Secretary, in answer to the Prime Minister's question,
said we had given a paper to Gromyko in Geneva, but nothing since. After the meeting
of the four Foreign Ministers, we might amplify the Geneva paper. We had
to be precise enough to cover ourselves after the Soviets signed their
peace treaty. The Prime Minister thought a summit meeting might produce
a modus vivendi.

At another point in the day's discussions the Prime Minister raised
Berlin again. He favored the idea of working toward something which could be put to the heads of
government. He was willing to do everything he could with Adenauer and De Gaulle. He expressed concern about the possibility of
a crisis in East Germany, of a Hungarian-type uprising, which would be
very embarrassing. The Prime Minister was sure that we should take
advantage of the period of calm; the storms were just below the horizon.
If a storm were to come, many of those now criticizing us would not be
of much help. We could not wait because of De Gaulle.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4–2862. Secret.
The source text bears no drafting information, but possibly
Secretary Rusk, who was also
present, drafted it. The meeting was held at the White House.

2 Macmillan visited Washington
April 27–29 for talks on questions of mutual concern.

3 No record of the private
conversation has been found.

44. Memorandum of Conversation44. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 30, 1962, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Dr. Von Brentano's Meeting
with The President

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Heinrich von Brentano,
Majority Leader in the German Bundestag (CDU)

Professor Wilhelm G. Grewe,
German Ambassador

Mr. Weber, German Interpreter

The President

Foy D. Kohler, Assistant
Secretary for European Affairs

Robert M. Brandin, Office of
German Affairs, EUR

The President expressed his sympathy to Dr. Von Brentano regarding his automobile accident and said
he was glad to see him in the United States.

Dr. Von Brentano said he was happy
to be able to make the trip despite the accident and grateful for the
opportunity to talk to the President. He said he wanted to point out at
the beginning in order to avoid misunderstanding that he was not in the
United States in an official capacity, but rather as a member of the
German Parliament and Head of the CDU
Parliamentary Group. He stressed, however, that there were no
differences between himself and the Federal Government, the Chancellor
or Foreign Minister
Schroeder. He acknowledged
that in the last days before Easter certain misunderstandings had been
reported in the German press. He had left for France and did not hear
about them until later. In connection with the US-Soviet talks, there
had been a meeting in Bonn, but he assured the President that no one who
participated in that meeting wanted indiscretions. He said anyone who
knew him would know that he would not commit such an indiscretion. He
said he realized that one could not have a common policy with a major
ally if there were such indiscretions. He could not be sure, however,
that someone else was not responsible.

The President said he knew Dr. Von
Brentano was not responsible for the indiscretions
because we had worked with him in the past. The President then went on
to say that the problems we have with the Soviets are extremely
difficult. They are unsolvable in a real sense and may be unsolvable
even as far as lesser matters are concerned. We could not even begin to
deal with them, however, if our proposals came out in the press and
become part of a political controversy.

The President referred to the difficulty of getting together proposals
and noted that it was easy to criticize from the outside. He cited the
criticism that had been made since the erection of the wall in
Berlin—i.e., that it should have been taken down brick by brick—but said
we had adopted the course we considered most responsible. The President
said there might be some things in the documents we had prepared which
should be changed. No one wanted to dictate to the Germans, who were
most involved geographically and personally, what they should do. This
is why we had submitted documents for their comments.

The President remarked that if the present situation were satisfactory,
we would not need a modus vivendi. It was not satisfactory, however, and
that is why we wanted to try to change it. He referred to Khrushchev's rude remark about being
able to squeeze the West in Berlin any time he wanted to. Perhaps we
could not change this situation, but we should try to do so.

The President said he had the feeling the press in Bonn was carrying on a
war against the United States, accusing the United States of being weak
and lacking determination. He pointed out that since his Vienna meeting
with Khrushchev, he had increased
the United States defense budget by $3–1/2 billion, had called up two
divisions of reservists with all the difficulties involved, would soon
have seven more combat divisions in readiness than were available when
he took office and had sent General Clay to Berlin. In addition, we were taking the risk of
war, were getting ready for a possible blockade, and had passed national
emergency legislation. We were also taking on the burden of trying to
reach a solution with the USSR on these problems. At the same time, the
United States was under constant attack while the French were held up as a good example. Yet
the French had only two divisions in Germany and the two divisions
recently recalled to France from Algeria were not even fully armed. The
President said that if someone else wanted to carry on negotiations with
the USSR, it was all right with him. For the past seven months, the
United States had had only headaches.

Dr. Von Brentano said that neither
he nor his friends had ever reproached the United States for weakness or
lack of determination. In fact he could cite additional illustrations to
the contrary. He said the United States and Germany have common policy
objectives, but there were some misunderstandings. Perhaps the fact that
the Federal Government had been asked to comment on the United States
proposals had stirred up unrest in Bonn because it was felt that there
were far-reaching implications involved. Dr. Von Brentano said the Germans had welcomed talks with
the USSR, being fully aware of their importance and the importance of
mitigating present tensions. He added that all Germans were aware of the
great responsibility for the United States and the Free World which
rested on the President's shoulders.

The President expressed his appreciation and said that in any
negotiations it was easy to sit outside and say what should or should
not be done—e.g., in labor-management negotiations. He went on to say
that there were basic disagreements with the USSR on Western presence in
Berlin, on the Soviet free city proposal, and on the Soviet desire for
presence in West Berlin. He emphasized that the United States would not
recognize East Germany de facto or de jure. It was necessary, however,
to see if there was any possibility of reaching an accord which would
prevent increased tensions every few months and would end the situation
whereby West Berlin could be saved only by the threat of war. He pointed
out there might be greater trouble after the USSR had signed a peace
treaty with the East Germans.

The President said he realized that the United States objection to the
diffusion of nuclear weapons created difficulties for Germany, but
indicated that we had a problem with the French on this matter and that
our policy was a general one not directed against Germany. As far as the
non-aggression pact between NATO and
the Warsaw pact was concerned, the President thought it should be
possible to word it differently to meet German objections. He suggested
that Dr. Von Brentano discuss the
question of technical commissions with Mr. Kohler.2 The President made the general point, however, that the
United States wanted to move in association with the Federal Government.
If parts of the United States proposals were not acceptable, the United States wanted to hear the
German comments. The President hoped Germans realized, however, that we
could not get everything we wanted. Otherwise, there would be no
possibility of trying to reach an agreement.

Dr. Von Brentano agreed with the
President on non-diffusion of nuclear weapons, saying it was not a
problem and not necessary to discuss since he understood the United
States legal situation. The important thing was whether or not we had a
functioning Atlantic Alliance ready to react to any threat. Dr.
Von Brentano said it was not
necessary to talk about non-aggression pacts either because he was also
sure some acceptable formulation or language could be found. He noted,
however, that guarantees from the other side were of problematic value
and cited Khrushchev's definition
of wars of liberation. Dr. Von
Brentano said it was necessary to discuss some things,
privately not publicly, because of our responsibilities to the German
and American people.

Turning to the question of recognizing the GDR, Dr. Von Brentano
indicated this was not a prestige factor, but a political question of
overriding importance. The participation of the GDR on equal terms with the great powers in an
international access authority would tend to place it on the same
footing with such powers. The establishment of joint commissions was
also potentially dangerous because it could set in motion a train of
events leading to the establishment of an all-German commission. He did
not think this would happen under the present government, but he was
afraid that a first step in this direction could lead to a second step
which would be disastrous—i.e., taking Germany out of the Western
Alliance. Dr. Von Brentano
stressed the necessity of avoiding any developments which would open up
such vistas. This concern was the basis of his reserve and warning.

Dr. Von Brentano pointed out that
the Federal Government had agreed in 1959 to the establishment of joint
technical commissions as part of the over-all Herter Plan.3 If those commissions were established apart from
such an over-all plan, however, it could lead to all-German
conversations. He was not worried about the threat of the GDR, but about the possibility of weakening
the Western Alliance. If Germany left the Western Alliance or if such a
possibility were implied in any proposals, the consequences would be
very serious.

The President asked Dr. Von
Brentano what it was in the United States proposals that
worried him. We were talking about West Berlin and East Berlin and
others participating in an international access authority on a basis
giving the West and the others a clear majority over the Communists. He pointed out that
West Berlin and East Berlin and the other members each had a different
status. Recognition of the GDR was not
involved. The President noted that the United States had been dealing
with Communist China at Geneva without recognizing it. He said he would
have the same problem if he tried to change United States policy toward
Communist China and, therefore, he understood German sensitivity in this
matter, but he emphasized that dealing with the GDR did not mean
recognition, as demonstrated by the fact that the Federal Republic dealt
with the East Germans on 90 per cent of Berlin access at the present
time.

Mr. Kohler said it was a question
of technical functions not political institutions.

Dr. Von Brentano replied that the
proposed commissions were really political institutions. He said he was
fully aware that German reunification could not be brought about now by
the United States or Germany, but he thought the common goal of
reunification should not be given up. If there were all-German talks or
an all-German commission, the impression would be created that the
Western Alliance was not interested in the peaceful reunification of
Germany and had shifted the problem to the Germans. In those
circumstances, people in Germany would say it was up to the Germans to
settle this problem. This development could be dangerous.

The President suggested that Dr. Von
Brentano discuss with Mr. Kohler the language establishing technical commissions
to see if a way could be found of meeting the problem without lessening
the commitment to reunification. He emphasized again, however, that it
would not be possible to reach an agreement with the USSR that would
fully satisfy everyone. He thought it would be useful to distinguish
between what was unsatisfactory and what was verboten. Unless some
agreement could be reached on possible proposals, we would have to stop
the conversations with the USSR.

The President said we envisaged a technical access authority which would
actually govern traffic to Berlin. This traffic was being controlled
now. The question was how we could set up a system assuring continued
traffic for the next few years at least. With this objective in mind, we
had put forth proposals to see if it was possible to create a basis for
seeking such a solution. The President expressed the view that the
present situation with respect to Berlin access was unsatisfactory since
it gave the USSR great opportunities for interference. For example, the
Soviets could insist on certain visas. As a result, no Germans would
travel. He wondered where this would lead to.

The President said the French did not want to be associated with our
efforts because they wanted to avoid criticism in the future that
Germany had been sold out by
the West. In the President's opinion, this was taking the easy way
out.

Dr. Von Brentano said he knew that
if the situation was serious, it was necessary to try to find an
accommodation. He was aware that concessions on both sides would be
necessary, but as the President himself had said, one could not
negotiate on the basis of “what's mine is mine and what's yours is
negotiable”.

The President said that it was necessary to see if some middle ground
could be found. For this reason, we had given our proposals to the
Federal Government for comment. The President said he did not mind
accepting responsibility and abuse since he thought it was in
ev-eryone's interest to try to reach an understanding. He thought the
present relative calm should be used to pursue conversations with the
USSR. It was better to talk now than under pressure. He added he had
observed that when those most opposed to conversations were asked to
face up to the possibility of war or to the necessity of economic, naval
or air blockade, they always wanted to do something else. Therefore,
these problems should be discussed now.

Dr. Von Brentano said he had been
involved in many negotiations and he knew the difficulty of getting
answers to difficult questions. He emphasized he was not entitled to
reproach the United States nor interested in doing so. He wanted to
express some apprehensions because he thought a frank exchange of views
and expression of feelings were essential. He added that after reading
the press in recent days, he frankly did not know where we stood. He
emphasized, however, that it was silly to say anyone in Germany wanted
worsened relations with the United States because all Germans knew how
dependent they were on United States friendship and support.

The President said there seemed to be stories in the press every day
criticizing the United States. He referred to the Gruson article in the
New York Times of April 28 carrying the headline “Brentano Uneasy Over
Bonn-US Tie”. He said it was easy to cast blame from the outside. He
noted that the Federal Government had not yet established the 18-months
conscription period, nor had it passed emergency legislation. Despite
this, there was antagonism against the United States. The President
pointed out the United States probably would have a deficit of $4
billion this year and that if it had not been for the Berlin problem, he
could have had a balanced budget and could have reduced taxes.

The President repeated that if the United States and the Federal Republic
could not reach an understanding, it would not be possible to go on with
the talks with the USSR. He said he wanted a private exchange of views
about mutual interests and in the spirit of mutual confidence. He
indicated he was aware that United States relations with the Federal
Republic in the last fifteen years were the best we had had with any country, with the exception of
the United Kingdom where we had a special relationship. He added that he
was also aware of German assistance to the United States balance of
payments. He expressed the view that the poison in the newspapers was
bad for both sides as Ambassador Grewe well knew.

The President noted that by not sharing nuclear information with France,
we were avoiding creating difficulties for Germany. We were also
supporting the Common Market which created difficulties for the United
States, but helped Germany. The President thought that perhaps there was
a breakdown in communications between the United States and Germany and
that both sides should work harder and more quietly. He said the United
States was totally stunned by the heat of the reaction in Bonn to the
United States proposals for discussion with the USSR. When he had
approved these proposals, the President added, he had assumed they were
in accord with the understanding reached by our two governments.

Dr. Von Brentano agreed that things
had not taken the best course in Bonn. Turning to the Gruson interview,
he said he had known the correspondent for years and that he had had a
long talk with him at which no notes were taken. He did not evade
questions which were in the air because that would have been foolish. On
the other hand, he could not accept responsibility for what the New York
Times or the German press wrote afterwards. It was silly to say that he
was in the United States to propose alternatives. He was not here on
behalf of the Federal Government and he could not accept an official
task in his present position.

The President again suggested that Dr. Von
Brentano go over the United States proposals with Mr.
Kohler and give his opinions.
The President said he knew we shared the same objectives, but that he
would welcome Dr. Von Brentano's
thoughts, particularly as to what would cause difficulties in the long
range and what might be unpleasant but could be lived with.

In conclusion, the President suggested it would be best in handling the
press after this interview to say that there had been a general
discussion and exchange of views which had been good and useful. He
advised against suggesting that there had been any discussion of details
and thought nothing should be said about any protest. Dr. Von Brentano fully agreed.

As they were leaving the room, the President asked Dr. Von Brentano what he thought would
happen to the price of Volkswagens. Dr. Von
Brentano expressed the hope they would go the way United
States steel prices had.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Germany. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Brandin and approved in the White
House on May 7. On April 29, in preparation for this meeting,
Bundy sent a memorandum
to the President stating that Brentano needed to take away from the conversation
the following four points: 1) the United States was determined to
defend Berlin, and the President, not the German press, was in
charge of this defense; 2) the United States found Schroeder both reliable and able; 3)
German critics of the U.S. position were generally ill-informed; and
4) the Kennedy administration was not likely to
be swayed by politically inspired leaks, and those responsible for
them would lose influence with the United States. (Ibid.)

2 A memorandum of
Kohler's conversation
with Brentano, which took
place at Kohler's office at
noon and covered the international access authority, press leaks,
the general principles paper, the technical commissions, U.S.-German
relations, future consultations, and the visit of Fritz Erler, is
ibid.

3 For text of the Western Peace Plan (“Herter Plan”),
May 14, 1959, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 624–629, or
American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1959, pp.
655–663.

45. Memorandum of Conversation45. Memorandum of Conversation1

Athens, May 3,
1962, 1–3:35 p.m.

US/MC/30

UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE TWENTY-NINTH
MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL Athens,
Greece, May 4–6, 1962

PARTICIPANTS

United States

Secretary Rusk

Mr. Kohler

Germany

Foreign Minister Schroeder

Mr. Carstens

SUBJECT

Berlin and Germany

The pre-lunch conversation opened with a thorough discussion of the leaks
of the US proposals to the Soviets in Bonn. Views were exchanged along
well-known lines and it was agreed that while there were possible
theories as to the source and motivation of the leaks, nothing could be
definitely established and the question should be regarded as closed.
Foreign Minister Schroeder pointed
out the political difficulties of his situation in which he was under
attack within his own party as “soft.” Mr. Schroeder then went on to the question of communications
and consultation between the two Governments and put in a plea that this
should resume through the channel of Ambassador Grewe in Washington. He pointed out
that since Grewe was so
thoroughly familiar with all the details, the reports which he submitted
were fuller and more useful to him than those received from Ambassador
Dowling, who had no means of
supplementing his instructions in reply to questions as happened when
Ambassador Grewe saw, for
example, Mr. Kohler in the State
Department. [4–1/2 lines of source text not
declassified]

The conversation then continued at the luncheon table. Mr. Schroeder talked at some length about
the desirability of an early visit to Bonn by the Secretary. In reply
the Secretary indicated that he had considered this. Unfortunately it
would not be possible in connection with the present visit since he was
committed to proceed on to Australia. There seemed some possibility that
if the NATO meeting should end on
Saturday he might be able to go briefly to Bonn on Sunday, however this
appeared to be rather remote. Otherwise he was under some fire from Congress with respect to his
travels. It was for this reason that he had made arrangements to bring
together the CENTO, NATO and ANZUS
meetings within a period of ten days. This might also mean that it would
be preferable for him to visit Bonn after the adjournment of the
Congress, that is, in July, though he did not rule out that arrangements
could be made before that date.

The Secretary then reviewed in broad terms his discussions with Gromyko and Dobrynin. He said he thought that there was some
misunderstanding with respect to the broad questions included in the US
Draft Principles paper. He pointed out that there had been no real
discussion of these broader questions with the Russians. The Secretary
had rather emphasized the question of vital interests and indicated that
if agreement could be reached on these, then these broader questions
could easily fall into place. The idea of setting up a continuing forum
of Deputy Foreign Ministers was really calculated to give the Soviets a
way out—a cover under which they could if they wished drop their
proposals or at least allow them to fade away. It was questionable
whether the French would agree to participate. The Secretary commented
that the French had suggested a tripartite meeting prior to the
quadripartite dinner tonight but had been informed that this would not
be possible to arrange. The Secretary thought it might serve a useful
purpose, from Mr. Schroeder's
point of view, to have this bilateral lunch followed without an interim
meeting by the quadripartite dinner. Messrs. Schroeder and Carstens indicated agreement that this would be useful
in terms of German fears of French ambitions for a tripartite
directorate. Carstens added that
the French had said that if the Germans asked them to go ahead at some
point and participate in a more formal negotiation with the Russians
they would agree to do so. The Secretary commented that the French game
at the moment seemed to be to avoid any commitment to any kind of Berlin
arrangement which some Germans, some day, might criticize. He thought
the French looked even beyond the present German government. Messrs.
Schroeder and Carstens agreed with the Secretary's
analysis. The Secretary then continued to say that it was absolutely
fundamental to the US position that there would be no Berlin or German
arrangement without the Federal Government's concurrence. It was
conceivable that the European countries could reach some kind of
settlement without the United States but it was not conceivable that the
United States could reach a settlement without the Europeans.

The discussion then turned to the question of the Technical Commissions
which the Secretary said we must discuss and work out together. He did
not understand why the Federal Government had such a lack of
self-confidence about dealing with East Germans. Carstens replied that if the Federal
Government dealt with the East German regime it would strengthen the
GDR and make life even more
difficult for the East German
population. Schroeder then
commented at some length on the nature of the Ulbricht regime. He expressed the opinion that a change
there to a more liberal regime would be a very important development in
the situation. If there were a more “middle-way” regime tensions would
relax greatly in Central Europe. Mr. Kohler raised the question, making it clear that he was
not challenging that such a change would be a desirable development,
whether, however, it would not in fact result in a strengthening of the
East German regime, as feared by Carstens, by giving it a greater acceptability to the
East Germans. Mr. Schroeder and
Mr. Carstens agreed that this was
an important question. However, on balance the Federal Republic had to
consider that the situation would be greatly eased if there were a
regime in East Germany which made some kind of “comparative” approach to
self-determination so that the population would be content to live there
and not persist in attempts to escape. The Foreign Minister then turned
to his political problems as a result of the leaks. He pointed out that
most of his own party, the CDU, as well
as the Free Democrats and the SPD, entirely supported his position. Only
elements of the CDU were accusing him of
having agreed to “concessions.” In reply to the Secretary's observation
that over the past year we had in fact reached no agreement of any kind
with the Russians and made no concessions, Mr. Schroeder said that the opponents
referred to such things as willingness to engage in commitments of
nonaggression as “concessions.” Returning to the previous theme, he
added that if there were a less oppressive regime in East Germany and a
resulting tendency toward easier conditions, he then believed it would
be very useful to move toward closer relations between West and East
Germany and even toward some rapprochement with Eastern European
countries, notably Poland. After citing his conversation with Polish
Foreign Minister Rapacki in Geneva,2 the Secretary went on to say
that he thought it would be useful to bring West and East Germans
together more. Schroeder observed
that the Technical Commissions would not really be the way to do this
since there would only be a handful of disciplined Communists on these
Commissions from the other side. In this connection he cited German
experience under Nazi totalitarianism. He said that even at the time he
had concluded there was no way to bring the Nazis down from the inside
and that only outside intervention could do this. The Secretary said
that from the point of view of long range strategy the more we could
develop the contacts of Eastern European countries with the West, the
more difficult it would be for the Soviets in case of war to fight their divisions
through these territories. In fact it might take a certain amount of
Soviet strength just to maintain order in the Eastern European
countries. [3–1/2 lines of source text not
declassified] He added that he thought it would be useful if
the Secretary could find some way to suggest to the Russians that it
would be in their interest to establish a better regime in Eastern
Germany. The Secretary said he had in fact already suggested to
Gromyko in Geneva that things
were made more difficult by the nature of the Ulbricht regime.

The Secretary then turned again to the question of the attitude of Paris.
The French had said they would not object to the explorations to see
whether negotiations might be possible. Now, however, they were saying
that we were getting very near to negotiations but still were not
committing themselves. Mr. Schroeder commented that he thought at tonight's meeting
the Secretary could not expect to get any comment from Couve on this
question until after he, Schroeder, had spoken. He had observed that this was the
case in the recent EEC Foreign Ministers
Meeting.3

The meeting then adjourned to the salon. At the Secretary's request Mr.
Kohler gave the Foreign
Minister a rundown on Dr. Brentano's talks with the President and with himself.4 Some discussion then ensued as to the press
treatment of German attitudes. During this Mr. Schroeder observed that the President
should not consider the New York Times a German newspaper. On balance he
thought that the treatment of this matter by most of the German press,
for example the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, had supported the
Federal Government's position. Mende's trip to the United States,5 he added, had been
very successful. In the famous meeting of the political leaders
Mende had observed that it was
better to have a modus vivendi than a casus belli. He said that for his
political position the question of timing was very important as respects
some elements of a possible modus vivendi package.

Mr. Schroeder then returned to the question of communications between the
two governments. He again requested that Ambassador Grewe be restored as the channel for
communications. He assured the Secretary that these communications would
be handled on a very limited distribution basis, precisely the same as
those obtaining for the Geneva briefings and insisted that the German
Embassy in Washington had in no way been responsible for the leak. He
then hoped that Ambassador Grewe
would be dealt with exactly like the French and UK Ambassadors. He referred in this
connection to the quadripartite Ambassadorial group and the Secretary
observed that it was the French who had disrupted this operation by
abstaining from active participation. Mr. Schroeder then said that having made this appeal for
restoration of normal communications, he wanted to inform the Secretary
that a general reshuffling of German diplomats was in the offing which
would include positions in Washington, Moscow and the UN as well as several other posts. Referring
to Mr. Schroeder's remark about
the President's sensitivity to the press, the Secretary observed that
the President was a great competitive player and liked to score 100 per
cent. He therefore did tend to notice the critical articles more than
those which supported him. Moreover he would say frankly that there was
some sensitivity in Washington to constant remarks out of Bonn about the
good old days of the relationship with his predecessor, Foster Dulles.
He had known Mr. Dulles very well himself and knew something of his
troubles with the Chancellor.

At the close of the discussion it was agreed that both sides would say to
the press something along the following lines: The Secretary of State
and the German Foreign Minister had met for a full review of the
discussions with the Russians and would continue their discussions with
the British and French Foreign Ministers this evening. These discussions
would of course be reported to NATO.
There was no doubt that further discussions between the US and the USSR
would be on a basis of agreed positions which started from the well
known and vital interests of the West in West Berlin.6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/5–362. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Kohler and approved in S on May 6. The meeting was held at the
Ambassador's residence. A summary of this conversation was
transmitted in Sectos 24 and 31 from Geneva, May 4. (Ibid.,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2104)

2 A
memorandum of Rusk's
conversation with Rapacki on March 15 (SecDel MC/19) is ibid.,
Central Files, 762.00/3–1562.

3 Held April 17 at Paris.

4 See Document
44.

5 A memorandum of President
Kennedy's conversation with Vice Chancellor
Mende, March 19, during
the latter's 12-day trip to the United States is in the Kennedy
Library, National Security Files, Germany.

6 At 8:30 p.m. Rusk and Schroeder joined Couve
de Murville and Home for further talks on Berlin. Rusk began the meeting by reviewing
his conversations with Gromyko at Geneva and then asked his colleagues
whether he should give Dobrynin a revised draft of the principles paper.
Home favored this, but Schroeder and Couve de
Murville demurred. (Memorandum of conversation
(US/MC/21); Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–362) In
subsequent conversations, May 4 and 5, Kohler and Carstens reviewed the principles paper in detail,
and Carstens agreed that
Grewe would receive
specific instructions after the Chancellor had considered the text
further. (Sectos 34 and 55 from Geneva, May 5; ibid.,
762.0221/5–562)

46. Memorandum for the Record46. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, May 5,
1962.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Heinrich von
Brentano, Saturday, May 5, 1962, 10 to 11 a.m.

I called on Von Brentano this
morning at his request, relayed through Minister von Lilienfeld. At first the meeting was
to be at Lilienfeld's house, but
later Ambassador Grewe called and
said that he would like to have me come to the Embassy and meet with
him. On the way to the Eglin Field air demonstration on May 4, I talked
with him about it and explained that I would prefer to meet Brentano privately in order to speak
very frankly with him about our confidence in Schroeder and in regular channels. Grewe agreed, and in turn I agreed to
have a private talk with him after talking with Brentano.

Brentano began our talk by making
three general statements. First, he hoped that his visit in Washington
had been useful, and he wished to express his thanks for the
understanding with which he had been received in all parts of
Washington, including the White House. He fully recognized that the
unhappy leak in Bonn had been damaging, and he agreed with his American
friends that such indiscretions could be helpful only to the Soviet
Union.

Second, he entirely agreed that it was important that there should be
negotiations with the Soviet Union. Tensions were so great that none of
us could neglect any possibility of lowering them. He further recognized
that the U.S. must have and exercise the responsibilities of leadership
in such negotiations.

Third, he spoke briefly to explain his reservations about the
International Access Authority and the mixed commissions. The
International Access authority might seem to lessen the ultimate
responsibility of the Four Great Powers, and the mixed commissions might
be misunderstood in Germany as meaning that the United States had lost
its interest in the problem of reunification. Moreover, he thought that
serious discussion between West Germans and Communist functionaries was
as impossible as serious discussion between the condemned man and the
hangman.

I replied to these three headings as follows. First, I agreed that
Brentano's visit had been
useful and that the indiscretions in Bonn had been damaging. I pointed
out the difficulty of catching up with the damage of such indiscretions,
and took the occasion to remark that Von
Brentano's private briefing on Tuesday (May 1) showed
this difficulty.2
We were convinced that his intention had been to emphasize Allied
harmony, but in fact correspondents, alerted to probe for differences,
had found some and had been guided accordingly. A still more notable
instance of this trouble was Brentano's excellent speech to the Press Club which I
had heard praised by our own State Department experts and which
nevertheless was reported in rather waspish fashion by Murray
Marder.3 All this trouble could be traced to the original
indiscretions in Bonn.

Second, I agreed that the United States had the responsibility of
leadership and was prepared to exercise it. We also believed in the
importance of negotiation, although we had no clear evidence that our
current efforts would be successful. We were trying to offer the Soviet
Union a quiet way out of the crisis if the Soviet Union was in fact
seeking such a result. We thought that perhaps some of the
misunderstanding in Bonn derived from a failure to grasp just what our
draft papers aimed at. There were many things which we believed that we
could not put in a paper designed to attract a Soviet signature. The
draft paper therefore described only the small sector in which our
position and that of the Soviet Union might overlap. We should find
other ways of describing the rest of our position. Brentano nodded his clear understanding
and agreement to this presentation and said that he thought there had
indeed been misunderstanding in Bonn.

Third, I disclaimed expert qualifications on the access authority or the
technical commissions, but I indicated that, in our judgment, the access
authority would not end the ultimate responsibility of the Four Powers.
Indeed, I said that I thought in the end there were two Great Powers
confronting each other here, and that all pieces of paper would take
their meaning in the end from this fundamental fact. As to the technical
commissions, I was somewhat more energetic, indicating our own belief
that the West Germans should have confidence in their own ability to
avoid being trapped by Communist opposite numbers. I recognized that
there was a difference of emphasis here, and recalled that the Chancellor had expressed some
worries of his own on this score last year, but I insisted that, in our
judgment, these contacts, while not of critical importance, could have
an affirmative value in the light of the relative quality and attraction
of the Federal Republic as against the puppet Pankow regime.

Brentano denied that there was a
problem of confidence in the German attitude toward the technical
commissions, and argued again that such a “doctrine of contacts” might
lead some Germans to believe that they must make their own arrangements
with the East Germans and eventually with the Soviet Union. If there
should ever be talk of reuni-fication by means of neutrality, he,
Von Brentano, would prefer to
go into exile, and so would most other men in German public life, even
among the opposition. The whole of German policy in recent years had
been built on the firm connection to NATO and the West, and he feared any action which might
seem to move away from this line of policy.

I remarked that I could see no such danger in the notion of “contacts.” I
said that the United States neither could nor would lessen its own
interest in the fate of Germany, and that we too had an enormous
investment in the solid commitment of the Federal Republic to NATO and the West. This was a keystone of
our policy, and we knew that the attitude of the German people
themselves was an essential element in this policy. We in our time had
heard the arguments in favor of the neutralization of Germany, and able
Americans had argued that Germany should be neutralized on the Austrian
model. For myself, I thought there was only one thing wrong with such a
policy: it would not work. Germany was no Austria, if only because of
her size. Brentano nodded his
agreement, and I went on to say that I thought Germany and the United
States thus shared in the problem of the East German regime. We could
not now get rid of it except by war. The Austrian solution was
impractical. The Federal Republic must remain a part of the West. What
could we expect?

I then suggested that the larger arena of relations with the Soviet Union
would remain a matter of central concern to the United States, and there
remained the possibility of an internal improvement in the GDR. I said that just as we had encouraged
and supported a new atmosphere in Poland, we thought it worth working
toward a mellowing of the Ulbricht
regime. It would be a gain if East Germany could move from Ulbricht toward Gomulka, and it was in
this sense that we saw some virtue in contacts. Brentano agreed with everything except
the last clause of this exposition.

After a further exchange of assurances that consultation is good and
leaks bad, we parted cordially.4

P.S. I did emphasize our great confidence in Schroeder and in regular channels, and I think Von Brentano took the point.

McG. B.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany. Secret.
Drafted by McGeorge
Bundy.

2 According to Tosec 48 to Athens, May 3, Lilienfeld had hosted a dinner on
May 1 for 12 U.S. correspondents and broadcasters at which Brentano, with support from
Grewe, had reiterated
German concerns about the general U.S. approach and the proposals on
access and technical commissions. The telegram concluded that the
correspondents were left with the definite impression that there
were serious differences between the United States and the Federal
Republic. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5–362)

3 For text of Marder's article,
which included brief quotations from Brentano's speech, see The Washington Post, May 5,
1962.

4 Following his
meeting with Brentano,
Bundy discussed the
situation with Grewe, who
indicated that he felt his position was so badly damaged that he
should withdraw. (Memorandum for the record; Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Germany) Later that day Bundy sent a memorandum to the
President reviewing his conversations with Grewe and Brentano. (Ibid.)

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State47. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to
the Department of State1

Bonn, May 9,
1962, 3 p.m.

2670. Embtel 2667.2 When I saw Carstens this morning, I asked for
clarification of Chancellor's Berlin press conference statements, saying
I was dismayed, as I was sure that President and the Secretary had been.
Carstens indicated Schroeder and he were equally mystified,
and even unhappier.

Carstens went on to say he was
confident Adenauer had not meant
to convey dissatisfaction with US policy, or to imply any basic
disagreement between US and
FedRep. He said Foreign Office
was already endeavoring to interpret to German press Chancellor's
remarks—which had been made in response to queries—in this sense. In
response to my request, he promised to try to get unofficial transcript
for me by end of day.

After some further discussion, Carstens and I agreed he should first have talk with
Chancellor, after which I would see him for general discussion his
current views. At my prompting, Carstens said he would ask Adenauer to send “explanation” to the President. I hope
to see Chancellor first of next week.

At luncheon today, I asked von
Eckardt to attempt at his scheduled press conference this
afternoon to make it clear that Chancellor had not meant to indicate any
basic disagreement with US policy. He said he would try to do so.

Dowling

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/5–962. Confidential; Niact; Limit
Distribution.

2 Telegram 2667, May 9, reported that the Chancellor's
May 7 press conference was an inept performance and that Dowling would see Carstens to ask for clarification.
(Ibid., 762.00/5–962) Extracts from the press conference are in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents,
1962, pp. 698–700 and Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik,
1962, pp. 486–488. The “uncorrected text” was transmitted in
telegram 2675 from Bonn, May 9. (Department of State, Central Files,
762A.13/5–962) On May 8 the Department of State issued a statement
giving its views on the access authority in response to the
Chancellor's remarks. For text, see American
Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 700–701.
Further remarks on the problem were made by the Chancellor at a
second press conference on May 8 and by President
Kennedy at his press conference on May 9.
For extracts from the former, see Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik,
1962, pp. 488–489; for a transcript of the latter, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: John F. Kennedy,
1962, pp. 375–383.

48. Editorial Note48. Editorial Note

On May 11 the President's Press Secretary Pierre Salinger arrived in Moscow for a 5-day visit.
During two extensive conversations on May 12 Chairman Khrushchev told Salinger that the Soviet Union could
not recognize the right of the Western powers to keep their troops in
Berlin and rejected the U.S. idea of an access authority. Reports on the
conversations were transmitted in telegrams 2935 and 2965 from Moscow,
May 13 and 15. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5–1362 and
101/5–1562) For Salinger's
account of the visit, including extracts from the conversations on
Berlin, see With Kennedy, pages 222–237. Further
documentation on the visit is in volume V.

49. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany49. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, May
12, 1962, 7:55 p.m.

3100. Eyes only Ambassador. Following which supplements Deptel 30712 is intended to provide broader framework
for your talk with Chancellor Adenauer. You may wish to begin by saying that we regret
situation which has developed and which has resulted in sensational
press treatment and speculation detrimental to our common interests.
Both sides need to take stock, to correct misconceptions and to plan
course for future which will avoid repetition of events of past few
weeks. It is in this spirit that US Government has instructed you to
make observations which follow.

On Berlin question, we are sending you in separate telegram chronologies
relating to consultation on “Principles Paper” and International Access
Authority paper.3 You may wish to draw on these as
appropriate to illustrate that process of substantive consultation with
Germans has been both continuing and full. In this connection, you may
also draw as pertinent on various messages repeated to Bonn reporting on
Secretary's discussions with Dobrynin.

Point on consultation leads logically to Chancellor's alleged feeling, as
indicated to General Clay in
Berlin, that he was badly treated because he had not received reply to
his letter of April 14, 1962, to President.4 You may wish to note
that, upon his return here, General Clay had mentioned the Chancellor's feeling in this
matter. You might point out that, on April 15, 1962, Secretary of State
discussed telephonically Chancellor's letter with President, who was in
Virginia over Sunday. You were thereafter directed immediately by
telephone to communicate to Schroeder that, while Secretary would go
ahead with his scheduled meeting with Dobrynin on April 16, he would not put forward any
further paper at this meeting.
You might add that while you were unable to reach Schroeder you did
reach Dr. Carstens on evening
April 15, who said he would inform both Chancellor and Foreign Minister
Schroeder same evening. In
view of this prompt response to Chancellor's letter which dealt with no
other subject, a formal reply was not considered necessary as it was
assumed governments would be in touch with each other in continuous
consultation on substance of Western position. At almost same time,
unfortunate leaks occurred of which we are all too sadly aware and
distracted attention from normal consultative process.

You should note that we had impression Athens meeting between Foreign
Minister Schroeder and Secretary
of State as well as between four Western Foreign Ministers5 had gone off in
good fashion, had cleared up remaining misconceptions and had resulted
in large measure of agreement. Consultations in Athens between senior
officials of two countries carried forward work on substantive paper,
and we are now awaiting through regular diplomatic channels final German
response to points worked out at Athens ad referendum. We were,
therefore, naturally surprised by press reports and speculations
following upon Chancellor's two press conferences in Berlin which tended
to create impression of major differences between us.

At this point line of argument set forth in Deptel 3071 should be presented, but last two sentences of
Schorr broadcast should be omitted.

You should supplement Deptel 3071 by
emphasizing that continuing reports from Bonn in recent days have
carried similar material. You should state as your own view this can
only be increasingly irritating to the President and may raise in his
mind a question whether German and American understanding is clear as he
thought it was in his most satisfactory meeting with the Chancellor last
November. You should state that it is this stream of reports of private
comments, rather than any particular disagreement over a minor
negotiating tactic, that is bound to give the President concern.

You should point out as your own observation that Chancellor probably has
no idea how many accounts of this kind have been reported by
newspapermen, broadcasters, and weekly journalists in recent weeks. If
Chancellor should attempt a denial, you should indicate that there are
so many of these sources that the President cannot be expected to
believe that their accounts are invented. Finally, you should indicate
as your own idea that a President who has plenty of important and
pressing political problems on all fronts can hardly be expected to look
with good humor on hints that these things were all done better by John Foster Dulles. It is a
principle of this Administration that President
Kennedy and not John Foster Dulles is now in
charge of foreign policy.

You should then expand on the President's basic views as you understand
them. Beginning after Vienna last June he committed his country to a
major military response to Khrushchev's challenge. 160,000 reserves were called to
service; the budget was unbalanced by an additional three and one-half
billion dollar defense appropriation, and the United States took the
lead in determined preparations to meet all contingencies arising from
the Berlin crisis. The response of the US to this crisis far exceeded
that of any other NATO nation, both
absolutely and relatively. And as the crisis deepened each moment of
real test found the US at the center of responsibility. Every test of
will in Berlin has been a test fundamentally for the US, and you may
wish to note that each of these tests has been passed, so that in spite
of the Wall the self-confidence of Berlin has been essentially restored,
as the Chancellor will have seen last week. FYI. Our information is that the Berliners are much less
troubled with the particular provisions of the International Access
Authority than some of those in Bonn. End FYI.

The President thus does not understand public or private doubts about the
determination of the US and he understands still less any inclination
for Germans to say that General De
Gaulle is the only hope; General De Gaulle has talked very energetically
but has thus far done very little; there are still only 2 French
divisions in West Germany. It is American determination and not French
rhetoric that is holding the line against Soviet pressure. Moreover, we
not only carry the main burden in Berlin but the overwhelming
responsibility also for the critical areas of Southeast Asia which are
under Communist pressure. Statesmen like the Chancellor, whose principal
concern is with the resistance of Communism, should be the first to
understand that covert criticism of the US is destructive.

Nor does the President understand how there can be an objection at this
late date to the diplomatic explorations on Berlin which have been going
on. At every stage these have been the subject of intense and careful
consultation, and if the Chancellor has been surprised at any point it
can only be because he did not fully inform himself of the work of his
own government. Thus the President was indeed startled by the
Chancellor's letter of April 14th with its sudden and unexplained
request that negotiations be discontinued. What the President did, as
the Chancellor knows, was to continue the discussions without putting
into them anything that had not long been agreed between our two
countries. The US remains determined to continue this close
consultation, but the President is glad that the Federal Government now
definitely supports further negotiation.

The President, in short, is determined to keep on with the double policy
of strong military defense and a constant search for an honorable
settlement if possible. He fully understands and has repeatedly stated
himself that negotiations may not succeed. But he believes the effort
must be made.

If appropriate opportunity occurs you should also make it clear to the
Chancellor that we would be greatly troubled if there were any serious
change in his government's long-stated desire to have Great Britain join
the Common Market. Arguments on this point are being sent forward
separately,6 and the
President thinks you may wish to press them with the Foreign Secretary
and other Bonn officials rather than directly with the Chancellor. But
there should be no doubt in anyone's mind that if Bonn should join Paris
in making entry into the Common Market unreasonably difficult, the main
responsibility for results will fall on Germany and not on France, with
grave consequences to Bonn's position in the Western alliance.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/5–1262. Secret. The source text indicates that
the telegram was drafted by Bundy, but he told Rusk in a telephone call at 3:48 p.m. that the
President had “worked hard on it in an effort to communicate sharply
with the old gentleman.” (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192) It was
cleared by Tyler and
Hillenbrand and initialed
by Rusk.

2 Telegram 3071, May 9, transmitted the text of a broadcast by Daniel
Schorr that morning that stated that the Chancellor was torpedoing
the U.S.-Soviet talks and recited a list of German grievances. The
telegram stated that this and other similar statements out of Bonn
could only be damaging to the President's relations with the
Chancellor. If the Chancellor had serious reservations about U.S.
policy, the President expected “to hear about them directly and not
through offensive remarks repeated by journalists.” (Ibid., Central
Files, 762.00/5–962)

3 Telegram 3095 to Bonn, May
12. (Ibid., 762.0221/5–1262)

4 Document 37.

5 See Document 45 and footnote 5 thereto.

6 Not found.

50. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State50. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to
the Department of State1

Bonn, May 14,
1962, midnight.

2737. Eyes only for the President and the Secretary. Department telegrams
3071 and 3100.2 I had long conversation of about two hours with
Chancellor this afternoon. My reception was unusually cordial, with his
underlying attitude being one of injured innocence characteristic of
child caught with hand in cookie jar. Conversation, though not wholly
coherent or consistent, was frankest and most open exchange of views I
have ever had with Chancellor, with embarrassing tendency on his part to deal in personalities.
Perhaps most significant element was his desire, explicit and implicit,
to re-establish his relationship with the President and the
Secretary.

Conversation opened by my expression of our regret at situation which had
resulted in sensational press treatment and speculation detrimental to
common interests, interrupted only by Adenauer's assertion that his answers to queries in
Berlin press conference had been misinterpreted. He asked if I had
brought to the President's attention his introductory remarks at this
conference; I replied that I had, but that press reports had out-run my
own. I then referred to his hurt feelings re lack of reply to his letter
of April 14, and recounted circumstances of oral reply; he interjected
that Carstens had not informed him
of this, but he now understood and accepted my explanation.

After remarking that the President and the Secretary had thought Athens
meeting had cleared up any misconceptions, I read him Schorr's broadcast
from Berlin of May 9 (Chancellor remarked he simply could not understand
where responsible journalists got such ideas), and went on to say that
more disturbing to us were reports brought to Washington of private
conversations critical of American policies and indicating lack of
confidence in the administration.

Chancellor again expressed unhappiness at lack of press responsibility,
and referred to press reports of his comments in Berlin against US entry
into European Community; he said these were wholly false. When I
suggested that reports of his attitude towards US could not be wholly
invented, he remarked that he too had been unhappy at reports and
indications from Washington re the President's impatience with him and
with Germans. He reminded me of great satisfaction with US-German
relations which he had expressed to me at conclusion of his visit to
Washington last November, and turned to Osterheld (who, with
interpreter, was only other official present at conversation) for
confirmation that just a few days ago he had been thinking of writing
private letter to the President regretting what seemed to be cooling of
relationship, and asking what could be done to repair situation. “Tell
me,” he said, “am I not right in sensing a change in the State
Department's attitude on German matters? Kohler has shown himself to be against us, and even
Hillenbrand, who knows
Germany and whom I remember from his past experience here, seems no
longer to understand our position.” I said I could not agree with him,
and pointed to full consultation we had had with his government, and to
fact that our moves in talks with Soviets had been taken only after
Allied agreement. He assented, but without appearing fully to agree with
me and went on to remark that what I had said made him feel much better,
[8–1/2 lines of source text not
declassified].

[1 paragraph (12–1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

I referred once more to private reports of his dissatisfaction with US
policy, particularly those subsequent to Athens meeting, but he again
evaded issue, saying that perhaps part of problem was lack of precision
in diplomatic understanding. He asked if I thought Schroeder and Carstens were less precise in their dealings with us
than Brentano had been. I refuted
this, although I had to admit there seemed to have been misunderstanding
re “principles paper” which was given to Soviets on March 22.

Chancellor then read to me from memorandum which he had prepared for
Foreign Office commenting on our latest revision of “principles paper,”
but which he had not yet sent forward to Schroeder, detailing various objections thereto. There
were number of recommendations for language changes, and introduction
showed reluctance to have paper presented to Soviets yet, but basic
objections continued to center on international access authority,
non-aggression agreement, and nuclear diffusion ban. On first, I said we
were prepared to consider any German proposal which he thought better;
on second I said merely I disagreed with Stikker,3 and third I used to return to
theme of Deptel 3100 and to recite
the President's basic views, his commitment of our resources to
Khrushchev's challenge, and
awesome responsibility which led him to continue talks with Soviets
while preparing for all contingencies. Adenauer said, with fervor, that he hoped I would tell
the President that he supported this policy fully. He added that during
previous US administration, there had been much talk of “co-existence”,
but neither side had thought this was possible. It was right, he felt,
to hold open possibility of honorable agreement with Soviets, at same
time endeavoring to convince them that West would protect its interests
(he retailed for me again his conversation with Khrushchev in 1955, in which German
assistance was asked against both Red China and US).

I asked Chancellor if he supported our policy of continuing talks with
Soviets. He said yes, entirely, adding that he only hoped we would
continue our efforts to bring France along with us. I replied that he
could perhaps do more than we, and he referred with evident pleasure to
his forthcoming State visit to Paris in July, saying it would be
significant event in Franco-German relations, and adding he would
continue his efforts with De
Gaulle.

I then asked Adenauer if it would
be fair to say, in summing up our conversation this afternoon, that he
was in agreement with our basic policy on Berlin. He assented readily,
and agreed when I said that I assumed we would be hearing shortly from
Foreign Office of his detailed objections to revised “principles paper”,
although he pointed out again that his memorandum had not yet gone forward to Schroeder and there might be changes in
it.

As final point, I referred again to damages which might be caused by
misunderstandings and by public or private criticisms. Adenauer agreed, saying he was grateful
for our conversation, that he felt much better about situation, and was
now determined to write the President a personal letter in next day or
two to explain his position in frank and open terms, and to set out his
basic confidence in American policy.

[1 paragraph (7–1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

My comments follow in next numbered telegram.4

Dowling

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/5–1462. Secret; Niact. Passed to the White
House.

2 See Document 49 and footnote 1
thereto.

3  Dirk U. Stikker, Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

4 Document 51.

51. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State51. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to
the Department of State1

Bonn, May 14,
1962, midnight.

2738. Eyes only for the President and the Secretary. My 2737.2 As you know, Adenauer has in past gone off the rails
from time to time without any apparent logical reason. He has, however,
thereafter behaved himself for a while after being called to task, and I
would expect the same to happen this time but for two factors which I
find disturbing.

First is fact he seems to have turned for moment at least against
Schroeder and Carstens, on whom we can therefore not
rely for assist-ance in pressing our case. I shall see Adenauer again for detailed argument re
his objections to “principles paper” as soon as I can get them from
Foreign Office. (I shall press for early date.) In meantime, I shall see
Brentano again to ensure his
favorable advice to Chancellor. It was he who was largely instrumental
in arousing Chancellor's latent worries, but problem of course is that
given Adenauer's suspicions and
pessimistic nature, it is much easier to awaken his concern than to
relieve it.

Second and more important factor is prospect for further damage which
Chancellor's State visit to Paris will afford. I hope I achieved some
result this afternoon, but I have no illusion that my persuasions will equal those of De Gaulle. Further inoculation is
needed, and I can think of no safer treatment than another visit to
Washington, which might easily come about as an outgrowth of
correspondence which Adenauer says
he is initiating. If a pretext is needed, I would think an honorary
degree could be arranged, and I have little doubt that the Chancellor
would accept your invitation for a personal talk.

Dowling

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/5–1462. Secret; Priority. Passed to the White
House.

2 Document 50.

52. Editorial Note52. Editorial Note

On May 15 General Lucius D.
Clay, the President's Special Representative in Berlin,
testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on his tour in
the city and Chancellor Adenauer's
concern about U.S. policy in Berlin. Clay stated that the confidence of West Berliners had
largely returned after the building of the wall and that there would be
an interlude of indeterminate length in Soviet harassment of the city.
Clay then reported that the
Chancellor had two fears, neither of which Clay believed was shared by the German people: 1)
transfer of authority to an international access authority which would
void Western responsibility if there were a crisis, and 2) a degree of
recognition of the German Democratic Republic. For text of his testimony
as well as questions by the committee, see Executive Sessions of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Historical
Series), 1962, volume XIV, pages 481–500.

53. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany53. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, May
16, 1962, 12:54 p.m.

3120. Eyes only for Ambassador. Following is text of letter from
President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer which the President handed to
Ambassador Grewe May 15:2

“Dear Mr. Chancellor:

I have just read Ambassador Dowling's report of his meeting with you,3 and I write to say
simply that I am very glad of this good beginning in getting our
relations back where they were in November. I am sure that as long as we
can keep in this kind of touch directly and through our trusted advisers
we shall be all right. I want to say, too, that I personally regret that
my failure to give a formal answer to your letter of April 14th gave you
concern. I did send a prompt oral response, which was necessary because
I was out of town, and because a meeting with the Soviet Ambassador had
been scheduled for the very next day—but a letter should have followed;
our relations to each other are too important to be marred by such
matters.

In the same spirit let me say that I am sure the impression you formed of
Secretary Rusk's message to
Foreign Minister Schroeder was the
result of an unhappy accident in the meaning of words in our two
languages. I believe we are both very well served by our loyal and able
Foreign Ministers, and for that matter by their professional staffs.
They are trying to keep us together, and we must not be hard on
them.

I am glad that you are giving your close personal attention to the papers
now under discussion between our two governments, and we shall look
forward to hearing your views. As I see the matter, our agreements
greatly outweigh our differences, and we have time enough to work out a
clear position before any paper goes on to the Soviets.

At the same time, I think it is very clear that we shall all gain greatly
if we can get this Berlin crisis moderated in a fashion that honorably
protects both the people of Berlin and our own interests. We doubt if
there is any prospect of a real settlement with the Soviets, but we do
think there is a chance of getting this three-and-a-half-year-old crisis
cooled off by an arrangement that centers on the very few things both
sides can say in the same
language. Our tactical purpose is to test this possibility—and to do it
in a way which continues to protect our common interests—while proving
to all concerned that a decent solution is possible whenever the Soviets
are ready to accept it.

With warmest good wishes and with thanks again for your courtesy to
Ambassador Dowling. Sincerely,
John Kennedy”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/5–1662. Secret; Priority. Drafted by the
President.

2 Grewe met with the President
at 5:30 p.m. on May 15 and on the next day with Rusk at noon. No records of these
meetings have been found, but they are described briefly by
Grewe in Ruckblenden, p.
560.

3 Document 50.

54. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)54. Memorandum From David
Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the
President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 17,
1962.

SUBJECT

The Next Steps on Berlin

I am attaching the working paper on “The Next Steps on Berlin” which is
now on its way to Chip Bohlen and the Secretary for their comments and
suggestions. At this juncture we have no idea what will emerge after the
Secretary and Chip Bohlen have had a chance to wrestle with the
problem.

As we see the exercise (Martin,2 Henry Owen and I went over it at
some length), there are two problems which must be resolved for the
achievement of a satisfactory Berlin arrangement—Soviet acceptance of
our military presence in Berlin and acceptable arrangements for our
access to the city and a gesture on our part which meets the Soviet
concept of “respect for GDR
sovereignty”.

Foy3 feels
strongly that in view of the Salinger conversations4 in Moscow (I have
not seen the Moscow report on them and therefore am prepared to accept
Foy's reaction), the question
of the Western military presence in Berlin must be nailed down firmly before we move too far
ahead in our exploratory discussions with the Soviets.

And as soon as there is some indication of Soviet give in this matter, we
can make a significant move on the question of “respect for GDR sovereignty”, indicating a readiness to
accept a GDR presence at the access
control points. These would be the essential elements of the “deal”,
with the non-aggression and non-diffusion commitments added.

You talked yesterday about a possible change in nomenclature for the
Western forces such as “police forces”, which might make our military
presence saleable to the Soviets. I am not aware of any indication that
a police force would be more acceptable to the Soviets than a military
force unless this was suggested by Salinger in his Moscow talks. However, in his comments
to Gardner Cowles, Khrushchev did say “Western troops must
leave Berlin or at least give up their occupation status”, which I took
to mean that some formula which removed the words “occupation forces”
might be acceptable. We could explore this possibility with the Soviets
once we had some indication that they were prepared to live with our
forces in Berlin.

As for tactics, the consensus of Hillenbrand, Owen
and Klein was that we should avoid
tabling papers; attempt for the time being to get German agreement on
the substance of the revised Draft Principles Paper; and let the
Secretary present to the Soviets orally what the Germans have agreed to
substantively, with the Secretary improvising the orchestration as he
goes along.

A new paper might be needed later. For the present however we should
avoid new documents, and eliminate the interminable debate with our
Allies over words, phrases and punctuation.

German agreement to the present draft of the Principles Paper should give
us sufficient license to move ahead with the Dobrynin dialogue. And this would be consistent with the
President's commitment to Adenauer
on the question of consultation.

Henry again suggested an early offer to the Soviets of accepting the
GDR at the check points. After some
discussion, it was agreed that this might be in order but only after two
or three more rounds with Dobrynin, and provided Dobrynin gave some indication of give in the Soviet
position on the Western military presence in Berlin.

As for transforming the character of the talks—by shifting their level
and locus—and perhaps letting Bohlen and/or Kohler carry them on privately with Dobrynin away from the Department, the
consensus was that this would be useful, but only after the Secretary
made progress in nailing down the principal points under discussion.

The immediate task then is to establish Soviet intentions, to ascertain
whether serious negotiations are possible. And if there appears to be promise of Soviet movement,
we should set down the principal elements of an acceptable arrangement
along the general lines of the proposed Draft Principles.

Allied consultation remains a tricky problem. In view of the experience
of the last few weeks, however, the general feeling is that some of the
difficulty might be avoided if there were fewer papers tabled and
greater reliance placed on oral explanations with the Soviets.

Attachment

THE NEXT STEPS ON BERLIN

1. We assume that (a) the possibilities of reaching an understanding with
the Soviets on Berlin have not yet been exhausted, no matter how slim
they may now seem, and (b) the case for continuing U.S. contacts with
the Soviets on Berlin remains strong, whatever be the current judgment
as to the urgency or lack of urgency with which the latter view the
situation. Under present circumstances there would accordingly seem to
be five possible courses of action which we might consider:

a. To concede fully that we cannot move any farther or faster than the
Germans want us to. This would mean waiting for the substantive comments
which they promised at Athens to give us on the revised “principles
paper” and the International Access Authority paper but not presenting
the Soviets with any further paper until they had made some major
concession or at least until the situation had developed to a point
where the Germans accepted the tactical desirability of putting such a
paper forward. It would presumably mean continuing the exchanges between
the Secretary of State and Ambassador Dobrynin, but at a deliberate pace and without the
introduction of any significant new substantive materials on the part of
the West.

b. To accept the German judgment that we should put another paper forward
at this time but, in the light of their substantive comments on the
revised “principles paper”, to have the Secretary, in his discretion,
explore orally with Dobrynin
possible language changes in the “principles paper” given to the Soviets
at Geneva.

c. To put pressure on the Germans after receiving their comments on the
revised “principles paper” with a view to their accepting, no matter how
reluctantly, that we present it to the Soviets at an early stage rather
than awaiting some major concession.

d. To foreshorten the negotiations process drastically through fairly
unorthodox methods in order to achieve either early agreement or clear deadlock within a period
of some 6 to 8 weeks. This might involve giving the Soviets a revised
“principles paper”, embodying, in effect, our fallback positions, and
stressing that, if the Soviets want changes additional to those made,
then we would have to consider the talks as deadlocked and our proposals
withdrawn. While we would not break off contacts, we would say that the
U.S. had no intention of using them to discuss further changes in our
“principles paper” and that the talks might well be transferred to a
lower level.

e. To start with the assumption that the experience of the past month has
shown that the U.S. cannot conduct exploratory talks with the Soviets in
a useful way and at the same time observe the amenities of conventional
consultation with our Allies. We might, therefore, try to put our
contacts with the Soviets on an even more private and confidential
basis, without consulting our Allies in advance or from meeting to
meeting. We would make it clear to the Soviets that any proposals
advanced or discussed were entirely provisional without any commitment
on our part or that of our Allies. Only if there seemed to be a real
prospect of agreement with the Soviets along lines which might have been
developed in these discussions, would we then take up substantive
proposals with our Allies preparatory to moving into the more formal
kind of negotiations required for a definitive arrangement in which they
would be included.

2. None of the foregoing fails to raise serious problems, but, on
balance, 1(b) seems to involve the least practical difficulties and
still to be consistent with the objective of continuing contacts with
the Soviets to further explore whether the possibility of an agreement
exists.

3. We cannot permit ourselves to be diplomatically sterilized, as the
most extreme interpretations of Adenauer's position would make us, nor can we logically
refuse to discuss our “principles paper” with the Soviets as something
which might conceivably be modified to take account of the Geneva talks,
as long as our basic interests are being preserved. At the same time, to
put forward a revised version of the “principles paper” in writing,
against the express wishes of the Germans, would run counter to the
assurances we have given them and might precipitate another Donnybrook
of the kind we just had.

4. The shock approach suggested in 1(d) might have to be considered if we
had any reason to think that time were running out, and that the Soviets
would ineluctably move ahead within the near future to take the
unilateral action which they have threatened, unless some dramatic
Western gesture of this sort were made. This does not seem to be the
case. Ambassador Thompson in
Moscow believes it unlikely that the Soviets will pay our price for a
real Berlin solution and that the present “neither peace nor war”
situation will continue. After an effort at some sort of a deal with the
West Germans, Ambassador Thompson
thinks,Khrushchev would sign his
separate peace treaty but would take steps to prevent it from bringing
on serious conflict with the West. Moreover, for the U.S. to offer
further concessions without any indication of give in the Soviet
position, would be a debatable negotiating tactic. The Soviets would be
unlikely to be impressed by U.S. statements that this was the ultimate
in concessions, and it is not clear precisely what the alternative
course of action for the U.S. would be if the Soviets did not accept
these concessions and we were then forced to carry out our threat to cut
off discussions with the Soviets on the “principles paper”. Such a
statement of purpose on the part of the U.S. may become desirable at
some point in the discussions, but it does not seem to have been reached
at the present stage.

5. If such a new tactical approach were to be followed, it presumably
would have to be done without prior consultation with our Allies,
following the procedures suggested in 1(e). This latter might, of
course, also be used for a more leisurely approach. The difficulty with
1(e) is that it leaves us at the mercy of the Soviets. By leaking out
the contents of such “private” discussions, they could completely foul
up our relations with our Allies and bring about a real rather than a
synthetic crisis of confidence. Soviet bad faith apart, it is difficult
to believe that talks could actually be carried on without becoming
known to our Allies. The pressures therefore for information would be
difficult to resist.

6. As to the substance of our position, we should shortly have the German
comments on the “principles paper” discussed at Athens. These may or may
not be helpful, but under the circumstances we would presumably have
more flexibility orally than in trying to put in a new paper. Two
revisions of the International Access Authority paper have been prepared
as the U.S. side—one attempts to adapt the Soviet version presented to
us in Geneva; the other attempts to adapt our version by incorporating a
number of Soviet suggestions. Since the main German objection was to the
make-up of the Board of Governors, and since neither of these versions
takes care of this point, it would seem desirable to await the German
comments on the old paper which they have promised before floating the
new versions.5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National
Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

2 Martin J. Hillenbrand.

3 Foy D. Kohler.

4 See
Document 48.

5 On May 22 Carstens called Dowling to the Foreign Ministry and
handed him an aide-memoire giving the German observations on the
draft principles paper and the access authority. In reviewing the
comments Dowling observed
that there were no surprises, and that Carstens had used the term “important” only in
regard to nuclear diffusion (stressing that there must be no valid
basis for any Soviet objection to a NATO multilateral force) and West German military
access to Berlin. (Telegram 2826 from Bonn, May 22; Department of
State, Central Files, 762.0221/5–2262) A translation of the
aide-memoire was transmitted in telegram 2827 from Bonn, May 22.
(Ibid.)

55. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)55. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military
Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative
(Taylor)1

Washington, May 22,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin Meeting with President at 1630 Hours, 21 May2

1. I now have a little information on yesterday's meeting which was
supposed to have addressed the alternative “next steps on Berlin” which
appear in the attached paper.3 I understand from
Mr. Klein and from other sources
that the meeting was more or less of a complete fiasco. The President
had his mind on something else and apparently had not read the paper
very carefully. In the second place, the Secretary of State
unfortunately had not done his homework either. This left Mr. Bohlen who, as one of my informers
said, seems to have a capacity for saying the right thing at the wrong
time. In short, the meeting appears to have accomplished nothing
whatever.

L

1 Source: National Defense
University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, Negotiations. Secret.

2 Other than this account and references in
Rusk's Appointment
Book and the President's Appointment Book, no record of this
meeting, which was attended by Bundy, Kohler, Hillenbrand, Bohlen, Rusk, and the President, has been found.

3 Attachment to
Document 54.

56. Editorial Note56. Editorial Note

On May 17 Under Secretary of State Ball left Washington for a trip to Copenhagen,
Stockholm, Paris, and Rome to discuss economic matters. On May 21
Secretary of State Rusk cabled him
at Rome, asking him to detour from his itinerary and stop at Bonn for
talks with Chancellor Adenauer.
Rusk informed Ball that the primary purpose of his
visit was to assist in the restoration of U.S. relations with Germany so
that the broad interests which both countries had in Berlin and Europe
could “be dealt with on their
merits without confused static from Bonn.” Rusk concluded that Ball would “undoubtedly not wish to discuss details of
our Berlin position” with the Chancellor, but he might make some of the
points in the instructions to Dowling (Document 49).
(Telegram 2863 to Rome; Department of State, Central Files,
110.11–RU/5–2162)

Ball and Dowling discussed Berlin, European
integration, a NATO multilateral force,
and the Common Market agricultural policy with Chancellor Adenauer on May 23. Ball stated that the President was
pleased that relations between the United States and Germany had been
restored to a “harmonious basis.” The Chancellor replied that he too was
pleased that good relations had been restored, “adding he had been
upset, not so much personally as officially,” because of the importance
of the questions to be dealt with. He stated that he regarded the
chapter as closed. (Telegram 2858 from Bonn, May 23; ibid.,
110.11–RU/5–2362)

57. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France57. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in France1

Washington, May
24, 1962, 7:54 p.m.

6319. If opportunity presents itself in your meeting with De Gaulle you should attempt correct
some misconceptions on his part on underlying rationale of US
exploratory talks with Soviets on Berlin which became apparent during
his May 15 press conference.2 Same line could also be used as appropriate in
Embassy contacts with FonOff.

By negative implication De Gaulle
apparently under impression US is engaged in definitive attempt to
settle problem of Germany. This may be among Soviet objectives as
embodied in their concept of drawing line under World War II, but US is
under no illusions on this point. Our position remains, as it has always
been, that only lasting solution to German and Berlin problems would be
reunification of country in freedom with reunited Berlin as capital of
this unified Germany. We are also realistic enough to recognize that
this goal is unlikely to be achieved in foreseeable future, given basically conflicting
Communist and Free World interests in Central Europe.

What we are trying to deal with is factual situation, one of ingredients
of which is capacity of Soviets to sign separate peace treaty with
GDR and to refuse any longer to
carry out their responsibilities towards Western Occupation Powers in
Berlin. As one of powers principally concerned in involved discussions
of this subject since Khrushchev
first precipitated Berlin crisis in November, 1958, French Government
should be very well aware that reasonable Western response to this
Soviet threat must be first to try to prevent such unilateral action by
Soviets, but if this cannot be done, to attempt in advance to achieve
some arrangement or modus vivendi which will enable vital Western
interests in Berlin situation to be preserved.

In explaining US approach, we have found useful conceptual framework
analyzing discussions with Soviets as taking place on three levels. In
this connection, you should draw on exposition in Deptel 5567 to Paris on April 17,
reporting Secretary's discussion with Dobrynin on previous day.3 We
believe use of this framework can be helpful in clearing up
misconceptions as to purpose of “principles paper” handed to Gromyko by Secretary in Geneva on
personal and informal basis.

We cannot agree that certain broader elements included in this paper,
such as nuclear nondiffusion, NATO-Warsaw Pact nonaggression statements and possible West
German/East German mixed commissions amount to attempt to settle German
problem. These are either merely declaratory of existing US policy or
attempt to provide mechanisms (as in case of mixed commissions which
suggested by Germans themselves) to improve de facto situation for
benefit of Berliners, West Germans and population of East Germany.

FYI. We would not, of course, anticipate
that you could persuade De Gaulle
of soundness US approach, given his position that mere posturing behind
US nuclear deterrent will somehow or other suffice to prevent Soviets
from taking unilateral actions which we cannot prevent and which will
necessarily result in de facto deterioration of Berlin situation. On
other hand, we do not wish to seem to agree, even by implication, with
his assessment that present US/Soviet exchanges amount to tacit
willingness on our part to join with Soviets in drawing line under World
War II in manner they desire. End FYI.

You might add that we have been in full consultation with the German
Government, as we have moved from meeting to meeting with Soviets, and
have also tried to keep French fully informed to extent that French Government itself has been
willing to permit this. We shall continue our probing of Soviet
position. Maintenance of contacts with Soviets on this highly charged
question is desirable and we consider that we must continue to explore
possibility, consistent with our vital interests, of achieving some
modus vivendi. In the event of breakdown and major confrontation over
Berlin, we should be able to say that we have discharged fully our
responsibility to our people in search for a peaceful solution. We have
been glad to note from President De
Gaulle's press conference statement that France does not
object to employment by US of its diplomatic resources towards this
objective.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0221/5–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by
Hillenbrand, cleared by
Tyler, and approved and
initialed by Kohler.

2 For a transcript
of De Gaulle's press
conference, May 15, see Major Addresses, Statements and Press
Conferences of General Charles de
Gaulle, May 19, 1958–January 31, 1964, pp.
172–184.

3 Telegram 5567 to Paris is the same as telegram 2363 to Moscow; see
the source note, Document 39.

4 Ambassador Gavin met with President De Gaulle on May 26, but was unable
to make the points raised in this telegram, since De Gaulle ended the meeting before
the Ambassador could respond to his exposition of the French
position on Berlin. (Telegram 5700 from Paris, May 28; Department of
State, Central Files, 611.51/5–2862; printed in vol. XIII, Document 252.

58. Letter From Chancellor Adenauer to President Kennedy58. Letter From Chancellor Adenauer to President Kennedy1

Bonn, May 25,
1962.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I thank you sincerely for your letter of May 15,
1962.2 I share your view that we cannot afford letting
our cooperation be disturbed by misunderstandings out of all proportion
to the difficult tasks before us. I also concur with you that the
differences between us are much less than the agreements and that there
is time enough to work out a clear cut position before a paper is
presented to the Soviets.

No one could feel greater satisfaction than I myself, my government and
the German people if it were possible to settle the Berlin crisis—which
has been smouldering for years—without our common interests being
harmed. I agree with you that to this end every possibility must be
conscientiously explored and that it is advisable to make clear to the
world that an honorable
solution is possible as soon as the Soviets are prepared to accept
it.

I believe that we will reach a consensus on the most suitable methods to
achieve this object. Certainly, we, on our part, will need firmness and
patience and we will not be able to make many new proposals to the
Soviets. One of these new possibilities to continue the talks with the
Soviets I had conveyed through Federal Minister Schroder to Secretary
Rusk at the Athens meeting. On
some questions, we are quite prepared to talk if the Soviets were ready
to allow more humane conditions to be created in the Soviet occupation
zone.

I am told that Secretary Rusk is
considering a visit to Bonn during the second half of June. I would
warmly welcome the realization of this plan and I believe that,
particularly during the present phase, frequent and intimate discussions
between our two governments are most useful.

Ambassador Dowling spoke to me
recently about your interest in Great Britain's admission to the Common
Market.3 So far, I have not communicated in this matter with
President De Gaulle. I think it
would be best to await first of all the meeting between President
De Gaulle and Prime Minister
Macmillan.4

With best wishes.

Sincerely yours,

Adenauer5

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The source text
is labeled “Unofficial Translation.” Attached to a May 29
transmittal note from the German Embassy.

2 See Document
53.

3 Presumably a reference to the
meeting on May 23 described in Document
56.

4 June 2–3

5 Printed from a copy that indicates that
Adenauer signed the
original.

May–July 1962: Further Discussions in Washington, Geneva, and MoscowMay–July 1962: Further Discussions in Washington, Geneva, and Moscow: Document List

Document 59: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 30, 1962, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State Central Files, 762.00/5–3062. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand and approved in S on May 31. The conversation was held in Secretary Rusk's office at the Department of State. On May 23 Hillenbrand prepared a list of 19 talking points for this conversation. (Ibid., 762.00/5–2362) Seven supplementary points were included in a May 28 memorandum from Kohler to Rusk. (Ibid., 762.00/5–2862)

Document 60: National Security Action Memorandum No. 158

Washington, May 31, 1962.

Source: Department of State, NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316. Top Secret. Copies were sent to Secretary of Defense McNamara, Director of Central Intelligence McCone, and General Taylor.

Document 61: Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, June 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.54/6–562. Secret. Drafted by Day on June 4 and cleared by OSD/ISA and JCS.

Document 62: Editorial Note

Document 63: Editorial Note

Document 64: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 18, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/6–1862. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Hillenbrand and approved in S on June 19. The conversation was held in Secretary Rusk's office at the Department of State.

Document 65: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Paris, June 20, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/6–2062. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, Moscow, and London. Secretary Rusk visited Europe June 18–28 for discussions on topics of mutual concern.

Document 66: Memorandum of Conversation

Berlin, June 21, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.00–RU/6–2162. Secret. Drafted by Hillenbrand on June 22 and approved in S on June 25. The conversation was held in Mayor Brandt's office.

Document 67: Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, June 21, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 37, 101 Soviet Buildup. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. Two annexes entitled “Comparative Data Soviet-US Forces 1 Jan 61–1 July 62” and “Major Measures Taken To Improve Readiness of Soviet-US Forces” are not printed.

Document 68: Memorandum of Conversation

Bonn, June 22, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11–RU/6–2262. Secret. Drafted by Hillenbrand on June 25 and approved in S on June 28. The meeting was held in Chancellor Adenauer's Conference Room at the Palais Schaumburg. A detailed summary of this conversation was transmitted in Secto 39 from Bonn, June 22. (Ibid., 611.62A/6–2262)

Document 69: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Rome, June 23, 1962, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11–RU/6–2362. Secret. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk and cleared by Kohler. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2122)

Document 70: Memorandum From the President's Press Secretary (Salinger) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 25, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Attached to a July 5 memorandum of transmittal from Bundy to Kohler.

Document 71: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, June 30, 1962, 1:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.62A/6–3062. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Hillenbrand and Fessenden, cleared by Kohler and Knight, and approved by Rusk.

Document 72: Memorandum of Conversation Between the President's Adviser on Disarmament (McCloy) and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)

Washington, July 3, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7–361. No classification marking. Drafted by McCloy. The full text is printed in volume VI.

Document 73: Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy

Moscow, undated.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. Translation. Handwritten notes at the top of the source text read: “Original and copy of translation retained by Kohler” and “Received at White House July 5/1962. Copy to Amb Thompson 7/7/62.” The source text bears no salutation or signature, but in a conversation with Rusk on July 12 (see Document 76), Dobrynin stated that when he delivered the message to the White House on July 5, he had indicated that it was intended as a message from Khrushchev to the President. (Memorandum of conversation, July 12; Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163)

Document 74: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant (Bohlen) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 6, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. A copy was sent to Kohler.

Document 75: Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Weiss) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Johnson)

Washington, July 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–1162. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Weiss.

Document 76: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 12, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–1262. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand and approved in S on July 13. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office at the Department of State.

Document 77: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 17, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Attached to a July 18 memorandum of transmittal from Bundy to Rusk, which stated that Bundy had prepared the memorandum of conversation at the direction of the President who had approved it. Bundy also instructed Rusk to limit access to the memorandum “to those who really must know about it,” since the President wanted “Dobrynin to have confidence in the privacy of such talks.”

Document 78: Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev

Washington, July 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 79: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, July 19, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 506 Bercon/Marcon. Secret. Drafted by Legere. Klein's notes on this meeting are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin.

Document 80: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, July 20, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret. The source text bears the handwritten note: “Taken from Pres Week-end reading dtd 7/20/62.”

Document 81: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, July 20, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2135. Secret; Limit Distribution.

Document 82: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, July 22, 1962, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2262. Secret; Priority. Passed to the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk and cleared by Kohler. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2134) Rusk was in Geneva July 20–25 to attend the Conference on Laos.

Document 83: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, July 23, 1962, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2362. Secret; Niact. Eyes Only. Passed to the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2134)

Document 84: Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Geneva

Washington, July 23, 1962, 7:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2362. Secret; Niact. Drafted and initialed by Bohlen, cleared by Hilsman and Davis, and approved and initialed by Ball.

Document 85: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, July 24, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2462. Secret; Niact. Passed to the White House.

Document 86: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, July 25, 1962, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11–RU/7–2562. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Moscow, London, Paris, Bonn, and Berlin.

Document 87: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, July 25, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2562. Top Secret; Priority.

Document 88: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, July 26, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7–2662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

Document 89: Telegram From the Embassy in Denmark to the Department of State

Copenhagen, July 28, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2862. Secret.

59. Memorandum of Conversation59. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May
30, 1962, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

Anatoli Dobrynin, Ambassador
of the USSR

Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counselor of Soviet Embassy

The Secretary

Foy D. Kohler, Assistant
Secretary

Martin J. Hillenbrand,
Director, Office of German Affairs

After an initial exchange of pleasantries, the Secretary noted that the
fact that he had asked Ambassador Dobrynin to come in on an American national holiday had
no special significance. He also pointed out, with reference to press
reports about problems with our Allies, that these do not concern basic
matters and thus were not related to the present discussion. One point
discussed with our Allies involved something which Mr. Khrushchev had already rejected in his
discussion with Mr. Salinger,
namely, the composition of the Access Authority. The real issue is the
central problem of our vital interests in Berlin, and this is between us
and Moscow and not between the Western Allies.

After noting that the views of Chairman Khrushchev as expressed to Mr. Salinger had been fully reported to
the President, the Secretary observed that nearly a year had gone by
since the Vienna meeting between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy.
During this year a considerable number of talks had been held with the
Soviet Union and various things had happened. Both sides seem to
consider that these talks had been useful in clarifying respective
points of view. However, we could not see that much real progress had
been made. During this period two things have happened: (a) There had
been a certain change in the de facto situation with the construction of
the wall and the further incorporation of East Berlin into East Germany.
We did not like these because
they were contrary to four-power agreements, but taking account of the
interests of both sides and the problem which East Germany constitutes
for the Soviets, we did not do anything about them.

(b) In the talks with Foreign Minister Gromyko last fall, and subsequently, there has been
mention of so-called broader questions. We had noted that, in regard to
these, there seemed to be no real difficulty in coming to some sort of
agreement and that they would fall into place if the central question of
Berlin could be resolved. We did not find, however, any corresponding
effort on the part of Moscow to take account of our vital interests. We
have noted, for example, recent statements made in East Germany that
agreement had been reached on a number of points such as nuclear
non-diffusion, boundaries, and a non-aggression agreement between the
NATO and Warsaw Pact countries as
if these were assured points to be stored away in the refrigerator. At
the same time the Soviet Union's insistence on its original position
with respect to West Berlin seems to be maintained.

The Secretary said he wanted to emphasize here that President
Kennedy at Vienna had made completely clear
that our commitments to West Berlin must be maintained. We could not
accept the effects which a failure to do so would have on ourselves and
the rest of the free world. A diminution of our position was not
tolerable while, at the same time, the Soviets were consolidating their
position in Germany. At Vienna, President Kennedy
spelled out in considerable detail the relationship between West Berlin
and US vital interests.He said that he had gained the impression that
the USSR was presenting him with the alternatives either of accepting
the Soviet position on Berlin or having a face-to-face confrontation.
This led him to remark at one point that it appeared we were going to
have a very cold winter, because a diminution of our position in West
Berlin was simply not acceptable.

The Secretary noted that the Soviet Union had advanced various formulae
as a substitute for the Western troop presence:

a. Having symbolic forces of the USSR, France, the UK and the US in West
Berlin as guarantors of the so-called free city;

b. Having neutral troop contingents in West Berlin under UN aegis for a period of three to five
years; and

c. Having symbolic forces in West Berlin of other smaller NATO and Warsaw Pact countries for a
period of three to five years.

These were simply variations of proposals that would eliminate the US in
West Berlin, or reduce our position, and thus have the effect which
President Kennedy had mentioned at Vienna.

We believe that both sides, the Secretary continued, have a serious
rational interest in avoiding a head-on conflict over Berlin. It would
be dangerous for the two sides to come to the table, with one thinking
that under no circumstances
would the other fight over Berlin. This might lead to the one side's
passing beyond the limits of toleration. It was, of course, true that
war was irrational, but other things were also irrational, such as
failing to meet our elementary commitments. We were thus trying to talk
out with the Soviet Government how this situation could be handled. On
the basis of what had been said so far, it did not seem likely that any
agreement could be reached on a permanent settlement of the German
question. We believed that any settlement which did not rest on the
basic attitudes and wishes of the German people was unlikely to be
permanent. There were grave disadvantages in trying to make a lasting
arrangement which would merely stimulate the worst aspects of German
nationalism and unsettle central Europe. We have not pressed for such a
permanent settlement because we saw no real prospect of agreement, given
the Soviet position. If we were wrong in this judgment, we would be
willing to look again.

It would also be possible, the Secretary went on, to proceed on the basis
of the factual situation, provided that all facts of the situation are
taken into account, not only those facts which satisfy the Soviets. Two
facts are: that Germany is not united and that the West is in West
Berlin. We see no reason why the situation could not be stabilized on
the basis of these facts pending an eventual permanent settlement. There
is nothing more abnormal in the Western presence in West Berlin than in
any other aspect of the German situation. We would regret it if the
geographic situation of West Berlin created any illusions. We are there
and have a basic right to be there. We have not been able to put much
content into the Soviet demand that our position in West Berlin be
reduced or eliminated. It is not realistic to talk about West Berlin as
a military base. The Soviet military would not pretend this to be true,
surrounded as West Berlin is by many Soviet divisions. Our troops are
there for the political purpose of underlining and demonstrating our
commitment to the city. They are in no position to take aggressive
action against anyone. We have heard the phrase frequently repeated by
the Soviets that it is necessary to draw a line under World War II. If,
in translation, this means the time had come to remove the West from
West Berlin, this is something we could not accept. The time has not
come for that. If we are unable to agree on a permanent settlement, and
apparently so far on the factual situation, what is to be done? We have
said that we are willing to proceed on the basis of existing facts, the
Secretary pointed out, and also to take account of a number of other
matters in which the Soviets and we have expressed some interest but
which are not directly connected with Berlin. However, in our dealings
with our Allies and our own people, we are unable to point to
practically anything indicating that Moscow has made any effort to take
our vital interests into account. We require a greater degree of
reciprocity in these conversations. We cannot accept as a concession a mere reformulation of
demands which amounts to the same thing, that is the reduction or
elimination of the U.S. position in West Berlin. President
Kennedy has more than once said that it is not
compatible with the relationship between great powers for one to say
that “What is mine is mine, and what is yours is negotiable.” We
consider, therefore, that there must be a greater degree of recognition
that U.S. vital interests are involved in Berlin.

The Ambassador would recall, the Secretary continued, that in an earlier
meeting between them as well as at Geneva, we had suggested a framework
within which we thought these discussions might profitably proceed. We
had reduced this to a paper which might be called a modus vivendi,
although the title was of secondary importance. We thought that this
provided a way of handling how our disputes with the Soviets might be
resolved. We had tried to avoid having either side subscribe to points
which were publicly known to be contrary to the positions of either
side. We have said that we cannot recognize the GDR. When Ambassador Thompson said this to Foreign Minister Gromyko, the latter responded that we
already did recognize the GDR. It was
true that we were prepared to act on the basis that the GDR is there. We do not pretend it does not
exist, nor do our Allies. The GDR has
trade offices in eleven Western countries and there are substantial
trade relations between West and East Germany. We have tried to leave
out of our paper points the acceptance of which would require either
side to change its basic position. Chairman Khrushchev had said to Mr. Salinger that the Soviets would not recognize any right
of the West to maintain troops in West Berlin. In our modus vivendi
paper we did not ask that this be recognized, since this did not require
recognition by the Soviets. We are there and not by any right granted by
the Soviets, but for reasons which are well understood. Our modus
vivendi paper was silent on this point. The paper left open the way, if
the Soviets felt it to be necessary in the light of their public
commitments to sign some agreement with the East Germans, for them to do
so. It was not the signing of such an agreement which was of concern to
us, but rather the practical consequences which it purported to have on
our position in West Berlin. There was no way by which one-sided
arrangements between Moscow and Pankow could affect our rights and
positions in West Berlin, but the practical consequences of such an
arrangement were important to us. We had supposed that, in a modus
vivendi, certain points of agreement might be registered and others put
into a process of discussion which would open the way to their solution
by peaceful means. This might take some time, but time was less
dangerous and expensive than haste if the latter were to involve a
direct confrontation of the kind threatened over Berlin. We did not
attach great importance to the precise wording of such a modus vivendi.
There seemed to have been some confusion at Geneva as to precisely what we had in mind with our
paper. Gromyko had handed us a
working paper embodying the standard Soviet positions. This was not a
paper designed to deal with the question of how we handled disagreement,
but was a record of the elements which were disagreed and embodied in
the Soviet position. Our paper was intended for another purpose: how to
manage disagreement. It did not mention such matters as the Western
occupation status or an all-Berlin solution, which would have been
included in any full exposition of the Western point of view.

We consider, therefore, the Secretary went on, that our two Governments
should think carefully about how they should deal with these matters and
in which direction the discussions could be moved forward. We did not
ask for a piece of paper recognizing our position in West Berlin. We are
there. It ought to be possible to discuss and clarify some arrangements
on access. The Secretary noted that he had said before that there was no
inherent contradiction between free access and the authority of the East
Germans in carrying out their responsibilities. This did not appear to
be an insuperable problem.

The Secretary said he thought there might be an advantage in trying to
find even some small point on which an advance could be made. This might
be to devise some means to reduce the sense of tension existing in
Berlin, which registered itself on both sides of the wall. Families were
divided and could not visit each other and the flow of normal trade was
made more difficult. Operation of the normal facilities of the city
could best be worked out by arrangements between those responsible for
the two sides of Berlin. We were interested in the possibility of
increasing the well-being of the people of Berlin by facilitating their
ability to work, to visit with each other, and to enjoy the cultural
opportunities on both sides of the city. We could understand that the
free flow of refugees that had previously taken place created great
problems for the Soviets and the East Germans. It had never been our
policy or that of the Federal Republic to stimulate this. When the
refugees arrived in West Berlin we did what we could for them,
consistent with our traditions. We did not consider it in our interest
to have the flow proceed on the scale on which it proceeded. Without
getting into the question of this kind of movement, we would like to see
an improvement in the interchange between West and East Berlin. The
Secretary then suggested a formula for the execution of an all-Berlin
technical commission contained in the attachment to this memorandum of
conversation, a copy of which he gave to Dobrynin at a slightly later
point in the conversation.

The Secretary said he would like to add some comments on one or two other
problems affecting the general situation. We did not fully understand
why there seems to have been a tightening up of the situation. From our
point of view, this seems to have been coming from the East, not from
the attitudes or hopes of the West in these matters. Organically, there was no connection between
Berlin and disarmament negotiations, but in the broadest political sense
it was inevitable that these matters should influence each other. A
crisis over Berlin would obviously have the gravest implications for
disarmament. If there were movement on the one, there could be movement
on the other in the sense that there would be mutual reinforcement for
the effort to bring about normalization and reduction of tensions.

(See Separate Memoranda of Conversation dealing with subjects of
disarmament and Laos for coverage of discussion at this point.)2

Resuming the general discussion, the Secretary stated that there was need
to give serious thought to the broadest direction of our respective
policies. In a period where Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy
would have responsibilities for the policies of their two countries,
they would have a chance to decide matters of the greatest importance.
These would involve whether the two great social systems represented
would be able to work out their long-range relationships leading to a
normal relationship between states. On ideological grounds this did not
appear easy, but on practical grounds and in terms of the interests of
the two and of the countries associated with them the problem did not
appear to be insuperable. However, the Eastern side must recognize and
take account of what the other side considers its vital interests, and
not merely of what it thought the vital interests of the other side
ought to be. The possibilities ahead for a more normal relationship were
very great, just as the tensions and dangers of an opposite course of
action would be very great. If the latter development ensued, it would
be cold comfort to know that so much history depended on these two
countries.

On the subject of Berlin, the Secretary noted we had made an immediate
suggestion regarding an establishment of an all-Berlin technical
commission. We also hoped that the Soviet Government would try to review
its position carefully in an effort to find a basis on which these
questions could be taken up with better reciprocity. It was not a good
situation to have the President report to the U.S. people and our allied
leaders report to their people, that, despite the building of the wall,
the absorption of East Berlin and the discussion of certain other broad
points on which agreement might possibly be found, on matters of direct
major concern to us, there was nothing to show that Moscow was
interested in moving towards a settlement. We also hoped, the Secretary
added, that the Soviets would give further attention to our modus
vivendi paper looking at it as a possible means of handling the
situation of disagreement.

Ambassador Dobrynin asked whether
the formula which the Secretary had handed him on the all-Berlin
technical commission was intended as a response to the paper given the
Secretary by Gromyko at Geneva.
The Secretary said our modus vivendi paper, given to Gromyko at Geneva, was intended as our
effort to deal with the general situation as we saw it, which we did not
feel, for reasons already indicated, his principles paper adequately
did. Dobrynin said that what the
Secretary had mentioned today had already been discussed with Gromyko and contained nothing
essentially new. His understanding had been that there would be a reply
to the Gromyko paper on certain
points. His impression had been that now was the time to obtain this
reply. Or did the Secretary not feel free to discuss the Gromyko paper, but instead wished to
make different points? The Secretary observed that he had not supposed
from the Geneva discussions that Gromyko expected a written reply to his paper. Dobrynin said it was not a question of
a written reply, but of a reply. The Secretary commented that, from his
talks with him, Gromyko could
identify those points which created the main difficulties between us. If
he wanted comments in an informal working paper on his informal working
paper, this could be considered. Dobrynin said that Gromyko had proposed a point-by-point discussion of his
paper, but now the Secretary was suggesting a different approach. The
Secretary pointed out that the purposes of the two papers had been
different. Recalling the content of Mr. Gromyko's paper at Geneva, he did not believe we could
carry any discussion very far without a greater element of reciprocity
on the part of the Soviets. He did not see enough readiness to take
account of our vital interests to promise that any discussion of the
Gromyko paper would be
profitable. Our paper was intended to advance the process of discussion.

The Secretary said he had been interested in one formulation of Chairman
Khrushchev to Mr. Salinger. He had said that the Soviets
could not recognize the right of the Western powers to maintain troops
in West Berlin. If this were analogous to our statement that we could
not recognize the GDR, that was one
thing. In the context of the other remarks made by Chairman Khrushchev, we assumed that there was
no significance to this formulation, but if there were, we would be glad
to know about it. That would open up further possibilities.

With respect to the German question as a whole, Dobrynin stated, there were certain
positive facts. The Soviets did attach some importance to the fact that
exchanges on these matters were now going on. A peace settlement and a
Berlin settlement were of great importance to the Soviet Union, which
had fought together with the Western powers against Germany and had
suffered much. The Soviet Union now wanted to draw a line under World
War II. It was not trying to gain anything from the United States. What
was desired was a recognition of the situation existing in Germany, that is the existence of
two German states. During the War the U.S. and the Soviet Union had been
allies, and had had the same aim of eliminating the Hitlerite aggressive
forces. But now, the troops of the two countries have different aims.
They were not allies any more. U.S. troops were in West Berlin not just
as occupation troops, but as NATO
troops. He was not speaking of the number of such troops, but of the
fact that they were still there to fight the Soviets and against Soviet
interests. It was, therefore, better to lessen tensions and to settle
this matter so that relations between the Soviet Union and the U.S.
could be improved. Clearly, the Soviet Union wanted to have good
relations with the United States, but certain circles in West Germany
wanted the two countries to clash. Otherwise, their “Great German”
schemes could not be carried out. The Soviet Union was not interested in
such a clash. In response to the Secretary's query as to who precisely
in West Germany wanted such a clash, Dobrynin said that many people demanded the restoration
of the German borders as before, and he was sure the Secretary knew who
they were as well as he did. Such a restoration could not be obtained
without U.S. assistance; hence they wanted a clash between the Soviet
Union and the U.S. A settlement of the situation in West Berlin would be
good for both countries. If this could not be obtained, then we might
come to the point where we would be confronted by a great test. The
Soviet Union was trying to avoid this and to seek a solution. If one
were to take the substance of the Secretary's statement, Dobrynin continued, and what is being
discussed in the West German press, what the Western powers were trying
to do was to find a settlement of the German and West Berlin problem
within the framework of the old occupation situation, and without taking
account of the new situation in the world and in Europe. The Secretary
asked what he meant by the “new situation.” Dobrynin responded the war has been over for more than
17 years, and we could not live forever in a state of war. It was
necessary to draw a line under World War II in a legal sense. The Soviet
Union wanted to legalize the situation of peace. Whether one liked it or
not, there were two Germanies. The Secretary commented that when we talk
of the fact of the two Germanies, we also must say that our presence in
West Berlin and free access thereto are facts.

Dobrynin said that the general
line of the Western approach was very clear; it was an open secret which
could be read in the papers. The substance of the West German proposals
as they had appeared in the press had the intention of spreading the
occupation rights existing in West Berlin to the communications between
West Berlin and the outside world. They wanted to continue four-power
responsibility, but what responsibility did the four powers have?
Ninety-five per cent of all traffic to West Berlin was the
responsibility of the GDR. Five per cent
was controlled by the Soviets under agreement with the East Germans.
When the peace treaty was
signed the Soviet Union would give that five per cent back to the East
Germans. It could not be said that even now there was any four-power
responsibility for access. The Secretary said he could not accept such a
formulation. Dobrynin observed
that the Secretary had spoken of facts. It was a fact that ninety-five
per cent of all traffic to West Berlin was now the responsibility of the
GDR. The Soviets had felt that it
was a good idea, after the Geneva discussions, for him (Dobrynin) and the Secretary to now
proceed with the positive points which had been discussed with Gromyko, but now three or four meetings
had taken place in Washington and “we had not made a single move.” The
Secretary commented that he was glad that Dobrynin had said “we.”

Dobrynin stated that in the
respective positions of the two countries there were certain things in
common which could be settled without too much difficulty. However, as
Chairman Khrushchev had said to
Mr. Salinger, and Gromyko and he to the Secretary, all
these questions could be easily solved, but only if there were a
settlement of the main question—liquidation of the occupation regime in
West Berlin. He referred to the fact that the Secretary had many times
raised the question of guarantees of access. The Soviets had accepted
the idea of an arbitration body or board. This had been a move on their
part, after the President had first raised the subject of an access
authority with Adzhubei. The
Soviets were ready to discuss this but they could only accept the idea
if there were agreement on the main point—ending the occupation regime
in West Berlin. When speaking of an access authority, the Soviets had
always made it clear this was not a control organ over access, for the
access routes go through the sovereign territory of the GDR, which has
the only real right to exercise the right of a sovereign state within
its sovereign territory. It was difficult to expect that the GDR and the Soviets would agree to give
rights which already belong to the GDR
to an international body. When the peace treaty was signed, the GDR would have all its sovereign rights
over access. The Soviet Government was not prepared to discuss
suggestions aimed at strengthening the remnants of the occupation regime
instead of its liquidation. Dobrynin noted that the so-called West German proposals
had not been discussed, but as these had appeared in the press, they
were completely unacceptable to the Soviet Union which was unwilling to
consider anything aimed at strengthening the occupation regime. The
Soviet Union still hoped that an agreement could be reached on West
Berlin and a German peace settlement. It felt that there was a
possibility of ending the occupation regime without inflicting moral
damage on the U.S. or Soviet Governments. They could declare to their
people that they had come to an agreement directed at achieving closer
relations between both countries. He, therefore, had to say that while
there was some glimmering of hope for an agreement, his Government could not accept the
maintenance of occupation rights in West Berlin, and his Government
could not agree on a settlement without a settlement of this question.
As Chairman Khrushchev had said,
this was the test of relations and if agreement were not reached, then a
serious situation would result. “The key was in your hands.”

Reviewing his notes, Dobrynin
observed that the Secretary had today merely repeated once more what he
had said to Gromyko. The
Secretary said that he had suggested that the Soviet Foreign Minister
come back to our Geneva suggestion and take a new look at this method of
handling the problem. Paging through his notes, Dobrynin observed that
the Secretary had mentioned U.S. relations with its Allies. The Soviet
Union did not try to influence these relations and at their last meeting
on April 27 the Secretary had said he was going to Athens to exchange
views with his Allies. Did the Secretary's remarks reflect this exchange
of views? The Secretary responded that there was no problem at the
moment of any importance between the Allies affecting this discussion.
The central problem is what Dobrynin had called the central problem.

Changing the subject again, Dobrynin said that, with reference to GDR recognition, the Soviet Union did not
ask formal recognition, but recognition of the sovereignty of the GDR and that it must enjoy all sovereign
powers within the limits of international law. The Soviet Union would
like to sign a peace treaty after reaching an agreement with the Western
powers and then put this agreement into the peace treaty.

As to the all-Berlin technical commission, Dobrynin continued, this was not a main issue between
the Soviet Union and the U.S. This was a matter for the Germans to
discuss among themselves. It was their business. If they wanted
something of this sort, the Soviet Union would be prepared to help. It
was not its job. As far as the wall was concerned, he added, the Soviet
Union had no authority to discuss this matter on behalf of the GDR Government and it was not a proper
subject for discussion with the Secretary.

Dobrynin stated that his
Government likewise felt the seriousness of developments in other areas.
The Secretary was aware of how the disarmament situation stood. The two
countries agreed on one thing, namely that the security of both
countries had to be respected. The basic concept was that when the first
stage of disarmament had been completed, there would be no relationship
of advantage or disadvantage and both sides would have the same amount
of security. He could agree that there was no direct connection between
disarmament and the Berlin problem, but that they were related. The
settlement of the Berlin question would obviously have an effect on
disarmament, since distrust between the two countries was an important
element in the situation. If the Secretary wished to discuss any matters
arising out of the Zorin-Dean talks, or
if the Secretary had any concrete proposals how these matters could be
handled better, he would be prepared to engage in such discussions.

Again referring to his notes, Dobrynin referred to the Secretary's remarks on
co-existence and said that it was the Soviet Union's view that the two
countries should really co-exist. In the ideological sphere this was
more difficult, but in the factual sphere the Soviets felt that peaceful
co-existence was both possible and required. There were no insuperable
problems between the two.

The Secretary said he wanted to comment on a few points made by Dobrynin. The latter had referred to
our troops in West Berlin as being there to fight the Soviets. They were
not there to fight anyone if West Berlin was left alone. They were there
to insure the safety of West Berlin. On the question of rights, he
continued, neither in terms of international law nor the specific
post-war arrangements was there any way by which the Soviet Union could
create a situation in East Germany which modified our rights in West
Berlin. If we differed on this, we wanted the Soviets to be clear on how
we saw the situation. On the other hand, there was no need for practical
interference with the authorities in East Germany in the maintenance of
free access. This was something that could be resolved, but we did not
want to leave the impression that we think East German sovereignty can
in any way take over our rights in West Berlin.

On the central question, the Secretary continued, Dobrynin had said the key was in our
hands. This was an expression of the lack of reciprocity which is at the
heart of the problem. Far-reaching proposals for change have come from
the Soviet side. It is not we who have developed the sense of crisis
over West Berlin. We cannot accept the proposition that the Soviet Union
should make such proposals and then claim that the key is in our hands
in the sense that we must accept them. One cannot deal with the United
States in that way. The key is in Soviet hands in that it has made the
proposals. We are willing to try to find a common key. We require some
reciprocal recognition that our vital interests are involved. In that
sense the key is in the Soviet hands.

As to the technical commission in Berlin, the Secretary added, our
thoughts were that anything that reduces tension between Germans in
Berlin would be beneficial to us, since such a reduction of tension
would be transmitted to us. Dobrynin said the two sides could not deal with this
matter in the fashion suggested in the paper handed him. The Secretary
said this was just a suggested formulation. Dobrynin said it was up to the Germans and not to us.
The Secretary asked whether he did not think this was a matter where we
could not exercise a certain influence. Dobrynin merely repeated that it was the Germans' job,
not ours. Mr. Kohler noted that he had read that the
wall had represented a decision of the Warsaw Pact powers.

Dobrynin said that, if the
Secretary preferred to use the term “common key”, the Soviets were
prepared to accept this. He did not understand the Secretary's remarks,
however, about GDR sovereignty. The
Secretary said he had been referring to an article in an East German
paper that we had already recognized the sovereignty of East Germany.
Dobrynin commented that the
U.S. may be overly sensitive on this. The Soviets understood this, but
what they wanted was that the sovereign right of the GDR in its own territory be recognized. The
Secretary noted that he had said the Soviets could not give East Germany
something which the Soviets did not have. Dobrynin injected that, with the peace treaty, the
GDR would enjoy full sovereignty.
The Secretary said “Not without our consent.” Dobrynin responded “This is where we
differ.”

Dobrynin said he had noted that
the Secretary was planning another trip to Europe. The Secretary said he
might make such a trip, but only for a few days. At Athens he had not
had time to discuss many problems of interest to the West other than
Berlin and Germany, and he wanted to deal with these, such as the common
market. Dobrynin said he thought
this was mainly Undersecretary Ball's subject.

As the conversation terminated, it was agreed that Dobrynin would report back to Moscow
and when he received new instructions would request a further meeting
with the Secretary.

Attachment

SUBJECT

Berlin

The two sides declare that they will seek the agreement of the
authorities in West and East Berlin to establish an all-Berlin technical
commission to be composed of officials appointed by the authorities in
West and East Berlin to deal with such matters as the facilitation of
the movement of persons, transport, and goods between West and East
Berlin, and the regulation of public utilities and sewage.

1 Source: Department of State Central Files,
762.00/5–3062. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand and approved in S on
May 31. The conversation was held in Secretary Rusk's office at the Department of
State. On May 23 Hillenbrand
prepared a list of 19 talking points for this conversation. (Ibid.,
762.00/5–2362) Seven supplementary points were included in a May 28
memorandum from Kohler to
Rusk. (Ibid.,
762.00/5–2862)

2 Memoranda of these conversations are in the
Kennedy Library, National Security Files, USSR, Dobrynin Talks.

60. National Security Action Memorandum No. 15860. National Security Action Memorandum No. 1581

Washington, May 31,
1962.

TO

Secretary of State

SUBJECT

Contingency Plans for Berlin

The President has now approved the development of contingency plans for
Berlin on the basis of acceptance of a requirement for passports for
West German access to West Berlin, but rejection of any attempt by East
German authorities to require visas for such access.

In approving such contingency planning, the President explicitly reserves
the right of the United States Government to review its position in the
light of the actual development of events. In particular, approval of
this planning should imply no automatic American undertaking to extend
military protection to civilian traffic under any specific set of
circumstances.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316. Top Secret.
Copies were sent to Secretary of Defense McNamara, Director of Central
Intelligence McCone, and
General Taylor.

61. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy61. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, June 5,
1962.

SUBJECT

Proposed Directive for Meeting Harassment of Allied Autobahn
Convoys

There are at present no explicitly stated US or tripartite rules to
determine the conduct of convoys which are held up by the Soviets or East Germans on the autobahn
except under the specific conditions envisaged in the Live Oak plans.
General Norstad has believed
that he has had sufficient authority in his capacity as commander of US
Forces in Europe to order some employment by US convoys of forceful
means (short of use of weapons except in self-defense). We considered it
desirable, however, to make the rules explicit so that they could be
reviewed in Washington and could be adopted by the UK and France. In
response to requests for a plan embodying such rules, therefore, General
Norstad prepared a directive
which he at first submitted to the US alone. Now, in slightly modified
form which takes into account the comments Embassy Bonn and our Mission
in Berlin made concerning the first draft, he has submitted it to the
US, UK, France and Germany through Live Oak. He has asked for
consideration of all four governments on an urgent basis. A copy of this
second draft is enclosed (SHLO 5–00288).2

In essence the proposed directive would authorize the following actions
by an Allied convoy:

1) If the convoy is denied passage by administrative resistance (e.g.,
refusal to clear it through a Soviet checkpoint), by undefended or
passive obstacles which can be removed by means integral to the convoy
(pioneer tools, unarmed personnel) or by a small group of troops bodily
blocking the way, the convoy commander after a series of protests and
warnings will proceed forward.

2) If initially, or after first proceeding as in paragraph 1 above, the
convoy encounters defended obstacles or obstacles which cannot be
removed or crossed with means integral to the convoy, if the troops
blocking the way do not move aside, or if sizeable troop units are
encountered disposed for defense, the convoy commander after a series of
protests and demands for passage, will withdraw when ordered to do so by
the Berlin Commandant concerned. During this operation the convoy will
fire only in self-defense and only if fired upon. Follow-up action to
withdrawal is provided in some detail.

A vital aspect of this plan is that it spells out the limitations on the
degree of force a convoy will be authorized to use in these
circumstances. However, the course of action envisaged should not be
considered as leading to use of force in all or most cases. Actually, we
are dealing with Soviet efforts to harass, not block, Allied access. Our
threat and evident willingness to proceed in the face of this harassment
can be expected to demonstrate to the Soviets that harassment will if
persisted in bring upon them
the full consequences of blockage, which we do not believe they are at
this time willing to incur. A plan for following up our threat is
necessary, but only for the unlikely event the Soviets either do not
believe it or are willing to go farther than harassment.

I consider that, if you approve the proposed course of action, it should
be adopted for US use pending tripartite approval. If the British and
French will not adopt it, but have no objection to our doing so, we
should retain it. We have the greatest number of convoys and hence have
greater need for such a plan. However, we should reconsider the plan in
the face of British or French objections of such a nature that their
cooperation, following US failure to obtain access with the plan, would
be doubtful. Lack of Allied support at that stage would leave the US in
the difficult position of having failed in a forceful and public test of
will, but without suitable measures to press the matter further. We
should make very effort to avoid significant weakening of the plan in
such reconsideration, however.

It should be noted in this regard that there has been scheduled for June
9 a US convoy movement which, given its character and the recent pattern
of Soviet harassment, may be held up at the checkpoint. Even if US
consideration of the plan is completed by that time, tripartite study
will likely still be in progress. As pointed out in the first paragraph
above, however, General Norstad considers he has sufficient authority to
order action along the lines of the plan even if formal approval has not
been given to it by that time. If prior to June 9 it is evident that the
British or French object so strongly to the proposed directive that
unilateral use of this course of action by the US would jeopardize their
future cooperation, we should consider whether General Norstad should be instructed not to
authorize action along those lines while the problem is being
reexamined.

I recommend that you approve the course of action proposed by General
Norstad, together with the
above considerations concerning its unilateral adoption by the US. This
recommendation has the concurrence of the JCS and Defense.3

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.54/6–562. Secret. Drafted by Day on June 4 and cleared by
OSD/ISA and JCS.

2 Not
attached to the source text, but a copy is attached to another copy
of Rusk's memorandum in the
Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B
3542. On July 17 Ausland retyped the text of SHLO 5–00288 and in between its
paragraphs added comments and suggestions made on them by the
Ambassadorial Group and various U.S. posts. (Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–1862)

3 On June 25
Bundy transmitted to Secretaries McNamara and RuskNSAM No. 167, which reads: “The
President has approved the course of action for dealing with Soviet
and/or East German harassment of Allied autobahn convoys which the
Secretary of State proposed in his memorandum of June 5, 1962.”
(Ibid., NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316)

62. Editorial Note62. Editorial Note

On June 7 the Soviet Union transmitted to the Embassies of the United
States, the United Kingdom, and France in Moscow notes protesting “a
series of dangerous provocations” by the West Berlin police and
“Fascistic elements” against the German Democratic Republic. In
particular the Soviet Union protested the firing by West Berlin police
into the Soviet Sector. In their June 25 reply the Western powers stated
that the West Berlin police were responding to shots fired by Eastern
zone guards attempting to stop refugees from fleeing the Soviet Sector
and noted that the difficulties in Berlin were due exclusively to East
Berlin authorities acting with the full consent of the Soviet Union. For
texts of the notes, see Department of State Bulletin, July 16, 1962,
pages 97–99.

63. Editorial Note63. Editorial Note

In a footnote to his biography of Robert
Kennedy, Arthur Schlesinger stated:

“On June 18, 1962, Bolshakov gave
Robert Kennedy a message from
Khrushchev. Khrushchev said that, if the United
States continued to insist on occupation rights in West Berlin, ‘the
Soviet Union will face the necessity of signing a peace treaty with the
GDR and the question of liquidation
of war remnants will be solved and on this basis the situation in West
Berlin—a free demilitarized city—would be normalized.'” (Arthur M.
Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy
and His Times, page 535)

Although Schlesinger cites the Robert
Kennedy papers as a source for this quote, no record of
the message has been found at the Kennedy Library.

64. Memorandum of Conversation64. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June
18, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

Anatoli Dobrynin, Ambassador
of the USSR

Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counselor of Soviet Embassy

The Secretary

Foy D. Kohler, Assistant
Secretary, EUR

Martin J. Hillenbrand,
Director, Office of German Affairs, EUR

Ambassador Dobrynin said that he
had brought the Secretary's remarks at their last meeting2 to
the attention of his Government and had now received appropriate
instructions. He then read from an English text along the following
lines:

(Mr. Hillenbrand was able after
the meeting to check a number of points with Counselor Kornienko, who had the Russian text of
Dobrynin's instructions, but
no aide-memoire or other written document was handed over.)

The Soviet Union has agreed to an exchange of views with the United
States Government on a peace settlement with the aim in mind of reaching
a wide agreement which would contribute towards mutual understanding
consistent with the interests of both sides. The Secretary's statement
had been a repetition of what had already been said many times: That the
United States would not participate in a German peace treaty, whether in
a single treaty with the two German states or in separate treaties with
the two German states. At the same time the United States is evading an
agreement which could be concluded on such a basis that thereafter the
Soviet Union could complete its peace treaty with the GDR and thus effect a mutually beneficial
solution of the West Berlin and other related problems.

We now face the task of concluding a peace treaty and eliminating the
vestiges of World War II. The most urgent situation requiring
normalizing is that of West Berlin. This cannot be on the basis of the
preservation of occupation rights, that is on the basis of the
continuing presence of the occupation forces of the United States, Great
Britain, and France. It is impossible to continue a useful discussion of
the German problem by attempting to lay aside the basic question of West
Berlin and the liquidation of the occupation regime therein. To do this
would be to preserve a dangerous hot-bed which could blow up the entire
world.

If nothing was said about ending the occupation regime and withdrawing
the occupation forces in the draft principles paper which the Secretary
gave Foreign Minister Gromyko at
Geneva, this was a weakness not a strength of this paper. It seeks to
fix the present abnormal situation of West Berlin for an indefinite
period and to engage both sides in indefinite talks. It would thus not
lead to an arrangement which would draw a line under World War II.

The Soviet Union cannot accept any agreement perpetuating the occupation
regime which is now constituted by NATO
troops. The forces in West Berlin are not the same kind of forces as
were there in 1945. Then they were directed at the elimination of German
militarism and Nazism and at averting a further threat of World War. The
occupation of West Berlin today constitutes a specific kind of NATO military base in which NATO forces are stationed.

The Soviet Government has made a number of concessions in its various
proposals to have token forces of the four occupying powers in West
Berlin, or to have neutral or UN troops
in West Berlin. To these has been added the suggestion that symbolic
forces of certain smaller NATO and
Warsaw Pact countries might be stationed there. In the latter case these
forces should naturally operate under the UN flag and not as representatives of the two blocs. They
would be in West Berlin on the basis of a new treaty. Thus a clash
between the US and the USSR would be avoided and account would be taken
of prestige considerations on both sides. These troops would be a kind
of symbol of the will of the participants not to allow outside
interference in the affairs of West Berlin.

The Soviet Union had a right to expect that the United States would
approach the Soviet proposals objectively, but the US has shown no
willingness to compromise or to take account of the interests of both
sides. The Secretary of State has said that the United States does not
require recognition of the presence of its occupation forces since this
is a fact. This presence allegedly gives the United States the right to
stay indefinitely in Berlin. The Secretary has indicated that this is
not a subject for discussion at all. But if the United States does not
want to discuss this subject, then what is there to discuss? The
continuing presence of occupation troops contradicts the aim of seeking
a mutually acceptable solution and bringing an end to World War II. The
US has also referred to its rights under the quadripartite agreements
and the unconditional surrender of Germany. But these did not establish
a basis for the indefinite occupation of any part of Germany. They
envisaged a peace treaty and drawing a line under World War II. The US
assumes unilaterally that it has an obligation to defend West Berlin and
the rights of its population. This cannot, however, create additional
rights with respect to presence or access. As is known, the Soviet Union
and the GDR acknowledge the right of West Berlin to determine its
own life. They are also willing to give international guarantees either
by having UN troops there or under the
most recent formula of troops from the two blocs under the UN flag. Any unbiased person would have to
admit that these would be an improvement over occupation troops which
are a constant cause of friction.

When the United States insists on the maintenance of the occupation, it
is difficult not to get the impression that it cares less for the rights
of the population of West Berlin than it does for NATO military interests. The US has said
that it does not recognize any GDR right
to control traffic to West Berlin. The GDR does not need such a right. Even now it controls 95% of
all such traffic. When speaking of access therefore, one is talking only
of 5% of the total traffic. The only basis for an agreement on such
access would be one combining the principles of freedom with respect for
the rights of the GDR. The Soviet Union
is surprised, therefore, that the US has thought of the idea of some
sort of international body, with a membership of thirteen states, which
would exercise rights in and crossing the territory of the GDR. Such a proposal is unacceptable in
view of its inconsistency with respect for the rights and sovereignty of
the GDR. How could one expect the GDR to give up what it has to a body
devised to deprive the GDR of its
sovereignty over a part of its territory? This would not better but
worsen relations between countries.

The Soviet Union has put forward its proposal for an international organ
to act as an arbiter. This was a step towards the US position. It would
not control access, however, but be an arbitral body to pronounce
judgments. It would not play master over the territory of the GDR or interfere with its sovereignty.

It will be impossible to come to an agreement if the Western Powers try
to force through Adenauer's claim
to Berlin as a Land of the Federal Republic of Germany or his ideas on
an access treaty. The Federal Republic of Germany is aggressive and
threatening. Every delay in achieving a peace settlement encourages the
Federal Republic to new provocations organized in West Berlin, for
example, such hostile actions against the Socialist countries as those
planned in West Berlin for the middle of July. (When queried by the
Secretary as to his reference to the middle of July, Dobrynin checked with Kornienko's Russian text and corrected
his statement to “the middle of June”.)

As for the US suggestion regarding an all-Berlin technical commission, it
had to be pointed out that, after having taken certain defensive
measures, the GDR made certain proposals
to the West Berlin Senat for agreement on measures to facilitate
movement between West Berlin and the capital of the GDR. No favorable response was received.
This could not be a subject for talks between the US and the USSR since
it concerned a matter within
the exclusive competence of the GDR. Its
solution was an internal matter for the Germans themselves.

On a number of items some basis for understanding did seem to be
emerging.The Soviet Government did not underestimate these. If the US
were reasonable, agreement could be reached on them, but the principal
task in connection with drawing a line under World War II is to settle
the West Berlin question. As the Warsaw Pact powers had recently stated,
they were willing to reach agreement on a mutually acceptable basis. If
the Western Powers did not show a similar desire, then the Warsaw Pact
countries would conclude a peace treaty with the GDR with all the
ensuing consequences. This would mean that the GDR would acquire all the rights of a sovereign state and
the vestiges of war would be completely liquidated. West Berlin would
become a free demilitarized city and the rights of the occupation troops
to remain there would not be recognized. All countries wishing to have
contact with West Berlin would have normal negotiations with the GDR.

As Chairman Khrushchev had said
recently to Mr. Salinger, it was
unwise for the two sides to try to frighten each other. They both have
ample power. To threaten to resort to the argument of force does not
help understanding. If anyone tries to threaten, he should realize that
he is doomed to failure. It was believed that the US Government was
aware of this.

Returning to the analogy of the Japanese Peace Treaty, it had to be
pointed out that the US and the USSR had fought together against Japan
and that the Japanese had also surrendered to the USSR. Nevertheless, a
separate peace treaty had been signed with Japan depriving the Soviet
Union of its rights as an occupying power. Now the US wants to keep its
occupation troops in West Berlin despite such a peace treaty, even
though this would merely lead to tensions and prevent the elimination of
the vestiges of the war. If it is true that at the time of the San
Francisco conference the US had certain ground to believe that it
enjoyed a military advantage over other powers; this time has now
passed. As the President recently said, there is now an equality of
power. Regard must, therefore, be taken for the position of other sides.
This must be understood. If in fact the Western Powers force the Soviet
Union to conclude a peace treaty with the GDR, they will find themselves in the same position as the
USSR after the Japanese treaty.

The Soviet Union does not want to see the glimpse of hope and
understanding between it and the US fade. It, therefore, hopes that the
US Government will not yield to those who are trying to force a
collision.

(This concluded the formal statement of Dobrynin's instructions.)

The Secretary said he was going to address a rather curious question to
Dobrynin as Ambassador. He
wondered what his answer would be if he were to ask the Ambassador whether he saw anything new in
what he had just said. Dobrynin
responded that his remarks were intended as a summary of the Soviet
position. The Soviets had received no reply to the proposal which
Chairman Khrushchev had made as
to the possibility of having troops in Berlin from the two pacts. The
Secretary stated he believed from what had been said earlier that
Dobrynin knew we could not accept this proposal. Dobrynin asked whether
our definite reply was that this was not acceptable. The Secretary said
“yes”.

The Secretary then gave his first observations on Dobrynin's statements. He said that he
did not think we could accept full responsibility for the phenomenon of
repetition. In its essential aspects the Soviet position which had just
been outlined had been regularly repeated since 1958. We do not believe
that constant repetition will of itself produce a series of proposals
from the West which could involve continuous attempts at compromise
leading to erosion of the central necessity of our position in West
Berlin. It is true that we have repeated this central point over and
over, but there has been repetition on both sides. With reference to
Dobrynin's statement about our remarks as to attempting to perpetuate
the presence of our troops in West Berlin, we have not used this term.
We hope that in time it will be possible to reach a permanent settlement
of all outstanding German questions. We do not believe that we can reach
such an agreement under present circumstances. We cannot seem to reach
agreement either on a permanent settlement or on a definition of the de
facto situation. Perpetuity is a very long time and we have not
ourselves thought of the question in terms of perpetuity. With respect
to a question like that of Berlin which is extremely difficult and
central, time can have a useful effect. As the President had indicated
to Chairman Khrushchev in his
communication, he was encouraged to think that a way was opening to a
settlement of the issues of Southeast Asia with particular reference to
Laos. We hoped the Geneva conference would resume and achieve this
result. This would be an important step. We also hoped that there were
other points, such as outer space and disarmament, where improvements in
our relations could occur. The more the general atmosphere improves, the
more possible it will be to sort out the relationships between the two
countries and the more manageable the central issue of West Berlin might
become. An improvement of conditions in East Berlin and East Germany
might make this more manageable.

The Secretary said he found it difficult to attach importance to the
charge that the occupation troops in West Berlin were NATO troops. Western Europe and the United
States united in the NATO agreement
under circumstances with which Dobrynin was familiar. In an analogous sense the Warsaw
Pact organization had been formed. The facts that our troops are in West
Berlin and that we are members of NATOdoes not change the reality
that our troops are there under earlier arrangements and that these
arrangements cannot be changed and still have us meet our commitment to
West Berlin. When in our modus vivendi paper we said we were not asking
the Soviets to recognize the occupation status, we were trying to take
the prestige question into account. Dobrynin had mentioned it was true that our prestige was
heavily involved. If Soviet prestige is involved in the removal of
Western forces from West Berlin, this was a problem created by the USSR
for itself. Under these circumstances, it was not easy for us to solve
the problem of Soviet prestige on the basis which the USSR proposed. Our
modus vivendi did try to take account of Soviet prestige.

The Secretary went on to say that he was disappointed not to recognize in
what Dobrynin had said any
element of reciprocity in taking account of the other's vital interests
which, in their last talk, he had requested the Soviets attempt to do.
Dobrynin kept using the words
“concession” and “compromise”. The lack of reciprocity was disturbing in
the Soviet reference to certain things which were stated not to be open
for discussion. Such subjects as German reunification or solution of the
Berlin problem on an all-Berlin basis seemed to be beyond discussion. We
cannot accept that only the diminution of our rights and commitments is
open to discussion. We do not see that necessary reciprocity here which
would open the way to handling this admittedly complicated but at the
same time simple and potentially dangerous problem. If Moscow were
attempting to consider how things look from our side, its reference to
relations between West Berlin and the Federal Republic could not be made
as it is made. After all, the Soviets maintain that East Berlin is part
of the GDR. In the face of this, it would be perfectly normal for us to
say that West Berlin is part of the Federal Republic. Years ago, we
entered a reservation which prevented an application of the Federal
Republic's constitution to Berlin in order to be in a position to deal
with these matters on a four-power basis. Now the Soviets say that East
Berlin is part of the GDR and that is
the end of it.

With reference to Dobrynin's
mention of the discussion of force, the Secretary continued, he thought
it right that neither the US nor the USSR should attempt to settle
questions with each other by threats or reference to a war which the few
survivors would never be able to understand. But the pressure of force
comes from what the Soviets have said and from what Dobrynin had repeated today with
respect to the consequences of the proposed agreement with the GDR. It was this pressure, intimidation and
attempt to frighten which had given an atmosphere of crisis to the
Berlin situation. This was dangerous and unnecessary, the Secretary
added, but he wanted to identify that this pressure had been exerted by
the Soviets on one of the key problems from the very beginning.

The Secretary said he would not go into any detail on the Soviet attempt
to draw an analogy with the Japanese Peace Treaty. We could provide
extensive notes as to why we did not consider this really relevant.
Soviet forces had not been in occupation in Japan. Soviet cooperation
with us in the Japanese war had been of three days' duration, although
we had made strenuous efforts to enlist Soviet cooperation in that war
at a time when we were also fighting Nazi Germany. There had been no
quadripartite occupation of Japan, no zones of occupation and no Soviet
presence. There had been general agreement among the community of states
as to the terms of the Japanese treaty, although the Indians thought
they were too severe and the Burmese thought them not to be severe
enough. The Secretary added that he believed Chairman Khrushchev had told the President at
Vienna that the Soviets should have signed the Japanese treaty. Thus,
there were many differences which do not make the Japanese analogy
relevant to the present situation.

As to access, the Secretary continued, the Soviets are aware from the
newspapers that we have had some thoughts which had been under
discussion among us on an International Access Authority. At an earlier
point, Ambassador Thompson had
indicated some general ideas on the subject to Foreign Minister
Gromyko. We were, of course,
familiar with what Gromyko had
said at Geneva on a four-power arbitral group. The Secretary said he
thought there were matters involving access which could perhaps be
worked out, but what makes them secondary is to link the access question
with the withdrawal of Western forces from West Berlin. It did not seem
profitable to try to find out whether such a four-power body would act
unilaterally or what precise authority it would have as long as the link
with troop withdrawal were maintained. At Geneva there seemed to be a
time when this did not appear to be a fundamental point in Soviet
thinking, but this now does seem to have been clarified as a fundamental
point. Therefore, there did not seem to be much prospect in going down
this trail.

These were his first observations, the Secretary concluded. He would
report to the President and would be seeing his colleagues among the
Western Foreign Ministers on his forthcoming visit to Europe. We would
review the whole situation and presumed the Soviet side would do
likewise, but he thought the central point continued to be the one which
Dobrynin had indicated. It was the key that would unlock these other
doors. The Secretary could also repeat arguments one through twenty, but
did not feel any need to do so.

Dobrynin said he would like to
reverse the Secretary's question and ask what is new in the US position.
The Secretary commented that this was an important point. If one looked
back on the past year of discussions between the two governments, one
noted that we had made a considerable effort to draw attention to certain points we thought of
interest and of importance to the Soviets and on which we considered
some form of agreement might be possible. We have thus over the past
year been injecting new elements. The Soviets, on the other hand, seemed
to be putting them in a bag, tying the noose and then asking, “what's
new?” Then when we get to the point of West Berlin, they continue to ask
“what's new?”

Dobrynin here reviewed what he
called the four Soviet variations for replacement of Western occupation
troops in West Berlin: symbolic units of the four former occupying
powers, of neutral countries, of UN forces and of certain countries of
the NATO and Warsaw Pact groupings.

(Subsequently, Mr. Hillenbrand
queried Kornienkov as to whether the second and third above were really
variants. It was confirmed that they were, although the neutral units
would be there under UN aegis.) Dobrynin said that the Soviet Union
wanted to lessen tensions in the middle of Europe. Yesterday Adenauer had been in Berlin. This would
probably lead to a further exchange of notes. Did we think that this
would help relations? The Soviets were trying to find a way, but the
Secretary said only “No, No”. The US had also given an ultimatum in
saying it had no answer but to maintain the presence of Western troops.
While the situation in Laos contained many elements that were not
parallel, one advantage was that the US and the USSR were not
confronting each other there. The Secretary commented that he was not
sure that this applied in Germany. Dobrynin observed that it would be better if troops
could be withdrawn to some extent. He did not want to emphasize the
point which was linked to the concept of zones, but ending the
confrontation would be a good thing in Berlin. The Secretary asked why,
if this were so, the Soviets were not prepared to have the four powers
accept the responsibility for all of Berlin. Dobrynin said that East Berlin is the capital of the
GDR. This was not just an
announcement, but there was a completely different social life there.
The Secretary commented that there was no reason why East Berlin could
not continue to be the locale for the small Soviet contingent just as
West Berlin was the locale for the small Western contingents. The fact
is, he continued, now that all these other things are in the Soviet
basket, they are reaching out to deprive us. Dobrynin asked whether the
Secretary believed that a UN presence
would put West Berlin in a Soviet bag. The Secretary answered in the
affirmative, noting that the reactions of the West Berliners and of our
Allies would be just what President Kennedy had
explained at Vienna. Dobrynin
said the proposal for symbolic troops from the two Blocs was fair. The
Secretary asked what the two Blocs had to do with West Berlin. Dobrynin responded by saying that it
was not the capital of the Federal Republic. The Secretary observed that
we were holding it in trust until the day when Berlin became the capital of a reunited
Germany. He did not see why the Soviets could not keep their troops in
East Berlin simply because of their effort to make East Berlin capital
of the GDR. After all there were some
twenty odd Soviet divisions in the GDR.

Dobrynin said the Soviet Union
had nothing against German reunification, but the situation had changed
much since the end of the war. If after World War II the West had wanted
unification, it could have had it on one condition—the neutralization of
Germany. The US could scarcely expect the Soviets to permit the
reunification of Germany under such conditions as would have it end up
in the Western camp. At that time the Soviet Union was quite prepared to
have a united but neutral Germany. Then came Bizonia and subsequent
developments. Now there were two German states. Surely the US did not
believe that unification was possible now. It was true that such a
powerful people would eventually have to be united. But the Soviet Union
could not wait until then. As to the Japanese analogy, Dobrynin continued, the question was
not one of how long the Soviets had fought in the war against Japan.
After all, their contribution in the war against Germany and their
losses had been much greater. As a matter of fact, the question was not
one of counting the days of fighting but simply that the US did not wish
to take consideration of Soviet interests in the Far East. The Secretary
observed that a lot of history was involved, but it could not be
forgotten that the Japanese treaty came at a time when practically every
agreement we had made with the Soviets during and after the war had
turned sour, for example that on China. Dobrynin commented that there was no China in 1949. The
Secretary said that one of the reasons for this was that the Soviets had
not kept their agreement on the disposal of Japanese arms. Dobrynin said he could not accept this,
but in any event this was not the question.

Coming back to West Berlin, Dobrynin claimed that he could not understand why the US
insisted on one-hundred per cent of its position, that is only presence
of troops of the three powers. Any of the various Soviet proposals would
permit the West Berliners to have their way of life. Why did the
Secretary insist on keeping US troops there permanently? The Secretary
said he should qualify “permanently”. After all, Dobrynin continued, the US is fond of
UN troops elsewhere and the Soviets
are not. Therefore, they thought UN
troops in West Berlin should be acceptable. If UN troops were accepted there, an agreement could be
reached on their composition. The main question from the beginning has
been that of the Western troops. Other questions were interesting, but
were not primary. The Soviets had never tried to give the impression
that this was not the principal question in order to get a little more
out of the US. Yet the US always said “no” to Soviet attempts to provide
a formula. The Secretary observed that we have tried to find some answer
to the question of prestige. It
had been unnecessary for the Soviets to make a point which they knew was
impossible for us a matter of their prestige. This had been imprudent
from a diplomatic point of view. We have tried to suggest how this
problem of prestige might be dealt with. The Soviet line in rejecting
our suggestion leads to the conclusion that their purpose is to get us
out of Berlin and thus bring about a fundamental change in the situation
in West Berlin. Dobrynin said the
Soviets wanted West Berlin to live as it did now. They believed that it
was not necessary to have US troops there to guarantee this. But the US
insisted there was only one way. This is the agreed way, the Secretary
commented. We agreed that the Soviets would be in East Berlin and the
Western Powers in West Berlin. Dobrynin said that seventeen years after the end of the
war had brought a new situation. The Secretary asked what the new
elements were. Dobrynin responded
that there were now two German states which were members respectively of
NATO and the Warsaw Pact. Any
collisions between those two states would inevitably reflect on their
respective Allies.

The Secretary commented that the problem of West Berlin had no bearing on
this relationship of the two parties if the Soviets left West Berlin
alone. Dobrynin observed that
West Berlin was a source of danger. Today Adenauer was there, tomorrow there would be more clashes
at the borders. The Secretary said that perhaps if someone other than
Ulbricht were there, these
frictions would decline. Dobrynin
said that he would not make the same remark about Adenauer or Brandt. It was not a question of only one man. It would
be far better if there were no opportunities for these daily clashes.
The Secretary observed that they were not necessary. Dobrynin said that people thought they
could do anything they liked in West Berlin because they could hide
behind the “big boy”. The US said its prestige was involved. But if the
US were not there, then the Germans could not run and hide behind “big
boy”. It was hard for the US to say “keep quiet” to the Germans. Neutral
representatives or UN representatives
would not permit these things. They would say “keep quiet”. Why was the
US so stubborn in keeping its troops there? The Secretary observed that
Dobrynin and the Soviets
continued to be just as insistent that we abandon our responsibilities
in West Berlin. What after all do the Czechs and the Poles know about
the so-called way of life in West Berlin? They have had no experience in
guaranteeing this way of life to West Berlin. Dobrynin said they would know what to
do and not allow activities in West Berlin which would jeopardize
relations between the US and the USSR.

The Secretary asked why there should be a problem from the Soviet view in
having an agreement filed with the UN,
with our staying in West Berlin. Why could we not agree that pending
final settlement of the German question, the Western Powers would
continue to accept responsibility for the security of West Berlin. The access question
could be worked out. This agreement could be filed at the UN and the UN
could approve it and establish some sort of presence in West Berlin.
Dobrynin commented that
unless this means UN troops, there would
be no change from the present situation. The Secretary said that it
would give the Soviets a change to refer to something which they could
say was better than occupation status. If there were other issues of the
sort about which Dobrynin had
expressed concern, these could be taken up in the UN. Dobrynin stated
that with UN troops in Berlin, the
situation would be different. The UN can
follow a line more gracefully than could the US. The Gaza Strip
experience had worked out pretty well. The Secretary observed that
different parties were involved. Dobrynin said the Secretary was too suspicious. The
Soviets had made a serious offer. It was not just a trick to get
something from the US. The Secretary commented that there had been a lot
of history since 1949. A lot of experience in mutual confidence was
required. Dobrynin said that Laos
was a good experience. The Secretary added that we have told Moscow that
July 2 is agreeable to us for the opening of the Geneva meeting.
Dobrynin asked whether the
Secretary would be going to Geneva. The Secretary observed that what
might be done was that Harriman and Pushkin could get the matter
settled. Dobrynin commented that
then the Foreign Ministers could come along and sign.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/6–1862. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Hillenbrand and approved in S on
June 19. The conversation was held in Secretary Rusk's office at the Department of
State.

2 See Document 59.

65. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State65. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Paris, June 20,
1962, midnight.

Secto 20. Following summary based on uncleared memorandum of conversation
which being pouched.2

During meeting with Couve afternoon June 20, Secretary briefly reviewed
recent talk with Dobrynin on June
183 and made following general observations:

1. Soviets now seem to be concentrating on point of direct interest and
confrontation: presence of Western forces in West Berlin.

2. Soviets have shown interest in other matters such as Warsaw-NATO non-aggression pact, nuclear
non-diffusion and mixed German commissions, but key point remains
question of troop presence.

3. In talk with Dobrynin of May
30, Secretary had urged need for Soviets to bring more reciprocity into
discussions in recognition vital interests of West. In latest
conversation Dobrynin merely
repeated stand-ard position in systematic form and urged US to bring
forward new ideas. US accused of repetition and Dobrynin referred to Soviet
concessions, i.e. various formulae to get US out of Berlin.

4. There has then been no advance on substance, but we did not have
impression Soviets are moving toward early military crisis, although
this might change tomorrow.

5. As Secretary has indicated at Athens, Soviets also do not seem to want
register complete diplomatic impasse.

6. While exchanges with Soviets therefore becoming increasingly sterile,
we believe they have been worthwhile and have served purpose. Khrushchev has pointed to them as
justification for elimination of time table and of harassments. Should
Berlin situation come to crisis no one could say we had neglected any
resources of diplomacy. In discussion of present Soviet intentions, both
Secretary and Couve agreed that while these highly relevant to Western
position evidence lacking on basis of which any definite conclusions
could be drawn beyond those noted above. There was also agreement that
situation in East Germany was threatening and might lead Soviets to
apply further pressures and threats similar to those in pre-wall period
last summer. Secretary said that if we were not sure what Soviets up to,
we were also not sure that Khrushchev was certain which course to take. On one
hand, he made relatively subdued statement such as recently in
Bucharest.4 On other hand, Soviets
seem to have caught themselves on prestige problem of separate peace
treaty. They also seem to be going ahead with rather active military
buildup in missile and nuclear field, and they may just be waiting until
they attain stronger military position.

In commenting on French position, Secretary said we seem to be in general
agreement on substance and that French views as to whether any headway
could be made on substance had so far proved correct. We felt it
necessary to go ahead with talks, and would welcome greater French
participation.

Our differences might well be resolved by events themselves. Couve said
he agreed much of drama had disappeared since December NATO meeting, but maintained position
that, while French take it as a fact that the US will go ahead in talks with Soviets, they could not
approve or participate.

In response to Couve's query as to
whether we still had idea of giving new paper to Soviets, Secretary said
that we had put in no further paper since Geneva. However, we did not
want to exclude possibility of revising paper. At present this did not
seem useful, since Soviets have remained adamant on troop presence. We
did believe there would be some advantage to putting access question
into some sort of framework so that great issues of prestige were not
raised on either side.

After further discussion of central issue of Western troop presence,
Couve asked whether Secretary
did not think that at some point Soviets would change position.
Secretary indicated that there was time at Geneva when this possibility
seemed to be opening up, but Soviets had since then shown no further
flexibility in discussion of Berlin.

After discussion of present Fed Rep attitude on relations with East
Germans, Secretary said that, with respect credit request by GDR, we were inclined to think positive
response might be a good idea. Couve said French had no real views on subject, and he
did not know whether East Germans would insist further on credits in
view of publicity.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/6–2062. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated
to Bonn, Berlin, Moscow, and London. Secretary Rusk visited Europe June 18–28 for
discussions on topics of mutual concern.

2 SET/MC/10. (Ibid.,
110.11–RU/6–2062)

3 See Document
64.

4 For text of Khrushchev's June 24 speech at
Bucharest, see Pravda, June 25, 1962.

66. Memorandum of Conversation66. Memorandum of Conversation1

Berlin, June 21,
1962, 4 p.m.

SET/MC/13

SECRETARY'S EUROPEAN TRIP (June 18–28, 1962)

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Dowling

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Kohler

Mr. Manning

Mr. Hillenbrand, Mr.
Lightner, et al.

Germany

Governing Mayor Brandt

Mayor Amrehn

Senator Schiller

Senator Kielinger

(other Berlin officials)

SUBJECT

Berlin

Mayor Brandt began by expressing
his appreciation for the Secretary's visit. He then gave a report on the
local situation noting particularly that:

(1) Morale was better now than at the end of 1961;

(2) This contrasts with the mood of desperation in the GDR which led to a heightened flow of
refugees despite the difficulties of crossing the border;

(3) The economic condition of West Berlin is good with production 5%
greater than last August despite the loss of 60,000 members of the labor
force;

(4) The flow of people into West Berlin was still not sufficient to
offset the losses normally incurred because of the unfavorable
population structure, but the outflow had been halted;

(5) Berlin was going ahead on economic programs under the Senator for
Economics, Professor Schiller;

(6) Security problems at the sector border were causing concern and more
shooting was possible (this might lead to a request that Allied
personnel be brought closer to the wall in view of the orders in the
Eastern side not to fire at Allied uniforms).

The Secretary then gave his general impression of discussions which he
had been having with the Soviets. He pointed out that our commitment to
Berlin was beyond question. Our troops were not in Berlin as tourists;
they represented the US presence. We had told the Soviets we are here
and will stay here. If they try to drive us out they have been told this
would mean war and all the destruction which war would bring. Because of
the seriousness with which we view our commitment, we feel we must
maintain responsible contact with the other side.

Frankly speaking, the Secretary said, he could not report any significant
progress in his talks with the Soviets. No agreement was in sight. The
simple issue which had emerged was the presence of our forces in Berlin.
At the same time we do not believe that the Soviets wish to precipitate
a crisis or to create a diplomatic impasse. This may, of course, change
at any time. If the Soviets continue to repeat their position we will
continue to repeat ours. We had nothing to trade in Berlin with since
our vital interests represent fundamental commitments to Berlin.

On one aspect of the situation, the Secretary continued, the West
Berliners could help. If there were any sign among the population of a
lack of confidence, the danger arose that this would give the wrong
signals to Khrushchev, who might
think we are weaker than we are and overreach himself. Hence, the
confidence of the West Berliners was important.

We were concerned about the situation in the GDR, the Secretary noted. Berlin is involved because a
crisis in the GDR enables the Ulbricht Regime to put pressure on
Khrushchev, who in turn puts
pressure on us. Another point, the Secretary said, which he wanted to
make was there was no disarray
on principle among the Allies. He had told De Gaulle in Paris2 that he must
confess that the French had been right so far about the difficulty of
finding a basis for negotiations with the Soviets. On the other hand,
De Gaulle had confessed that
the talks had not produced the kind of disturbances and collapse of
morale which he had thought might be possible. Our differences,
therefore, are essentially on tactics and procedures, and there is an
underlying agreement on policy.

As to the press leaks on the makeup of the International Access
Authority, the Secretary said, we had not put this proposal to the
Soviets but had been discussing it with our Allies. When Khrushchev read about it in the
newspapers, he rejected it because of the provision for West German
membership. We are not going to argue about a hypothetical question with
the West Germans. So far the Soviets have been talking about access to a
Berlin from which we are removed.

In response to Brandt's question as
to whether the Berliners feel that the recent Warsaw Pact
Declaration3 might portend a
stronger engagement of the Warsaw Pact Powers and a pushing ahead
towards a peace settlement, the Secretary commented that we could not,
of course, stop the Soviets from signing a peace treaty. What was
important was the alleged consequences for us. The question was whether
they would have a sort of Bolz-Zorin arrangement,4 or tell the GDR
to do nothing, or let the GDR attempt to
control our access. We were a little inclined, on balance, to think they
should not proceed with their peace treaty at the present time. He did
not think the other Warsaw Pact members, with the exception of the GDR,
played much of a role in this situation. Mr. Bohlen suggested that a more likely interpretation of
the Warsaw Pact Declaration was that this obtained the endorsement of
the Pact countries for further deferral of the peace treaty
deadline.

Mayor Amrehn stated that the danger
of such declarations is that it raises the prestige factor. He wondered
whether the question of status had arisen in the Secretary's talks with
the Soviets with particular reference to the ties of the West Berliners
with the Federal Republic as they have developed over the past thirteen
years. The Secretary said that, on the latter point, the matter of these
ties had been referred to briefly some times before. We, of course, had
made our legal situation clear long ago in terms of the reservation we
had entered on certain articles of the Bonn Constitution. However, we
have always insisted that the West Berliners, as far as the other side
is concerned, must have freedom to establish whatever relations they wish with the outside world,
including the Federal Republic, and that this is intimately linked to
the viability question. Because the discussion had centered on other
matters, this question has not arisen with the Soviets in any direct
way. As to the question of status proper the Soviets are, of course,
talking about eliminating the occupation status. Since this is
unacceptable, other aspects of status have not arisen.

Mayor Brandt thanked the Secretary
for his presentation and added that he would like to emphasize the
necessity to take some action to create holes in the wall by political
means. This might be done within the framework of the Federal Republic
trade negotiations with the GDR, through
the International Red Cross, through some action by the Western Powers
vis-a-vis the Soviets, or finally by some effort to mobilize world
opinion, e.g., using the Human Rights Commission of the UN (Brandt added that the last point was not the position of
the Federal Government in Bonn). The Secretary said we would discuss
this matter in Bonn. We have not come forward with any proposals on the
wall because we did not want to seem to give the wall status by
accepting its presence. When he had raised the question with Dobrynin, the latter had said this is
not a subject for the Soviets but for the GDR.

At this point the discussion terminated and the participants left for the
Golden Book Ceremony.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
110.00–RU/6–2162. Secret. Drafted by Hillenbrand on June 22 and approved in S on June 25.
The conversation was held in Mayor Brandt's office.

2 A record
of Rusk's conversation with
De Gaulle on June 20,
transmitted in Secto 13 from Paris, June 20, is printed in vol.
XIII, Document 255.

3 For text of the June 7 Warsaw
Pact declaration, see Pravda, June 10, 1962.

4 Regarding the Bolz-Zorin letters, exchanged on
September 15, 1955, see footnote 3, Document
8.

67. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy67. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy1

Washington, June 21,
1962.

SUBJECT

US and Soviet Military Buildup and Probable Effects on Berlin
Situation

REFERENCE

General Taylor's
Memorandum of 14 June to the Secretary of Defense, Chairman, Joint
Chiefs of Staff and Acting Director Central Intelligence2

General Taylor's memorandum asked
for a comparison of the military buildup of Soviet forces with that of
United States forces over the past eighteen months and for our views of
the probable effect of the current relative strengths on Soviet
attitudes toward the Berlin situation in the coming months. I shall
treat these as two separate but related subjects in this report which
has been prepared with the assistance of the Central Intelligence
Agency, the Joint Staff and Defense Intelligence Agency and has the
concurrence of the Director of Central Intelligence and the Director,
Joint Staff.

Forces Buildup

The size and composition of the USSR's military forces have been
influenced importantly by Soviet policy decisions of the past year and a
half, in which the Berlin crisis has been an important factor. A
programmed reduction in military manpower and in older air and naval
equipment was underway in 1960 and had cut total military strength to
3,000,000 men in the first part of 1961. In response to our reaction to
the Berlin pressures, the process was reversed in the summer of 1961 by
calling some key reserves and delaying the discharge of conscripts in
the Fall of 1961. We believe that the force level now stands at about
3.25 to 3.5 million men. The increase in personnel strength seems to
have been used to bring existing units up to strength and provide needed
combat and service support units rather than to raise the number of
divisions. We believe Soviet Army strength is now approximately 145
divisions, of which 79 are at 70% or higher strength and have an
immediate combat capability. The remaining 66 vary in strength and
training status but are essentially cadre units of 40% or less strength.

During the same period the United States armed forces have been increased
by 325,000 to 2,825,000. More significant than the number is the form
which our buildup has taken. We have made a major increase in
operational missiles, both tactical and strategic. We have filled out
skeleton combat units, relieved tactical forces of basic training
missions, added needed support units, reequipped with modern weapons,
increased mobility, improved the alert status of both strategic and
tactical forces, eliminated critical shortages of equipment, and raised
forward stockage levels—in sum, we have put our forces on an increased
war readiness basis.

It is difficult to be precise in cataloging specific measures taken by
the Soviets and particularly in determining the timing of their moves.
However, the Soviets have made important qualitative improvements,
notably in mechanizing their ground forces, adding to their formidable
submarine fleet, and in expanding their strategic nuclear capabilities.
Soviet missile capabilities for nuclear delivery and air defense have
continued to increase in the past 18 months, and the tempo of the ICBMprogram has quickened. At
present, the USSR possesses a ballistic missile force capable of
delivering massive nuclear attacks against targets in the European area,
and a much more limited force of missiles and bombers suitable for
attacking the United States.

In sum, we believe that the measures it has adopted since 1 January 1961
mean that the USSR is now retaining ground, air, and naval forces at
levels higher than originally planned, while at the same time proceeding
with an expansion of capabilities with advanced weapon systems. But, on
balance, we believe there is no question that the relative improvement
has been in our favor and that the Soviet leadership knows it. I have
attached to this report two annexes, one showing, for both sides,
strengths and changes in personnel and in key organizations and weapons
and another describing measures taken to improve combat readiness in
critical categories.

Implications for Berlin

With reference to Berlin, I feel certain that our improved military
position and our firm response to provocation have had a major influence
on Soviet attitudes. From the beginning Khrushchev has sought to develop his campaign against
Berlin in such a way as to avoid serious risk of general war. At the
same time, he evidently believed that Allied concern over a military
confrontation would lead the West to compromise its position in
Berlin.

While the Soviet leadership has received a firmer reaction than expected
from the West, it has been beset with mounting internal and intra-Bloc
problems. In the wake of the October Party Congress, the Kremlin has had
to deal with problems raised by the renewed attack on Stalin and the
anti-Party group and with a widening rift in its relations with Peiping
and Tirana. Another factor that may be inducing caution is the status of
the East German regime which continues to be plagued with economic
problems and a resentful, hostile population. It is a singularly
unstable Satellite upon which to base a major political issue. The
Soviets also apparently intend to continue their efforts to woo West
Germany, as a possible alternative to negotiating with the Allied Powers
and as a device for driving a wedge between Bonn and its NATO partners.

Another important factor which contributes to the USSR's hesitancy in
pushing its Berlin objectives by precipitate action is that the Soviet
leaders appear now to realize that the shift in the political-military
relation of forces in the world has been less significant than they
anticipated two or three years ago. The United States acceleration of
military programs beginning in 1961 has clearly impressed them as a
manifestation of United States determination and has also forced them to
confront the economic implications of a new round of arms competition.
At the same time, they have had
to recognize that the West cannot be persuaded to accept their inflated
strategic claims. Perhaps equally important, they have become aware that
their real accomplishments in strategic weapons cannot be so readily
translated into concessions by the West as they had earlier
imagined.

We recently estimated (in NIE 11–9–62),3 in
conjunction with the other USIB
agencies, that it is unlikely that the Soviets are resolved to bring the
Berlin issue to a head in some fixed period of time, and that they will
probably continue their effort to obtain concessions through
negotiations. We believe it likely that the Soviets will not sign a
separate peace treaty in the near future, but we do not exclude this
possibility. At the same time, we believe it highly unlikely that the
Soviets regard Berlin as an issue to be settled by a genuine or lasting
compromise; they aim at eventual incorporation of the western sectors of
the city into East Germany. We see no evidence that the Soviets feel
able either to reduce their basic objectives or to abandon negotiations
and seek these objectives by unilateral action.

Accordingly, in the more recent NIE 11–13–624 we concluded that for the near future at least, the
Soviets are not likely to moderate their demands in order to take the
negotiations off dead center. However, we think they are more likely to
do this than to resort to major unilateral action, such as a separate
treaty. Most likely of all is a continuation for the present of the same
rigidity in negotiations without at the same time any serious move to
break them off. While this judgment in the NIE is derived from an
interpretation of recent Soviet behavior, rather than from any
significant body of intelligence data, we feel that it is the best
evaluation which can be made at the present time. The chances are good
that there will be a new round of Berlin harassments, intended primarily
to keep pressure on West Berlin morale and on Western negotiators.

Robert S. McNamara5

1 Source: National Defense
University, Taylor Papers,
Box 37, 101 Soviet Buildup. Top Secret. The source text bears no
drafting information. Two annexes entitled “Comparative Data
Soviet-US Forces 1 Jan 61–1 July 62” and “Major Measures Taken To
Improve Readiness of Soviet-US Forces” are not printed.

2 Not found.

3 “Trends in Soviet Foreign Policy,” dated May 2, 1962. (Department
of State, INR-NIE Files)

4 “Soviet Intentions With Respect to Berlin,” dated June 13, 1962.
(Ibid.)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this
stamped signature.

68. Memorandum of Conversation68. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bonn, June 22,
1962, 11:30 a.m.

SET/MC/24

SECRETARY'S EUROPEAN TRIP

(June 18–28, 1962)

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Dowling

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Kohler

Mr. Manning

Mr. Morris

Mr. Hillenbrand

Germany

Chancellor Adenauer

Foreign Minister Schroeder

Dr. von Eckhardt

Dr. Carstens

Dr. Krapf

Dr. Von Hase

Dr. von Braun

Dr. Osterheld

Dr. Reinkemeyer

SUBJECT

Berlin

After the private meeting had terminated between the Chancellor and the
Secretary,2
with only an interpreter present, the discussion resumed in a larger
group including Foreign Minister Schroeder and other senior officials. The Chancellor
announced he had had a good and frank talk with the Secretary. Mutual
trust had been increased “if this were possible”. The Chancellor
repeated, “if this were possible” (wenn dies moeglich waere). The
Secretary expressed his appreciation for the Chancellor's words and
indicated the primary purpose of his visit to Europe was to consult with
the Federal Republic and to make sure that no accidental
misunderstandings persisted which could be eliminated by discussions. He
noted that this was his first visit to Bonn.

Schroeder said he also wanted to
express his gratitude that the promise which the Secretary had made at
Athens about the visit had been carried out. While this had started out
as “a little promise”, the way the trip had developed it had turned into
a considerable commitment of time and energy by the Secretary. He was
therefore all the more grateful that the Bonn visit had remained
possible.

The Secretary then reviewed his recent talks with Soviet Ambassador
Dobrynin. He said it was not
always pleasant to talk with the Soviets, but this was always easier
when the Western Powers are united and going together on the policies
involved. He was grateful for the basic unity which existed. He had
initiated these additional talks with Dobrynin because his Geneva talks with Foreign Minister
Gromyko had arrived at a
point of no agreement on the most elementary Western vital interest: our
troop presence in West Berlin. Other subjects had been discussed with
the Soviets but there had been no real exploration of these. We kept
coming back to the fact that the Soviets were trying to eliminate or
cripple the Western forces in Berlin. At one stage in Geneva the Soviets
did not seem to be completely adamant on this point. They hinted that
they might abandon their position. The Secretary had now seen Dobrynin four times; the talk on June
18 had been at the Soviet Ambassador's initiative. Dobrynin, in effect, admitted that he
had nothing new to say, and the Secretary said he had nothing new to
add. Dobrynin complained that
there were no new ideas from us, but that the Soviets keep coming up
with new ideas, for example, the various formulae for replacing the
Western troop presence in Berlin. The Secretary noted that he had
pointed out to Dobrynin that it
was not very helpful to produce a number of variations to accomplish
what was not acceptable to us. This did not amount to putting forward
new ideas. However, the Secretary added, we did not have the impression
that the Soviets now wanted a military crisis or a diplomatic impasse,
although we could not be sure of this. We seemed to be getting to the
point where there was not much more to say unless we get into details
which are attractive to both sides and which might help to ease tensions
while the basic disagreements continue, for example, easing of border
incidents in Berlin by a meeting of the commandants, procedures so that
families and friends could meet with one another, et cetera. There is no
reason to think that any agreement on the broad issues of Berlin and
Germany is likely in the near future.

The Secretary noted that, in his talks in Paris, he had found the French
much more relaxed on Berlin than previously. The differences with the
French were proving much narrower than had been feared. He indicated
that he had to admit to President De
Gaulle that the French view on the impossibility of
finding a satisfactory basis for negotiations had so far proved correct.
In return, De Gaulle admitted
that the Secretary's talks had not caused the disturbance and crisis
within the Alliance which he had feared.

There seemed to be general agreement on policy with the French although
not on tactics. The French had not said they would join the activities
of the Washington Ambassadorial Group for consultation on our talks with the Soviets, but
they are, of course, fully participating in Berlin contingency
planning.

Reporting on his trip to Berlin, the Secretary said he had been gratified
by the good morale and the steadiness of the Berliners. He noted that
the German NATO representative, Von
Walther, during the recent NAC meeting,
and Mayor Brandt during their
discussions in Berlin, had expressed concern about the possibility of a
build-up in pressures in East Germany which might lead to renewed
pressures on Berlin itself. If the pressures in the GDR could be relieved somehow, this might
reduce the crisis in the Berlin area.

Schroeder said that his impression
of the Dobrynin talks was that
they had gone on in a good atmosphere without bringing any real change.
The Soviet concentration in recent talks on the point of the Western
troop presence and their general stress on Berlin proper rather than on
broader subjects might be a Soviet tactic so they could say this was the
really important issue which had to be solved first when the East
Germans applied pressure on them to move ahead with signature of the
peace treaty. He referred to a recent talk which he had with Ambassador
Smirnov in which the latter had placed stress on Berlin, and also to a
more recent talk with FDP leader
Mende and Smirnov which, if
correctly reported, indicated continued Soviet interest in some form of
access authority. This to him seemed to confirm the limited nature of
the present Soviet interest in concluding a peace treaty. It seemed
clear that the Soviets would have little purpose in signing such a
treaty without prior agreement on a modus vivendi with the Western
Powers. If they did go ahead and sign such a treaty, then they would
presumably have to consider inserting some separate Berlin clause in the
peace treaty. He thought therefore there was a possibility the Soviets
might eventually accept the unavoidability of continued Allied presence
in West Berlin; hence their interest in possible access arrangements.
This spoke for the probability of drawn-out discussions. As to the
situation in the GDR, Schroeder
expressed the view that despite the increasing unrest which reflected
stronger refugee pressure, he believed it unlikely that the regime would
lose control in view of the overwhelming Soviet military presence in the
GDR. He outlined West German
thinking on the East German request for credits. The basic
considerations were to do as much as possible to preserve the economic
ties of the GDR with the Federal
Republic and favorably to affect Berlin access. The population of the
GDR, to the extent this could be
determined, would argue against extension of credits as further
strengthening the regime preferring to suffer rather than to see this
happen. However, this would not be an obstacle to a positive decision if
other factors were in favor of it. Extension of long-term credits also
had the disadvantage of seeming to accept the long-term existence of the
GDR and would also create an incentive, after the period
of initial deliveries was over and the period of repayment of credits
starting, for the GDR to upset any
arrangements. The Federal Republic had the problem under active
consideration. It was clear that the GDR
was very greatly interested in these credits. The economic interest of
the Federal Republic was minimal, and the political interest was not yet
precisely defined.

The Secretary said we appreciated Bonn's assurance that we would be
consulted before a final answer was given to the East Germans. While
such credits would be important politically, it was not easy to know in
what direction they would go. Khrushchev had used the existence of talks between
Moscow and Washington as a pretext and possible reason for the
postponement of the deadline on the peace treaty and the ending of
further harassments. Whether an additional trade relationship between
the Federal Republic and the East Germans would serve as a further
pretext to defer signing of the peace treaty was a relevant question.
Moreover, if these credits were as important to the GDR as they seemed to be against the
background of economic difficulties in the Bloc, then an extension of
credits might create a value which the East Germans would feel it
important to protect and thus give them a stake in calm relations. He
was inclined to discount somewhat the argument that credits would
support a regime from those who prefer hardship to loss of freedom,
since no amount of hardship was likely to overthrow the regime unless
the West were prepared to fight a war. In summarizing he said we would
be generally sympathetic to the idea of credits if the Federal Republic
thought they were a good idea, if they did not involve highly
disadvantageous trade features, and if they did maintain pressure on the
other side to keep the situation peaceful because of its interest in
continuing deliveries. Schroeder said the Federal Republic still wanted
to consider the various arguments pro and con, and felt no need to begin
formal negotiations today or tomorrow. It would discuss the matter with
its Allies when the Germans knew their own minds better.

Schroeder raised the possibility
of dramatizing the incidents at the Berlin wall and demarcation line by
bringing the situation before the UN
Human Rights Commission. While the Federal Republic did not
categorically reject this up to now it had generally not favored it on
the ground that the other side would try to bring the whole Berlin
question as well as the question of the peace treaty and the German
problem before the UN, once an opening
were provided. The UN as now constituted
could not be relied upon to consider the issue favorably. The Secretary
said there were two separate questions involved: What can be done to
help the people of East Germany and how can we make the Communists pay
for what they are doing? He did not believe that conditions could be
improved by a propaganda approach. Hence the question might first be
explored through International Red Cross contacts. If we had determined that improvement was not
possible, then we could decide how to achieve a maximum propaganda
effect. He agreed that, once the question got into the UN it would be unpredictable what many
UN countries would do, particularly
in the light of the Soviet position that UN forces might be substituted for Western occupation
troops.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
110.11–RU/6–2262. Secret. Drafted by Hillenbrand on June 25 and approved in S on June 28.
The meeting was held in Chancellor Adenauer's Conference Room at the Palais Schaumburg.
A detailed summary of this conversation was transmitted in Secto 39
from Bonn, June 22. (Ibid., 611.62A/6–2262)

2 For a brief report on the
private meeting, see Document 69.

3 At 3 p.m. on June 22 Rusk and Schroeder discussed various aspects of the positions
to be taken in continued talks with the Soviet Union on Berlin. A
memorandum of this conversation (SET/MC/27) is in Department of State, Central Files,
110.11–RU/6–2262.

69. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State69. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Rome, June 23,
1962, 2 p.m.

Secto 48. Eyes only for President and Acting Secretary. No other
distribution. I am satisfied that the visit to Berlin and Bonn was a
good investment.

(1) Despite the deliberate restraint and relative brevity of my arrival
statement and speech at the Golden Book ceremony,2 both the
Berliners and the West Germans seemed to accept without question my
presence perhaps even more than my words as a reassuring reaffirmation
of US commitments.

The only criticism I have heard came from American correspondents who
considered there was not enough fire and brimstone.

(2) My report on and discussion of the talks with the Soviets with the
Berlin Senat indicated that they would go considerably farther than the
Federal Republic in proposing practical arrangements to alleviate the
situation both in Berlin and on the access routes and that they have
fewer illusions about what we can get without paying the price of some
practical political concessions.

(3) In Bonn I followed the deliberate tactic of first bolstering personal
relations with the Chancellor and then building up Schroeder. It seemed to have had the desired result.
The Chancellor was effusive in his expressions of confidence and
Schroeder was clearly well
satisfied.

(4) I had an hour's talk with the Chancellor alone. I found him far more
lively and mentally alert than I had expected. Indeed his mood,
including two full evenings of friendly and animated discussions with
him and other German leaders, surprised his own colleagues. In our
private conversation he expressed his concern about the stubborn
strength of Communism in Western Europe especially in France and Italy;
he was obviously distressed that there are still some thirty thousand
Communists in the Federal Republic. He spent some time on Red China,
beginning with the repetition of his story about Khrushchev having asked him for help
against the Chinese during his Moscow visit in 1956. Yoshida, who
recently visited Bonn, had underlined to him the “national” character of
what was happening in China and had expressed the view that the path of
safety lies in developing somewhat more normal relations. The Chancellor
asked me about reports that a change in US policy toward China might be
in the making. I told him that we had no completely dogmatic view but
that any such opportunity was severely limited by Peiping's attitude
that the sine qua non of any improvement must be the turning over of
Formosa and its ten million people. I pointed out that this presented us
with an issue similar to that of West Berlin. The Chancellor then
introduced his relations with De
Gaulle by saying that he was deeply aware of the fact
that the memories of Nazism made it impossible for Germany to assume a
leading role in Europe. He then recalled de
Gaulle's visit to Moscow in 1944 to sign a Franco-Russian
agreement against Germany. Diagramming the geographical relationship
between the USSR, Germany and France he said Germany must do everything
possible to prevent a Franco-Russian arrangement against Germany.
Therefore complete intimacy between Germany and France was utterly
fundamental. This, incidentally, was Adenauer's reflection of the same
underlying longer range Franco-German distrust which I saw from the
other end in Paris.

I told the Chancellor that I thought he had greatly overestimated the
obstacles to a leading role on Germany's part deriving from the Hitler
period. I told him that he personally could now see his bold and
statesmanlike dreams for Europe on the edge of realization. I emphasized
that it was a fundamental interest and policy of the US that Germany and
France be intimately associated but that we saw this within the
framework of joint leadership and a united Europe and in an Atlantic
Community with ever closer associations with North America. I pointed
out that the Atlantic Community is a nexus of interlocking special
relationships reaching around the globe, including the inter-American
system, the Commonwealth, French associations in Africa and the welcome
development of German interests outside Europe.

The Chancellor then repeated a view I have heard in Paris that the entry
of Britain, Norway, Denmark and Ireland into the Common Market would
change the entire character of Europe. Again I told him that I thought
this was an exaggerated fear; since World War Britain has become
increasingly European in its orientation and far less involved, for
example, in that vast area from California to Suez. From across the
Atlantic, we found it at least as natural that Britain could become an
integral part of Europe as that Germany and France could set aside so
much history and become the closest partners. I told him that he could
write his name in the largest letters in history if he could achieve a
situation in which it could finally be said, after several centuries,
that war would not break out over inter-Western European issues. I
emphasized to him that I was not in Bonn to create any problems between
him and de Gaulle but that I thought that both of us would have a
temporary and minor problem if De
Gaulle's understandable campaign to increase the prestige
of France should be undertaken at the expense of his friends rather than
of the enemies of the free world.

Adenauer made no reference to the
irritations of recent weeks nor to any personality problems within the
present German Govt.

He concluded by saying that he had occasionally felt that he would like
to write an informal personal letter about one or another matter to
President Kennedy but that he had been reluctant to
do so because of the President's obvious heavy responsibilities. I told
him that I thought informal and very private exchanges of that sort
would be welcome.

(5) My visit to Bonn removed any doubt I might have had as to the
inevitable growth of German pressure for nuclear weapons unless there
are multilateral arrangements in NATO
or Europe or unless there are significant steps toward disarmament in
this field. The Chancellor asserted in the most positive terms that his
1954 declaration renouncing the production of nuclear weapons was made
under and subject to then prevailing conditions (rebus sic stantibus)
and that, indeed, this interpretation was offered by Dulles on the
latter's initiative. Schroeder
wrestled very hard to get a flat commitment that we would not refer to
the non-diffusion of nuclear weapons in any paper we submitted to the
Russians on Berlin. This I refused to do but simply pointed out that the
matter might become moot because the US and USSR have agreed to discuss
non-diffusion in Geneva immediately upon return in mid-July from the
current recess.

(6) How effective the Chancellor will be with President De Gaulle next week remains to be seen.
The German officials and politicians here obviously have great fears
that he will be seduced. I cannot help but share the fear that the
Chancellor will not stand up well, if the two statesmen do much business
alone. Schroeder, for example, is
as conscious of the deficiencies of the French contribution to
collective defense, especially by providing conventional forces for the standing strategy, as Strauss
showed himself to be in Washington. However when I brought the subject
up with the Chancellor he referred to De
Gaulle's troubles with his Generals and need to rebuild
the morale of the French armed forces. He appeared to accept this as
justification from [for] the lack of an effective French conventional
contribution to the central front and not to be aware of the diversion
of French resources involved in the financing of the force de frappe. He
tended to dismiss the subject with the confident assertion that if
trouble came De Gaulle could be
counted on to put everything France had into the fray.

(7) Despite a certain restraint on the part of the Chancellor himself
about the Common Market, I found general support in Bonn for UK
accession and the confident expectation that the present negotiations
will succeed; this from men like Schroeder, Erhard,
Abs, Rosenberg and others.

(8) I also got the impression that political leaders such as Schroeder, Mende, Dehler and Brandt went out of their way to let me know that there
is more flexibility in Germany about a Berlin settlement than one would
suppose in talking with people like Von
Brentano.

(9) Above is too long but gives background prior to Adenauer visit to Paris where De Gaulle will undoubtedly make a major
effort. I took some satisfaction from Adenauer's volunteered assurance that he would write me
a long letter after his visit to Paris.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 110.11–RU/6–2362. Secret. According to another copy,
this telegram was drafted by Rusk and cleared by Kohler. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF
2122)

2 For text of this statement, see American Foreign
Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 707–708.

70. Memorandum From the President's Press Secretary (Salinger) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)70. Memorandum From the President's Press Secretary (Salinger) to the
President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 25,
1962.

I had lunch with Mike Sagatelyan, the chief TASS correspondent here, which had several interesting
parts to it.

Sagatelyan spent most of the early part of lunch telling me that while I
might think his conversations with me reflected the official Soviet line
he wanted me to know that he was speaking to me personally and not as a
representative of the Soviet Government. He made this point three or four times and then got
on to the subject of Berlin. Sagatelyan said he thought the Berlin
problem could be solved on the basis of allowing Western troops to
remain there but changing the status of the city into a United Nations
mandate or some other form. He said that this was so because the
Russians did not consider the Western troops in Berlin to be an
aggressive force. Despite Sagatelyan's protestations, this would seem to
be an effort on the part of the Soviets to launch another feeler,
particularly in view of my own discussions with Khrushchev on Western troops in Berlin.
The part about Western troops not being an aggressive force is almost a
verbatim quote of what I told Khrushchev. Later in the discussion Sagatelyan told me
he had read the latest account of the Dobrynin-Rusk
talks at the Embassy which again reinforces my opinion that this is a
feeler.

Pierre Salinger

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Attached to a
July 5 memorandum of transmittal from Bundy to Kohler.

71. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany71. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, June
30, 1962, 1:39 p.m.

3591. Please deliver to Chancellor following letter from Secretary as
soon as possible and prior to former's departure for Paris:

Begin Text.

Dear Mr. Chancellor:

I would like to take this opportunity, shortly after my return to
Washington, to tell you that the friendly reception and valuable talks
which we had in Bonn have been a source of great satisfaction to me.
They were the highlight of what proved to be a useful, if somewhat
exhausting, trip to five countries. The success of our talks has shown
once again that there is no real substitute for personal contact in
eliminating misunderstandings and differences of emphasis which may
arise when communication is limited to the written word and speculative
discussion in the press creates false impressions.

I was moved by the warmth of the reception accorded us in Bonn and by the
generous hospitality which you and Foreign Minister Schroeder extended. We covered a wide
range of subjects of importance to both our countries, and I came away
from them ever more convinced that there is a strong and basic mutuality
of interest between the United States and the Federal Republic on all
the issues that really matter. This is a fact in which we may not only
take heart in the present but assurance for the future.

I was much encouraged not only in Bonn but in Paris, Rome and London to
find an atmosphere favorable for the success of the Common Market.
Fortunately, our own legislative action also seems to be going forward
in a favorable way, which will enable us to play a full and positive
share in the development of an Atlantic partnership.

I have the impression that, on the subject of Berlin, we are agreed on
the basic principles involved and as to what we should do both to
strengthen our position and to continue efforts directed at a possible
modus vivendi. We should be able to work out details at the official
level as we go along within this framework of general agreement. In a
related area, I know how much you have been concerned about the sad lot
of the population of East Germany and East Berlin, and how important you
consider it that no legitimate possibility be left unexplored which
might help to alleviate their situation. As you know, I have already
hinted to Dobrynin that we are aware that a major source of the Soviet
problem arises out of the nature of the regime in East Germany and the
general dissatisfaction which its oppressive practices must inevitably
create in the population. We cannot expect that the Soviets will admit
the truth of this to us, but I would hope that the point might at least
make some sort of impression on their own thinking. I believe with you
that we must continue to seek ways and means to help the people of East
Germany but in such a manner as not to arouse premature or false hopes.
Here again the officials of your Foreign Office and the Department of
State concerned with these matters should keep in close touch exchanging
both information and ideas. In this connection, we shall be particularly
interested in receiving the views of the Federal Government as they
develop on the proper attitude to be taken towards the East German
request for credits.

May I once again thank you for your hospitality and reaffirm my
satisfaction that my visit to Bonn proved possible and that its results
were so gratifying.

With warm personal regards and esteem,

Sincerely,

Dean Rusk. End Text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.62A/6–3062. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted
by Hillenbrand and Fessenden,
cleared by Kohler and Knight,
and approved by Rusk.

72. Memorandum of Conversation Between the President's Adviser on Disarmament (McCloy) and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)72. Memorandum of Conversation Between the President's Adviser on
Disarmament (McCloy)
and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)1

Washington, July
3, 1962, 1 p.m.

[Here follows discussion of China.]

Another discussion took place in regard to Berlin. I said I was gaining
the impression that Mr. Khrushchev was digging himself in deeper on the removal
of United States troops in Berlin. Mr. Khrushchev must know how important a factor this was in
our position and the position of all the Allies. To keep emphasizing
this point was endangering a real settlement on Berlin which could be
part of a package which might include a number of points of real
advantage in the relief of tensions.

If Mr. Khrushchev wanted to
diminish the prestige of the United States by demanding the withdrawal
of United States troops and the insertion of other troops in West Berlin
with no penetration of East Berlin by any foreign troops we would not be
getting anywhere according to my view. This is not the time to
crystallize positions on this important issue. Mr. Dobrynin must remember we did not throw
the challenge to Mr. Khrushchev
on Berlin. He did, and he heated it up so much we felt impelled to build
up our military position. This annoyed Mr. Khrushchev very much and he stepped up his armament and
all this leads us nowhere. There is a real opportunity to work out a
solution on Berlin which may not suit Ulbricht but which would relieve
tensions but they can't be relieved if Mr. Khrushchev is really trying to get us to back down in
Berlin which we will not do. I said this was a matter on which I
certainly felt very deeply and I felt the American people did. There
was, in my judgment, real danger of war over Berlin if it were not
handled temperately and there should never be an effort to force the
issue. It carried a terrible danger everytime it was attempted. Mr.
Dobrynin said he knew this
was a sensitive element in our position over Berlin but he did not see
why it was that we objected to neutral occupation of West Berlin. The
United Nations could do this as it had in the case of the Suez, for
example. The danger in Berlin was the confrontation of our two forces.
It was the only place in the world where this was so. The necessity was
to remove this danger. The fact that Berlin was surrounded by East
Germany did not mean that they would ever be disposed to attempt to
overrun the United Nations forces in Berlin. They could never agree to
any presence of foreign troops in East Berlin because such a repudiation
of the Communist regime by the Soviet Union makes it impracticable.

Then, I said, leave the situation as it is with no further attempts to
maneuver us out of position. It was not “intolerable.” It was not
challenging; people could very well get on in Berlin if it were not for
the new challenge. It was, of course, annoying to Ulbricht but who was
Ulbricht to allow him to play
with fire. If Ulbricht could be gotten rid of, I had the idea the whole
situation would be improved greatly.

The West Germans would be much more forthcoming in regard to East
Germany, etc. He suggested we get rid of Adenauer. I said this might be possible if we had
controlled the elections in West Germany as they did in East
Germany.

I referred to the Wall as a terrible acknowledgment of weakness. This
symbol of war and concentration camps was sinister, out of place and a
dreadful admission of weakness in that people had to be locked in their
own home country to keep them there.

He said that it was only natural to erect such a Wall—there were barriers
at every border crossing. I said I knew of only one such penitentiary
wall on any boundary. He said a number of people in the United States
Government had indicated to him that the Wall was a welcome stabilizing
factor.

I said I did not agree. It was just too unnatural and sinister. It
induced violence and hatred. It should be disposed of soon.

[Here follows discussion of disarmament.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7–361. No
classification marking. Drafted by McCloy. The full text is printed in volume
VI.

73. Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy73. Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy1

Moscow, undated.

We are following with great attention the development of the
Soviet-American exchange of opinions on German peace treaty and
normalization on its basis of the situation in West Berlin and we are
carefully weighing considerations being expressed by the President, the
Secretary of State or on behalf of the President through unofficial
channels.

On the other hand, we, naturally, cannot but take notice of the facts
which indicate sharpening of the situation in West Berlin caused by activities of certain circles
not interested in a German peace settlement. Other facts of recent past
also support repeatedly voiced apprehensions that the absence of a final
peace settlement in Germany not only keeps up the existing tension in
Europe but can also cause unforeseen, undesirable consequences for
European and world peace.

All this prompts the conclusion that further delay in solving the
questions connected with a German peace settlement would involve such a
threat to peace which must be averted already now when it is not too
late.

Unfortunately in the course of the Soviet-American exchange of opinions
there has not been achieved any noticeable progress since the meetings
in Geneva. The whole matter has come to a standstill because of the
differences in the main outstanding question—that of withdrawal of the
occupation troops of the U.S., Great Britain and France from West Berlin
and of abolition there of the occupation status. Motives were more than
once given in detail on our side why we by no means can accept
continuation of the present unsatisfactory and dangerous situation in
West Berlin, the reason which lies in the presence there of occupation
troops and occupation regime covering in effect the existence of a
NATO military base in the centre of
the G.D.R. territory.

We have set forth a number of concrete proposals which took into account
the official position and motives of prestige of the U.S. on this main
subject of disagreement. The President's considerations on the necessity
to search for drawing nearer our points of view have thus been meeting
with a favorable response in Moscow. Unfortunately, however, no proposal
has been put forward by the American side which would enhance the
possibility for solving the question of drawing a line through World War
II by abolishing the occupation regime in West Berlin and by giving it
the status of a free city. The expressed considerations about some
temporary settlement of the question, so far as they do not provide for
abolition of the occupation regime and withdrawal of the occupation
troops of the three powers from West Berlin, cannot, naturally, make an
agreement easier. Since the whole matter is that of eliminating the
vestiges of the war it is absolutely impossible to accept mere formal
changes in West Berlin without really changing the existing abnormal
situation there which is fraught with possibility of a sudden explosion.

Both we and you had enough time for thinking this over. And if both of us
are ready to really search for a solution then there are no reasons not
to find it in the nearest future, without further procrastination. There
is absolutely no sense in postponing until fall, and from fall until
spring what should and can be done already now.

It can be seen from the last talk of Mr. Salinger with our Ambassador2 that the
President shares the view that it is not expedient to postpone solution
of the German problem and that he takes interest in finding a mutually
acceptable solution on the main unresolved question—that of the foreign
troops in West Berlin. Those proposals which we set forth before in our
conviction fully correspond to the interests of both sides. But in order
to speed up the solution and make a choice out of the alternatives that
we face we are ready to make another effort that in the greatest
possible degree takes into account the wishes of the United States on
the question of the presence of its troops in West Berlin so far as
those wishes are compatible with the task of completing a German peace
settlement.

Our proposal is as follows.

The occupation regime in West Berlin will be abolished and during the
first years the troops of the United Nations will be stationed there
which will act as guarantors of independence and security of West
Berlin.

Those U.N. troops must not, naturally, either taken as whole or in any of
their parts, represent this or that military group opposing each other
and their status as guarantors acting in the name of the UN should be defined on the basis of a
special agreement. They would symbolize the determination of the parties
to the agreement not to permit outside interference into the affairs and
life of the population of West Berlin. Those troops by their nature
would be police formations and not combatant troops, what should be
agreed upon.

The UN police military formations, the
initial strength of which should not exceed the combined strength of the
troops of the three powers stationed there as of July 1, 1962, would be
composed of police military formations of the U.S., Great Britain and
France which combined will make one half of such formations in West
Berlin; the other half of UN police
military formations will consist in an equal proportion of contingents
of troops of one or two neutral states, one or two states of the Warsaw
treaty (for example, Poland, Czechoslovakia), one or two small NATO states.

Subsequently the numerical strength of UN
police military formations in West Berlin will gradually diminish,
namely: during the first year after the abolition of the occupation
status those UN formations will be cut by
25 per cent of the initial strength, during the second year—by another
25 per cent and during the third year by next 25 per cent of that
number. The above mentioned gradual reduction of the numerical strength
of the UN formations will be carried on
in the same proportion both
with regard to the police military formations of the three powers and
the formations that will be provided by other states.

Since the sides agree that the presence of foreign troops in West Berlin
should be of temporary nature they make an arrangement that by the end
of the fourth year the remaining 25 per cent of the UN police formations will be withdrawn from
West Berlin, and West Berlin will be free of the presence of foreign
troops. We proceed from an assumption that after the withdrawal of those
formations the guarantees by the UN in
respect to independence of West Berlin that would guard that city from
outside interference into its domestic affairs, should remain fully in
force. With the abolition of occupation status West Berlin will be
considered as an independent political entity, that is, as a free city.
Subversive activities must not be carried on from West Berlin against
the GDR or other socialist countries.

Naturally, any claims by the FRG on West
Berlin must be declined for they constitute a manifestation of the
policy of aggression and revanche in practice. We are generally
satisfied that our positions regarding groundlessness of any claims by
the FRG on West Berlin are in effect the
same. An appropriate agreement will also be achieved on free access to
and from West Berlin with due respect for the sovereignty of the GDR on
the basis of generally established international practice. The German
Democratic Republic, as it has already stated, will assume appropriate
commitments on this question. We on our part again reaffirm that we have
stood and continue to stand for an unimpeded access provided the
requirement to respect the lawful sovereign rights of the German
Democratic Republic is observed.

If differences or frictions arise on practical questions of access they
will be considered by a special temporary international body—an
arbitrator about which the Soviet side put forward corresponding
proposals.

Simultaneously with the normalization of the situation in West Berlin and
abolition there of the occupation regime other questions of a German
peace settlement should be finally solved, such as: fixation and
juridical formalization of the existing borders of the German states,
the border between the G.D.R. and F.R.G. included, nonarming of the
G.D.R. and F.R.G. with nuclear weapons (either directly, or through
third countries, or through military-political groups in which they are
participants), due respect for the sovereignty of the G.D.R., conclusion
in one form or another of a nonaggression pact between the NATO and the
Warsaw treaty organization. An understanding on all those questions
should, naturally, be formalized in appropriate agreements.

The agreement achieved by the sides on appropriate questions will find
its reflection in a peace treaty which the Soviet Union and other
interested states will conclude with the German Democratic Republic.

Setting forth the new proposal on the question of foreign troops in West
Berlin which we believe is paving the way to a mutually acceptable
agreement and which we hope the President will duly appreciate, we
proceed from an assumption that as the American side has repeatedly
emphasized a solution of all other questions of a German peace
settlement which were discussed will not run into obstacles.

We would like the American side to correctly understand the motives and
aims of this new proposal. We deem it necessary before taking steps with
regard to conclusion of a peace treaty with the German Democratic
Republic with all ensuing consequences which were earlier mentioned more
than once to exhaust the possibilities to achieve a mutual agreement. We
believe that in a question so important as that of a German peace
settlement not a single unused opportunity should be left aside if, of
course, all the interested sides are guided by good intentions, if they
strive not for an increase of tension in Europe and in the whole world,
not for encouragement of forces of revanche and aggression, not for war,
but for a relaxation of tension, for peace.

The success of peaceful settlement in Laos gives all of us an encouraging
example. The President once expressed an idea that if a mutually
acceptable solution of the Laotian problem could be reached it would
make easier for the United States to find ways to peaceful settlement of
the German problem. We also believe that now it is the turn of the
German problem.

In Laos we moved step by step and now it seems that we are close to a
final settlement. Our proposals that were set forth above also provide
for settlement of the problem of foreign troops in West Berlin during a
certain transitional period, by several stages up to the complete
withdrawal of those troops.

We want to draw the attention of the President that we are putting
forward our proposals on problems of a German peace settlement with due
regard for the considerations and position of the American side and we
seriously count on the possibility of an agreement. If the President
reacts positively to our new proposal, the Foreign Minister of the USSR
could at a meeting with the Secretary of State in Geneva come to a final
agreement. Thus a meeting between the President of the US and the
Chairman of Council of Ministers of the USSR would be prepared, during
which it would be possible to fix an achieved understanding and,
provided there is an agreement between the parties, to sign appropriate
documents.

The achievement of an agreement on the problems of a German peace
settlement, including the normalization of the situation in West Berlin, would have a profound
impact on all the peoples as an example of effective cooperation between
the powers in the field of peace in accordance with the principles of
the United Nations. This would be a major victory for the policy both of
the Soviet Union and the United States and, we are sure, of all those
who stand for peace and condemn war. This would create a basis for a
fruitful cooperation of the two powers also in the solution of other
more cardinal problems relating to the main international problem of our
time—that of general and complete disarmament and developing on its
basis peaceful cooperation among all states and peoples.

Naturally, this would open a new chapter in the history of
Soviet-American relations in which undoubtedly are vitally interested
not only the peoples of our countries but also the peoples of the whole
world. And the first steps of our countries along a new road could be
consolidated by a state visit of the President of the United States to
the Soviet Union who would be a welcome guest of the peoples and the
government of our country.

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification
marking. Translation. Handwritten notes at the top of the source
text read: “Original and copy of translation retained by Kohler” and “Received at White
House July 5/1962. Copy to Amb Thompson 7/7/62.” The source text bears no
salutation or signature, but in a conversation with Rusk on July 12 (see Document 76),
Dobrynin stated that when
he delivered the message to the White House on July 5, he had
indicated that it was intended as a message from Khrushchev to the President.
(Memorandum of conversation, July 12; Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163)

2 This conversation has not been further identified.

74. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant (Bohlen) to Secretary of State Rusk74. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
(Bohlen) to
Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, July 6,
1962.

The Soviet communication received at the White House on July fifth2 does not, in the
slightest degree, represent any shift in the Soviet basic position. It
merely provides a new formula to achieve the same result; namely, the
total withdrawal of Western forces from Berlin. It provides that this
should be done during a period of four years but in the first year, the
Western troops, which will constitute only half of the total contingent,
would, in effect, be UN forces and,
specifically stated, would not be under the command of the United
States, United Kingdom, or France. The other fifty percent would also be
UN forces but made up of contingents from the smaller NATO powers and Warsaw Pact powers. These
troops would be progressively reduced by twenty-five percent a year, so
that at the end of four years, there would be no forces at all in
Berlin. The paper makes no advance on the subject of access, and refers,
in regard to the all-German questions, to all of the points the Soviet
Union would like to see accepted.

Since the Soviet document offers no advance from our point of view and is
obviously completely unacceptable to us, and certainly to our Allies,
the most important question concerning it is what does it mean from the
point of view of future Soviet action? Since, in itself, it does not
provide any specific clue on this point, it could quite well be the last
Soviet attempt to reach some form of agreement before proceeding with
the signature of a separate peace treaty. It could equally well be a
means of just heightening the pressure on us in connection with the
negotiations. It is fairly certain that the Soviets do not expect any
Allied acceptance of this proposal and, therefore, it is either a move
for the record to clear the way for a signature of a separate peace
treaty—which still leaves very much open the question of the effect of
any such treaty on the Western rights and obligations in regard in
Berlin—or, as indicated earlier, it is merely a further pressure move on
their part.

This document is not addressed, officially, to the President, and may,
indeed, have been sent to the Attorney General. The question, therefore,
arises as to how best to handle its receipt. Since the manner of its
delivery is informal, and to some extent unofficial, I would question
whether or not we would wish to discuss it with our Allies. To do so
would be to depart from the confidential nature of these communications
and it would almost certainly leak during the process. The only
difficulty with not making our Allies privy to its contents is that it
conceivably might be a prelude to moves towards the signature of a peace
treaty. I think the manner of a reply, if any, and whether or not to
inform our Allies should be given most careful consideration, and I
certainly would not feel under any compulsion to get off any quick
answer.

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. A copy was sent
to Kohler.

2 Document 73.

75. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Weiss) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Johnson)75. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Weiss) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State
(Johnson)1

Washington, July 11,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin

1. At the Task Force Meeting this morning2 a considerable
portion of the time was devoted to discussing various signs of renewed
Soviet threats to sign a peace
treaty. Mr. Kohler is obviously
disturbed, though his basis is more intuitive than intellectual. The
Khrushchev speech and the
message from Vienna reporting Kreisky's impression of his Soviet visit are the two
most tangible sources of information (Tab A).3

2. The Secretary is meeting with Dobrynin tomorrow afternoon which may be utilized to set
the stage for more significant discussions with Gromyko at Geneva next
week.

3. There seems to be considerable Allied apprehension over the
possibility of new Soviet moves. The British have requested an
Ambassadorial Group Meeting for this afternoon (this being very short
notice) to discuss London's concerns.4

4. As a follow-up from yesterday's meeting between Nitze and Kohler,5 which was called for the
purpose of discussing various Berlin problems, EUR has undertaken the drafting of a memorandum to Defense
which would provide guidance as to probable military moves which would
be required in the event of Soviet signing of a peace treaty. We have
worked with EUR on this paper, however,
I believe that it would be well for you to give it your personal
attention since, as I mentioned to Kohler, we clearly should not
consider these military actions in solely a Berlin context. He, of
course, agrees. If you have any guidance with regard to the proposed
memorandum to Defense (Tab B),6 I would appreciate receiving it. If you wish to
discuss it, I am, of course, at your disposal.

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–1162. Secret. Drafted and initialed by
Weiss.

2 No
other record of this meeting has been found.

3 Neither printed. For text of Khrushchev's July 10 speech at Moscow, see Pravda,
July 11, 1962. Extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy:
Current Documents, 1962, p. 710. Telegram 48 from Vienna, July 10,
transmitted Kreisky's
impressions of his visit to Moscow and his view that the Soviet
Union was preparing to take action leading to an East German peace
treaty.

4 At the
meeting at 3:30 p.m. Ormsby
Gore began by saying he had requested the session
because the United Kingdom believed the Soviet Union “might be
moving toward a crisis situation in Berlin in the near future.”
After extended discussion the Ambassadorial Group concluded that the
Soviet Union was probably not moving toward a crisis over Berlin,
but that increased harassment of access to Berlin could be expected.
(Memorandum of conversation, July 11; Department of State, Central
Files, 762.00/7–1162)

5 No other record of
this meeting has been found.

6 Not
printed.

76. Memorandum of Conversation76. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 12,
1962, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

Anatoli Dobrynin, Ambassador
of the USSR

Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counsellor of Soviet Embassy

The Secretary

Foy D. Kohler, Assistant
Secretary

Martin J. Hillenbrand,
Director, Office of German Affairs

After an initial exchange, Ambassador Dobrynin said he had been authorized to transmit a
proposal along the following lines:

(1) The occupation regime in West Berlin will be abolished. During the
initial years United Nations troops will be stationed there to act as
guarantors of the independence and security of West Berlin.

(2) The status of these troops as guarantors acting in the name of the
UN should be defined in a special
agreement. They must not, either in whole or in part, represent this or
that opposing military group. The troops would symbolize the
determination of the parties to the agreement not to permit outside
interference in the affairs and life of West Berlin's population. By
their nature, these troops would be police formations and not combatant
troops.

(3) The UN police military formations
would be composed one-half of police military formations of the US,
Great Britain and France and one-half of an equal proportion of
contingents of troops of one or two neutral states, one or two states of
the Warsaw Treaty (e.g. Poland and Czechoslovakia), and one or two small
NATO states. The initial strength of the UN police military formations should not exceed the
combined strength of the troops of the three powers stationed there as
of July 1, 1962.

(4) Thereafter, the numerical strength of the UN police military formation in West Berlin will be
decreased as follows: During the first year after abolition of the
occupation status, reduction by twenty-five percent of initial strength;
during the second year a further twenty-five percent; during the third
year a further twenty-five percent; and by the end of the fourth year
the remaining twenty-five percent, after which West Berlin will be free of the
presence of foreign troops. The indicated gradual reduction in strength
in UN formations will be carried out in
the same proportions both with respect to the police military formations
provided by the three powers and the formations provided by other
states. After withdrawal of these police formations, the UN guarantees
with respect to the independence of West Berlin, guarding the city from
outside interference in its domestic affairs, should remain fully in
force.

(5) With the abolition of occupation status West Berlin will be
considered as an independent entity, i.e., a free city. Subversive
activities against the GDR or other
socialist countries must not be carried on from West Berlin.

(6) Any claims by the Federal Republic of Germany on West Berlin must be
rejected as manifestations of the policy of aggression and
revanchism.

(7) An appropriate agreement will be concluded on free access to and from
West Berlin, with due respect to GDR
sovereignty on the basis of generally established international
practice. As already stated, the GDR
will make appropriate commitments on this question. The Soviet Union
again reaffirms that it has stood and continues to stand for unimpeded
access, provided that respect is accorded to the lawful sovereign rights
of the GDR.

(8) Differences or frictions relating to practical questions of access
will be considered by a special temporary international body—an
arbitrator as to which the Soviet Union has already put forward
appropriate proposals.

(9) Concomitant with the abolition of the occupation regime in West
Berlin and the normalization of the situation there, other questions
relating to the German peace settlement should be finally solved, as for
example (a) fixing and juridically formalizing the existing borders of
the German states, including the border between the GDR and FRG; (b) non-arming of the GDR
and FRG with nuclear weapons (either
directly, or through third countries, or through military-political
groups in which they are participants); (c) due respect for GDR sovereignty; (d) conclusion of a
non-aggression pact between the NATO
and Warsaw Treaty organizations in one form or another. An understanding
on these questions should be formalized in appropriate agreements.

(10) The agreement reached on appropriate questions will be reflected in
the peace treaty which the Soviet Union and other interested states will
conclude with the GDR.

The Secretary said that, on his recent visit to Europe, he had talked to
the French, British and Germans, as well as the NATO Council, on the German and Berlin question. In summary
he might draw two general conclusions: (1) the United States and its
Allies are in complete unity with respect to what we continue to describe as the vital interests of
the West in the situation. One sign of this has been the recent
identical response of all Governments to the proposal of Chairman
Khrushchev for mixed troops
in West Berlin of certain countries of the Warsaw and NATO organizations. There had been no
consultation on this, but a vital point for the West is involved. (2)
There was a real hope that these issues could be resolved by peaceful
means and that, over time, the two sides could work into a more normal
relationship.

One point which, the Secretary said, had not been discussed on his trip
and which he would like to stress in view of certain remarks in
Khrushchev's recent speech,
was the fallacy of the idea that the US is in some sense a prisoner of
West Germany and is merely parrotting German views on the subject of
Berlin. If one goes back to the discussions of last June between
President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev, it is clear that we have
been talking consistently about US vital interests, not borrowed
interests. These are related to our interests in the security and peace
of the West, and the consequences to these if our commitments to Berlin
should be shown to be empty and meaningless. We are speaking for
ourselves in this matter, and we hope there will be no misunderstanding
on this point.

Ambassador Dobrynin asked whether
the Secretary had any comments on the new Soviet proposals. The
Secretary said he would not attempt to comment at length but these
proposals seemed to be merely a variation on the same point, with the
same objective as previous formulae—the elimination of the Western
presence in West Berlin. To use the US vernacular, the Soviet proposals
were simply “not on”.

Looking back to the beginning of the Kennedy
administration, the Secretary continued, we seem to be in a dilemma. The
President came into office as one of the few young men in high position
at the present time among the great powers. He was looking ahead for
decades, taking a broad historical view. The Secretary observed
parenthetically that, allowing for obviously unacceptable ideological
points, he had found the wide historical range of Khrushchev's last speech in Moscow
interesting. President Kennedy felt that there were
two broad paths which might be followed: That of implacable hostility
and inevitable catastrophe, and that of improved understanding leading
to a more normal relationship. The latter was the one we should take.

As we have discussed Berlin, the Secretary went on, we have mentioned a
number of points on which there seemed to be a possibility of agreement
and which need not be troublesome. If, however, on the Soviet side these
were put into a framework of some sort of stylized diplomatic technique,
or regarded as signs of weakness, as compromises or concessions which
were obtainable anyway if the Soviets just pressed hard enough, this
created a dilemma for us. How can we proceed on the road to normalization when we are
pressed on a point relative to which we cannot make concessions? On the
one side we see points which could fall into place; on the other side we
see the Soviets becoming more and more insistent on the point of Western
troop presence.

Ambassador Dobrynin observed that
the most recent Soviet proposals should be interesting. The Soviet Union
obviously was trying to find a way out. It did not want a military
catastrophe. However, it believed that the matter of occupation troops
in West Berlin was a source of permanent danger in Europe which must be
solved.

The Secretary said that the Soviets applied their formulae only to West
Berlin. If they were willing to think in terms of Berlin as a whole, so
that the confidence in our commitments to West Berlin would not be
diminished, this could be talked about. But it put us on a slippery
slope to confine the discussion to West Berlin, after saying that East
Berlin and the GDR were not subject to
discussion. Dobrynin questioned
the Secretary's use of the expression “slippery slope”. The Secretary
said that, if the Soviets did not feel that it existed, they would not
be pressing. Dobrynin said that this was not really the case.

There was a brief discussion as to whether the Soviet expression “drawing
a line” should be “under” or “through World War II” which concluded that
either expression conveyed the meaning adequately. The Secretary
commented that the Soviets have talked about drawing this line and the
dangers in the Berlin situation. We simply did not understand what the
Soviets had in mind. The danger actually had not appeared until the
Soviets started pressing the vital interests of the West in West Berlin.
What is the real content of drawing a line under World War II?

Dobrynin said that, after a war
must come peace, and this meant a peace treaty. If a peace treaty could
not be had with both German States, then it should be had with one
German State. West Berlin, which was in the middle of an existing German
State, was a source of perpetual danger. Every day there were frictions
and new incidents. These had to be stopped. Separately, perhaps, each
issue was not so important, as for example, the recent humiliating
treatment of Soviet citizens connected with the Soviet Tourist Agency,
but the cumulative effect was. The presence of Western troops in West
Berlin was the presence of NATO troops.
The Secretary asked if the various troops around West Berlin were not
also Warsaw Pact troops. Dobrynin
said that this was not a real argument, since they were on East German
territory. The mere presence of Western troops in West Berlin causes
elements in West Germany and Berlin to act provocatively in a way which
might lead to conflict. The Secretary asked whether the twenty Soviet
divisions in East Germany did not have some influence on Ulbricht's attitude. Dobrynin did not respond directly, but
said the Soviets had offered to withdraw their troops in old proposals. Coming back to
those old proposals, this subject could be discussed.

Referring to the split of the city, the Secretary said that he could see
the desire of the East Berliners to come over to West Berlin might have
caused embarrassment, but the situation should be improved locally.
Dobrynin asked why the West
Berlin Senat had refused to come over and have talks with the East
German authorities. The Secretary commented that the West Berlin
authorities should talk with the authorities of East Berlin and not of
the GDR, as he had proposed in their
last conversation. Dobrynin said
it was up to the Germans to do this; there had been no answer to the
last proposal from the GDR. The
Secretary said the contact should be between the city authorities.
Dobrynin stated that East
Berlin was the capital of the GDR and
anyway this was not the real issue. The Secretary observed that, if
Dobrynin were in West Berlin
and listened to some of Ulbricht's
speeches, he would not be very comfortable. Dobrynin said that he did not think that Ulbricht would be involved personally in
any discussions with any West Berliners.

The Secretary asked when we could expect a response to our note of June
25.2 Dobrynin observed that it had
been delivered in Moscow and he was not in the act. Up to the present he
had received no indication of a reply.

After a number of other subjects had been discussed at this point,
reported in separate memoranda of conversation,3 the Secretary returned to the subject of Berlin
by inquiring as to whether there was any indication what Gromyko's attitude on Berlin was likely
to be if a meeting took place at Geneva.4 Dobrynin said that he had the
impression that the Soviet Foreign Minister would expect to discuss the
newest Soviet proposal with the Secretary. Did the latter have something
particular in mind on this or other questions? The Secretary observed
that what we need is evidence of that sense of reciprocity about which
he had previously spoken. The one-sided character of the talks on West
Berlin on which the Soviets were insisting would not lead anywhere.

Dobrynin asked how long the
Secretary expected to be in Geneva. The Secretary responded that this
was a matter which he was holding a little open. If the Laos meetings
began on Saturday, he might expect to arrive on Friday afternoon. If the signing took place
on Monday he might stay on into Tuesday, but there was no specific
limitation. In the article which he had written, the Secretary
continued, he had suggested that he ought to stay at home. Dobrynin suggested that he take a copy
along on his trip to refresh his memory. In response to the Secretary's
query, Dobrynin said he was not
aware when Gromyko was arriving.
He did know that the Soviet Foreign Minister was looking forward to
seeing the Secretary.

The Secretary said he did not know whether there was much point in going
over with the Ambassador positions which had already been repeated over
and over again. What we need is a real indication that our vital
interests are recognized, not necessarily in a formal sense, but are
understood as they exist in this situation. He did not know that there
were any fresh arguments on either side, but he was concerned that,
despite the fact we had tried to clarify our attitude and that of the
West, the Soviet Government has again put its position on the public
record, thus building up the prestige factor. This had been
self-manufactured and we did not see much we could do about it. Making a
public proposal as in Khrushchev's recent speech, which the Soviet Government
knows does not fit our view of our vital interests, does not help to
find an answer to the question.

Dobrynin commented that, in the
last four or five months, the Soviet Union had put forward several
proposals. The United States had put forward no proposals on the
occupation regime question. The Soviet Union wanted to find a solution.
If it did not, it would simply have signed the peace treaty. The
Secretary observed that these so called “fresh” proposals are just a
series of variations to reduce or eliminate our position in Berlin.
Dobrynin again asked what the
US proposals were. The Secretary responded that the Soviets know that,
if they want forces in Berlin, they can have them in East Berlin. They
also know that we think the presence of Western forces provided a
stabilizing element in the situation. We had suggested a statement of
principles to handle the fact of disagreement as well as to provide a
forum for continuing discussion.

Dobrynin stated that an
interesting stage had now been reached. Both sides knew the arguments of
the other side very well. The time had come to find a solution, not
merely to repeat well-known arguments. This required proposals in
concrete terms. The Secretary commented that the Soviets surely did not
expect us to make proposals to get ourselves out of West Berlin.
Dobrynin said the US had made
no proposals in the last year and a half. The Secretary observed that he
thought the Soviet Ambassador underestimated the exchanges between the
two Governments. We had made so many proposals that even Ulbricht had recently listed four or
five points on which agreement had been reached.5 Dobrynin said he was thinking of
the central issue. The Secretary went on to say that the only proposals
the Soviets had made would reduce our position and enlarge the Soviet
position. When the US tried to find a fair solution, or to improve its
position, the Soviets said these matters were not to be discussed. In
effect, they were in the bag.

Dobrynin said his Government
still hoped that a way out could be found on the main and central issue,
and that thereafter a solution of the German question as a whole could
be found. The main issue is the abolition of occupation troops.

The Secretary said that he would like to ask on what basis the Soviets
considered that they had an interest in West Berlin except in terms of
the occupation rights derived from the defeat of Nazi Germany. Dobrynin responded that his Government
held that, 17 years after the war, troops must cease to have the status
of occupation forces. The Secretary noted the Soviets were saying a
great deal more than that the Western troops should be there on another
basis than occupation. They are saying that the troops should not be
there at all, or should share their position with Soviet troops or
Warsaw Pact troops. Dobrynin said
it was not a question of sharing possession but just of guaranteeing the
status of West Berlin. West Berlin must be an independent entity. The
question is how to guarantee this. The Western troops would not provide
a good guarantee; they are already a source of friction. The guarantee
provided by a UN troop presence would be
better. Why could it not be accepted? The Secretary said there was no
objection to a UN presence of some sort
in Berlin, not just West Berlin. The Western forces are in fact
surrounded by Ulbricht and his men
(Dobrynin protested at this).
We cannot ourselves see how the freedom and security of the people of
West Berlin can be maintained without the three Western Powers. If
Ambassador Dobrynin were a West
Berliner, he would feel the same way. Dobrynin commented that, if he were a responsible
citizen of West Berlin, he would not want these troops which were a
source of so much friction. The Secretary commented that the only case
in the free world where we would find such unanimity as is found in
elections in the Soviet Union would be a West Berlin vote on the
continued presence of the Western powers. Dobrynin said that, if the UN troop question were put up to the population, he was not
sure that it would not be supported. Mr. Kohler asked whether if the question were put to the
vote the Soviets would accept the verdict of the West Berliners.

Dobrynin said he was not a
Berliner. This was a matter in which the national interests of the
Soviet Union were involved. The Soviets had not asked German permission when they came to Berlin,
and they did not want the Germans to decide on a matter where their
national interests were involved.

During a discussion which then ensued of the Common Market (reported in
separate memorandum of conversation), Dobrynin asked about the future of US trade with the
Soviet Union in view of Congressional attitudes. The Secretary observed
that the prejudice of our policy favors trade. We are a trading nation,
and we trade unless there is a reason not to. In his recent speech
Khrushchev had referred to
post-1946 military expenditures. He wished that there were some people
in the Soviet Union assigned, perhaps as war-gamers, to the task of
telling the Soviet leaders how Americans thought about things. In 1946
we had greatly reduced the US armed forces. Not a division or air unit
was ready for combat. Our Defense budget was about 10 billion dollars.
Now it is over four times that much. Why did this come about? It started
with Soviet policies during the Stalinist period, the Greek experience,
etc. The major jump had come at the time of the Korean war. If Khrushchev had not insisted on greatly
reducing or eliminating our position in Berlin last summer, the
subsequent increase in our forces would not have occurred. If Stalin had
not pushed in his time, the US would be disarmed today for all practical
purposes. Because of pressures on Berlin, we have strengthened our
forces. The Soviets became alarmed and strengthened their forces, and
all this in relation to Berlin.

The President would like to move on trade but people who are opposed to
trade with the Soviets are nourished by pressures on Berlin. The
Secretary repeated that he hoped that Gromyko would come to Geneva with a basis on which a
solution on some of these problems could be found. He noted that he had
referred to the two different roads that the US and the Soviet Union
could take. The choice of alternatives was extremely important. We
wanted to improve our relations if possible. This was the President's
view. If you removed from Khrushchev's recent speech the ideological elements,
which we could not, of course, accept, there was an undertone of
seriousness in what he said. His remarks about the diversion of
resources to the arms race provided a basis on which we could agree.

The Secretary said he supposed Dobrynin had been a little surprised that he had been so
moderate during his visit to Berlin. Dobrynin said that he had noticed this, and that the
Secretary observed that one thing that had surprised him, in returning
by helicopter from the City Hall to the Airport, was the emptiness of
East Berlin, not merely at the Wall but for a considerable distance
behind it.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/7–1262. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand and approved in S on
July 13. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office at the Department of
State.

2 See Document 62. For text of the July
14 Soviet reply, see Pravda, July 17, 1962. An extract is printed in
American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 711–712.

3 Memoranda of the parts of the conversation on
nuclear testing, use of nuclear forces against the Soviet Union, the
Common Market, and captive nations are in the Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, USSR, Rusk/Dobrynin. Regarding the memorandum of conversation about
Khrushchev's message to
the President, see the source note, Document
73.

4 Rusk visited Geneva July 19–25
to sign the neutrality agreements on Laos.

5 For text of
Ulbricht's July 7 speech
at Rostock, see Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik, 1962, pp. 809–816.

77. Memorandum of Conversation77. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July
17, 1962, 6 p.m.

Memorandum of Conversation between the President and Ambassador Dobrynin, Tuesday, July 17, 1962, 6:00
p.m. (prepared from the President's account and approved by the
President July 18)

The President met alone with Ambassador Dobrynin and talked with him for just under an hour. The
atmosphere of the conversation was agreeable. After some pleasantries
the conversation turned on three subjects: Berlin, nuclear testing, and
developments in Southeast Asia.

On Berlin, the President told Dobrynin that he had prepared and would soon have
delivered a reply2 to Chairman Khrushchev's recent communication.3 The President
emphasized that the presence of Allied troops in West Berlin is a vital
interest of the United States. For this reason none of the Soviet
proposals for alternative arrangements could be accepted; all of them,
in one way or another, implied the departure of Western troops—they
would get us out, and without so much as a fig leaf of concealment. This
would mean a major retreat. Europe would lose confidence in U.S.
leadership. It would be a major victory for the Soviet Union and a major
defeat for the West.

Ambassador Dobrynin said that
Chairman Khrushchev would be
greatly disappointed in this response to his most recent proposal. He
asked whether the American position was related to German interests or
American interests. The President said again that he was speaking of a
vital U.S. interest. There might well be other issues on which we would
be willing to press the Germans quite hard—as, for example, on the
structure of an access authority. But on the question of our presence in
Berlin, there was no argument among the Western Allies; it was of vital
interest to all. The President remarked that he had made this point
clear to Foreign Minister Gromyko
in the fall of 1961.4

Ambassador Dobrynin argued that in
its present condition Berlin is a potential source of dangerous friction
and conflict and that a removal of Western troops would lessen the dangers. The President stated that
while he could understand Soviet objections to the presence of Western
troops, he must emphasize again that the removal of Western troops would
be a disaster for us, while their presence was not a disaster for the
Soviet Union.

The President also emphasized that Soviet-created tensions in Berlin had
caused increases in Western rearmament and that any new crisis would
have a similar effect. The President noted the disagreement which the
United States has with its Allies on the diffusion of nuclear weapons,
and said that Soviet-created tensions could only increase the danger of
results which the Soviet Government would not like. Ambassador Dobrynin argued in reply that it was
the fact of Western troops in West Berlin which created these dangers.
This was the one point of direct confrontation between opposing great
powers, and it was naturally a source of danger. If the confrontation
could be ended, the dangers would be reduced. The President repeated
that the real cause of danger was the Soviet effort to change the
existing situation, that the way to reduce tension was to reach an
understanding, and that the presence of Allied troops was a vital
interest. The Ambassador repeated that the Chairman would be
disappointed.

(Comments on nuclear testing are on page 3, and on developments in
Southeast Asia on page 4)5

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential
Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Attached to a July 18
memorandum of transmittal from Bundy to Rusk,
which stated that Bundy had
prepared the memorandum of conversation at the direction of the
President who had approved it. Bundy also instructed Rusk to limit access to the memorandum “to those who
really must know about it,” since the President wanted “Dobrynin to have confidence in the
privacy of such talks.”

2 Document 78.

3 Document 73.

4 For a memorandum of the
President's conversation with Gromyko, October 6, 1961, see vol. XIV, Document 170.

5 Neither printed.

78. Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev78. Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev1

Washington, July 17,
1962.

DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: I am responding to the communication received through
Ambassador Dobrynin on July 5,
1962.2 Secretary of State
Rusk made certain preliminary
comments on this communication during his meeting with Ambassador
Dobrynin on July 9th
[12th],3 since its contents related directly to the subject of their discussion, but
I should also like to take this opportunity to add my personal views. I
believe that in a matter of such seriousness and potential danger to
peace, we must take advantage of any legitimate channel in an effort to
clarify our respective positions.

As heads of government we are naturally interested in the welfare of our
peoples, but we also have a certain obligation to history and to
humanity as a whole. This dual responsibility demands that each of us
make an effort to understand the position of the other and to see
whether accommodations cannot be made, consistent with the basic
interests of both parties, directed toward finding peaceful solutions to
outstanding differences. This seems particularly important in the case
of Germany and Berlin where the vital interests of great nations are
involved at a major point of friction.

What we, therefore, find especially troubling in the present Soviet
position is the consistent failure, even in the very formulation of the
problem, to take any real account of what we have made clear are the
vital interests of the United States and its Allies. For example, the
Soviet Government has on a number of occasions, as in your most recent
communication, complained that it has put forward a number of concrete
proposals which take into account “the official position and motives of
prestige of the United States,” but that “unfortunately, no proposal has
been put forward by the American side which would enhance the
possibility of solving the question of drawing a line through World War
II by abolishing the occupation regime in West Berlin and giving it the
status of a free city.” Such a formulation is, in effect, the very crux
of the problem, because it states the issue in a way which embodies all
of the Soviet premises and none of the Western premises in this
evaluation of the current situation.

We have gone to some pains over the past year to define to you what we
consider to be our vital interests in the Berlin situation. These do not
take away anything from the Soviet Union which it now enjoys. On the
contrary, we have attempted to show that an arrangement mindful of these
interests could lead to a chain of developments of mutual benefit to
both sides. The Soviet Government, on the other hand, consistently
states the problem in terms which completely ignore our vital interests
and proposes an outcome under the shadow of a threatened fait accompli
which the Western Powers can either accept in advance or in the actual
fact.

In your recent communication, you note that the “main outstanding
question is that of the withdrawal of the occupation troops of the
United States, Great Britain and France from West Berlin and of the
abolition there of the occupation status.” To accept this formulation
would be to accept the Soviet position one hundred per cent. We find it
difficult to see even the
slightest element of compromise here on the part of the Soviet
Government. The various formulae which the Soviet Government has put
forward all have the same objective—the total withdrawal or a severe
reduction in the position of Western forces in Berlin. Merely mixing the
same ingredients together in different proportions does not change the
basic fact that the result is impossible from our point of view. We
cannot, therefore, accept as accurate the statement that these formulae
attempt to take into account the “official position and motives of
prestige of the United States.” They run directly counter to them. Does
the Soviet Government really believe that our acceptance of any of them,
including the most recent, would not be interpreted throughout the world
as a complete capitulation? We know that it would be, not only by the
West Berliners who would immediately begin to abandon the city and leave
it a hollow shell, but by all governments and informed peoples. It was
for this reason that, at our meeting in Vienna now more than a year ago,
we placed such stress on the commitment of the United States to Berlin
in terms of our national prestige and vital interests. Nothing that has
happened since then has affected the meaning of our remarks.

The question of Western troop presence is central. Surface changes in the
Soviet position which do not really take account of this fact do not
provide a real basis for serious negotiations. Without this recognition
of our vital interests it is difficult to see how other aspects of the
situation can usefully be considered.

Having said this much about the Soviet position, I feel that I must also
comment on your description of our position. To say that the American
side has not put forward a proposal “which would enhance the possibility
of solving the question of drawing a line through World War II by
abolishing the occupation regime in West Berlin and by giving it the
status of a free city” is, as I have indicated, to state the problem
without the most minimum elements of reciprocity. We are not opposed to
drawing a line through World War II (though we believe it more important
to avoid World War III), but drawing such a line to us cannot mean
accepting the position of one of the victors of World War II at the
complete expense of three of the other victors. Our views as to how
appropriately to draw a line through World War II are well known. We
understand that these views are unacceptable to the Soviet Government.
Because we know this we have not insisted on pressing our views to the
point of conflict and crisis, although we believe them to be correct. We
could not, of course, be expected to put forward proposals eliminating
ourselves from West Berlin.

We have instead tried to be practical in our approach and in the specific
proposals we have put forward. These have not proceeded from the
assumption that one side must be prepared to abandon its position
entirely. We have instead been
motivated by the desire to eliminate the Berlin issue as a source of
major conflict, which it is in the interest of both sides to avoid. We
have attempted, therefore, to provide a means of dealing with the fact
of disagreement in such a way as to serve the broader common interest of
both sides in the avoidance of head-on collision and in the preservation
of peace. We have also made a number of suggestions for relaxing the
sense of crisis in the Berlin area.

You are, of course, familiar with the informal working paper which
Secretary Rusk gave Foreign
Minister Gromyko at Geneva on
March 22, 1962.4 We
have never felt that the merits of our suggested approach have really
adequately been considered by the Soviet Government or dealt with in
subsequent discussions. The language of this paper was not meant to be
sacrosanct, but it reflected a sincere effort to find points on which
there seemed to be at least some agreement in terms of previous
statements made by both sides. We would, therefore, hope that you would
review the explanations which Secretary Rusk has given to see whether
our approach does not suggest an acceptable way out of the present
impasse.

In a recent speech,5 you pointed to the
example of Laos as showing that, given a desire for agreement, ways can
be found to settle the most challenging and complicated international
problems. We can agree entirely with this. In the case of Berlin, there
is also undoubtedly a desire for agreement. What seems to be lacking so
far, however, is any common ground as to what might be required in order
to achieve agreement. Desire for agreement is important as a necessary
beginning, but it cannot suffice in itself unless a spirit of patience
and of respect for the vital interests of the other party is also
present. We feel confident that, if these factors are present, we will
also be able to work out something on Berlin which will contribute a
resolution satisfactory to both sides.

In your same speech you pointed out that the German question did not have
a direct bearing on disarmament but was closely related to it. Here
again we can agree. Even a quieting of the Berlin question on the basis
of respect for the mutual interests of both sides could not help but
markedly improve the entire atmosphere of relations between the Soviet
Union and the United States. As the two major nuclear powers, we have an
overriding common interest, deriving from our troubling knowledge of the
destructive potentialities of the new weapons, in preventing their
spread into the control of other countries. We are certain that one of
the major factors in recent years, not only in the general acceleration
of arms preparations but also in focusing attention on nuclear weapons, has been the almost
continuous crisis over Berlin since November, 1958. Further threats to
Berlin and continued heightening of the crisis can only lead to
additional measures in this direction.

We feel, therefore, that we have an additional strong and common interest
in arriving at a solution of the Berlin problem, consistent with our
mutual interests and prestige, in order to relieve the continuing
pressures for an arms race including the piling up and diffusion of
nuclear weapons. We might add that the enlarged U.S. military
preparations which began last summer took place only after the renewal
of Soviet threats against our position in Berlin. Our efforts in the
military field, and those of our Allies, were a sign of the seriousness
which which we all regard the defense of our vital interests in Berlin.
This military build-up, however, was not something we wanted, or
something which would have happened in the absence of the developments
of last summer. If it is true that the threats to our position in Berlin
remain a serious source of difference between our two countries, it is
just as obvious that some satisfactory arrangement on Berlin would
greatly improve the atmosphere and remove an important motive for
increased Western effort in the armaments field. This is a consideration
to which we hope you will give deep personal thought. Further pressures
on Berlin can only exacerbate the situation and enhance the danger of an
arms race which we assume neither of us basically desires.

We undoubtedly live in a climactic age. Science has now given man a
capacity for destruction which, for the first time, could threaten the
very existence of the race itself. This fact makes it imperative that,
as rational men, we attempt to resolve our differences rather than move
step-by-step towards a major confrontation. In reading the history of
past wars and how they began, we cannot help but be impressed how
frequently the failure of communication, misunderstanding and mutual
irritation have played an important role in the events leading up to
fateful decisions for war. In the nuclear age, we cannot be resigned to
passive acceptance of a chain of causation which seems to determine the
course of history from the outset. We know from your own willingness to
discuss these matters that you do not hold to the view that what is
happening now is predetermined, and cannot be affected by the decisions
which our governments take. I write with this in mind, and urge that you
give serious thought to the reflections and suggestions which this
communication contains. I have not tried here to deal with every aspect
of your communication, but have limited our comment to what seems to be
the heart of the issue between us. We would not, however, want silence
on these other points to be interpreted as complete agreement on our
part with your formulation of the problems and suggested solutions.

If I may summarize, the following lines of approach have seemed to us to
be open in seeking a satisfactory resolution of the German and Berlin
question:

1. We might join in a real attempt to draw a line through World War II by
agreeing on a German settlement based on the freely expressed wish of
the German people. As you know, this is in our view the best solution to
the problems of Germany and Berlin. We have not pressed in these private
exchanges for your agreement to this solution because you have
emphasized that it is unacceptable to you—as unacceptable as your
proposals for the removal of our troops from Berlin are to us.

2. Short of an all-German settlement, we might agree on new and improved
arrangements for all of Berlin.

3. We might deal with the present situation as a factual matter,
including the fact of the Western presence in West Berlin. This could
mean proceeding on the basis of our informal working paper of March 22,
1962. It would essentially reflect a recognition that there are basic
elements in the Berlin situation on which there cannot now be agreement.
With such recognition, steps might be taken to ease tensions in the
immediate area of Berlin, and it might perhaps be less difficult
thereafter to deal with other aspects of the Berlin question while
moving ahead with the reduction of tensions in other fields. We have in
mind here particularly steps toward disarmament.

It is now expected that our Foreign Ministers will be meeting shortly in
Geneva to sign an agreement on Laos. They will undoubtedly find the
occasion to discuss further the question of Berlin. We hope that Foreign
Minister Gromyko will come to
Geneva with a position embodying genuine elements of reciprocity and
taking account of our vital interests in the Berlin situation. If this
should prove to be the case, we feel certain that much progress can be
made in removing a major source of contention—an accomplishment which
would surely have a remarkable and heartening effect in improving the
atmosphere and making possible progress in other related areas.

Sincerely,6

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification
marking. The source text bears no drafting information.

2 Document 73.

3 See Document
76.

4 See Documents 19 and 20.

5 See footnote 2, Document 75.

6 Printed from an unsigned
copy.

79. Memorandum for the Record79. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, July 19,
1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President on Berlin Planning, 1000 hours, 19 July
1962

1. At 1000 hours, July 19, 1962, the President met with representatives
of State-Defense-JCS-the White House
staff, in order to consider approval of a US position on BERCON/MARCON contingency planning
concerning Berlin, specifically BQD–M–27
dated 12 July 1962 and its enclosure.2 What follows is the result
of an informal debriefing by General Taylor. Among others who attended were Secretaries
Rusk and McNamara, Assistant Secretaries
Kohler and Nitze, Generals Lemnitzer and Gray, and Messrs. Bundy and Klein.

“(1) There is a compelling necessity for the Allies to succeed in
protecting their vital interests relating to Berlin and to ensure that
this success is recognized in the Free World.

“(2) The purpose of Allied operation, however, should not be to overpower
the Soviet Union or to disintegrate the Satellite area, but to make the
Soviet Government change their policy on Berlin. Therefore, the Allies
should give the Soviet Union opportunity to draw back and even (without
creating the appearance of failure on our part) help them to cover up
this retreat.” (Ibid., President's Office Files, NATO General)

On July 24 Bundy sent Rusk and McNamara a memorandum in which he stated that the
President approved the general position taken in their joint memorandum
and the specific recommendation that U.S. contingency plans for Berlin
be discussed with NATO. (Department of
State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2462)

2. The discussion did not proceed in a particularly orderly manner and it
was only with some difficulty that Mr. Nitze was eventually able to direct the attention of the
meeting to its constituted purpose of discussing and approving the
BERCON/MARCON planning
positions embodied in BQD–M–27. He was
eventually, however, able to do this and the President has given his
approval to the paper.

3. In general, the apparent impression conveyed to the President by the
extensive discussion was that months would be required before any
substantial operative plans came into existence, that not very much had
been accomplished with our Allies—especially at NATO level since last year, and that a great deal of time
seemed to have been expended on planning for unlikely contingencies. Although the meeting was not
supposed to address the subject of a separate peace treaty until after
the consideration of BERCONs/MARCONs, the President's early questions apparently
brought this subject into the arena right away. Secretary Rusk reported the fact of many agreed
papers, draft notes and announcements, etc. He also said that when in
Europe later this week he would propose to the other Quadripartite
Foreign Ministers the advisability of reviewing their contingency plans
for a separate peace treaty in the light of developments during the past
several months; he also thought that it might now be appropriate to
encourage the French to return actively into the Berlin planning forum.
The President's questions brought out the fact that there did not exist
any genuine counterproposal for action in the event of a separate peace
treaty, but rather only plans for using selected mechanics designed to
accommodate to the separate treaty. The President strongly felt that the
Western reaction to a separate peace treaty should not be such as to
imply great concern over the treaty (this, of course, is in fact the
sense of the agreed Allied position).

4. After the above early discussion, Mr. Nitze proceeded to outline briefly and generally the
place of the BERCONs/MARCONs in
over-all Berlin planning. General Lemnitzer then followed, as planned, with a useful
explanation of the specific BERCONs and MARCONs proposed for approval,
but the President kept intervening with questions. In answer to one of
them, General Gray said that on
his recent trip to Europe he had discovered the BERCON planning activity
had not yet even descended to the level of Armies, and that therefore
some months would undoubtedly be required before fully prepared
operational plans would be available up and down the entire line.

5. At one point in the discussion the briefers mentioned that the Allies,
including the United States, would enter into some mobilization
activity. The President thereupon asked what the US plan was for
mobilizing whom on what time schedule, but no ready answer was
forthcoming from the group.

6. Comment. It would seem that the President never clearly understood the
exact place occupied by the BERCON/MARCON plans in the over-all picture of Berlin
contingency planning which may be said to begin with certain unilateral
plans, proceed through tripartite and quadripartite agreed plans or
catalogues of plans, and feed at some point into the full context of
NATO plans and catalogues of plans.
The one basic Berlin planning “Bible” with which the President is, or at
least was at one time, reasonably familiar is the so-called “Poodle
Blanket”3 with its
four preferred phases or
sequences. A review of this Poodle Blanket, highlighted by a
demonstration of how, where and when the BERCONs and MARCONs fit into
it, would almost surely have led to greater understanding by the
President and therefore a more orderly consideration of the paper which
formed the subject of the meeting.

LJL

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 506
Bercon/Marcon. Secret.
Drafted by Legere. Klein's notes on this meeting are in
the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany,
Berlin.

2 On July
16 Rusk and McNamara had sent the President a
joint memorandum outlining the status of Berlin contingency (BERCON)
and maritime contingency (MARCON) planning and the steps needed to
coordinate this planning with NATO.
Attached to this memorandum was BQD–M–27, “Report to Washington Ambassadorial Group on
Politico-Military Consultation on Bercon/Marcon Plans.” In describing the Western aims in
a Berlin crisis this paper stated:

3 For text of NSAM No. 109 (U.S. Policy on Military
Actions in a Berlin Crisis, “Poodle Blanket”), October 23, 1961, see
vol. XIV, Document 185.

80. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy80. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy1

Washington, July 20,
1962.

SUBJECT

NATO Contingency Planning for
Berlin (BERCON/MARCON
Plans) and the Conceptual Framework of Poodle Blanket

During yesterday's discussions of Berlin contingency planning (BERCON/MARCON Plans), General Gray
(JCS) made a statement to the effect
that the State Department considered it necessary to have a pause—about
60 days—before the West would respond militarily to Soviet interference
with Western access to Berlin. Unfortunately, General Gray did not make clear the context
in which he was speaking, nor did he define precisely what he meant by
the pause or the reasons for it.

The fact is that the period between Soviet/GDR blockage of access to Berlin and the outbreak of
hostilities—Phase II in the conceptual framework spelled out in NSAM 109 (“Poodle Blanket”)2 —is not a pause at all. It is a time during
which most intensive diplomatic efforts—backstopped by appropriate
military and economic measures—will be made to avoid the outbreak of
hostilities and reach a political rather than a military solution to the
Berlin problem. It is the period during which the West will bring into
play a progressive series of moves, designed to impress the Kremlin with
its determination to protect its position, but yet providing the Soviet leadership
with the opportunity to modify its behavior in time to avert a clash
beyond the level of no return. This may take 60 days; it may take
several months. At this juncture it is clearly impossible to estimate
the period with any kind of precision. However, the consensus is that
unless the Soviets either by miscalculation or deliberate decision
resort to force to impose their solution on Berlin, the odds are in
favor of a longer rather than a shorter Phase II. And as Secretary
McNamara indicated, there is
no difference of view on this score between the Departments of State and
Defense.

“Poodle Blanket”, you will remember, divides Berlin planning into four
phases:

(a) Phase I—the period in which there is Soviet and GDR interference with access to Berlin, but
this interference falls short of definitive blockage;

(b) Phase II—when there is significant blockage of one or more means of
access to Berlin and the Allies take a variety of noncombatant measures
to protect their vital interests—the basic right of access to and the
Western presence in Berlin;

(c) Phase III—the beginning of non-nuclear military action to deal with
the problem; and

(d) Phase IV—the onset of nuclear military action.

In essence, then, Phases I and II are noncombatant, while Phases III and
IV are combatant periods, so that the critical point in the Allied
effort to end Soviet/GDR interference
with the exercise of basic Allied rights in Berlin is just prior to
Phase III.

The underlying assumption in all this is that the Soviets, as we, wish to
avoid general war. This of course will not stop the Soviets from
pressing on for their objectives in Berlin. Nor does it mean that we
will not have to face up to periodic increase in tensions, with varying
degrees of heat. But unless there is a radical shift in Soviet policy,
or miscalculation by the Soviet leadership, the critical point in the
Berlin exercise will be reached just short of Phase III.

For all practical purposes, we are now in Phase I. Intermittently, since
the end of the 1948–1949 blockade, both German and Allied access, in the
air and on the ground, have been subjected to Communist harassment of
one sort or other. Over the years, however, we and the Soviets have
found methods for dealing with these harassments sometimes by facing
each other down as during the air corridor harassments of last spring;
more often by patient and protracted negotiations, such as the efforts
which finally produced the existing Autobahn identification procedures.

The Soviet tacticians at some time may consider it necessary for the
Kremlin to strike a more threatening and aggressive pose in Berlin and
interrupt Allied and/or German traffic to Berlin, all or in part. This
in effect is Phase II. And present planning for this Phase envisages
intensified diplomatic efforts
and maneuvers, backstopped by a NATO
military build-up and the imposition of economic countermeasures ranging
from limited restrictions up to and including a total embargo on trade
with the Soviet Union and its Satellites.

The most difficult and critical problem in the exercise is communicating
our position and intentions to the Soviet leadership to induce,
persuade, or compel it to agree or acquiesce, and to provide it with the
means to do either gracefully.

By the same token, the Soviet response to our move will be determined
largely by what they believe our purposes to be, our ability to achieve
these purposes, and our resolve and capability to assume the risks in
raising the threshhold. This in fact is the rationale for the graduated
increases in commitments of force—to demonstrate clearly our readiness
to assume the necessary risks of war.

This brings us back to the time requirement affecting the duration of
Phase II. Time is needed for the NATO
military build-up—which is intended to bring pressure to bear on the
Soviets as well as prepare NATO for a
possible Phase III. The build-up itself is likely to have a deterrent
effect, and time is needed to measure its impact on Kremlin thinking.
And clearly, as tension mounts or the possibility of war increases, both
we and the Soviets will be under increasing pressures from all sides to
attempt to find a peaceful solution to the problem. This will take a
variety of forms, including possibly a UN
involvement, and can go on for some time. At this juncture, two months
would appear to be a most conservative estimate. The probability is that
this exercise will be of much longer duration. Phase II is really
intended to induce the Soviets to agree to an acceptable modus vivendi;
it is not merely preparation time for Phase III when the NATO contingency plans—the BERCON/MARCON Plans—came into
play, although this is always a possible eventuality.

What is involved then is not a 60-day pause before active military
operations are undertaken, but rather a period in which major efforts
will be made backed by all possible means to achieve a political
solution to the Berlin problem. And as long as both sides seek to avoid
a military solution, Phase II need not be accelerated. Moreover, in so
far as Berlin itself is concerned, we can cope with an extended Phase II
for the stockpile and airlift capacities give us a cushion which permits
us to withstand substantial Soviet pressure.

McG. Bundy

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret. The source text
bears the handwritten note: “Taken from Pres Week-end reading dtd
7/20/62.”

2 See footnote 2, Document
79.

81. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State81. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, July 20,
1962, 6 p.m.

187. Re Schnippenkoetter's statement to Ambassadorial Group meeting that
Khrushchev's threat to
Austrians to cut Allied military access to Berlin was new, wish point
out Khrushchev on previous occasions has made clear this Soviet
intention, although perhaps not so explicitly.2

I agree that serious crisis over Berlin unlikely before late fall
although gradual buildup of tension probable. Timing may be related to
next round Soviet atomic tests as they may hope soften up Western
position by exploding large bomb. I have not changed my views on
probable course of developments Berlin question, namely: increased
tension; at some stage serious attempt negotiate with US which probably
unsuccessful; direct approach to West Germans, also unsuccessful;
signature of peace treaty but with some steps to avoid or at least
reduce danger of military conflict. At some stage along way, consider
play for summit conference or bilateral meeting with President
Kennedy likely. I find difficult to assess
reasons for Khrushchev's publicly
emphasizing issue of troop withdrawal. He must surely know our position
is firm and while possible he is building this up for bargaining
purposes it does not seem reasonable that he would wish further to
commit his personal prestige which already deeply engaged. I am more
inclined to think he considers successful negotiations impossible and is
building up his position for signature of treaty.

Am inclined think Soviet position on test ban may have changed in recent
months in manner to make possibility agreement more likely. Believe
possible Soviets may have concluded that in view strain on their
resources continuation of competition in this field more likely to
result in breakthrough by us than by them. They would in any event
insist upon further Soviet round of tests before agreement became
effective.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2135. Secret; Limit Distribution.

2 A memorandum of the conversation of the
Ambassadorial Group on July 11, during which Counselor
Schnippenkoetter made this statement, is ibid., Central Files,
762.00/7–1162.

82. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State82. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, July 22,
1962, 1 a.m.

Secto 13. Eyes only President and Acting Secretary. No other
distribution. Memos conversation with Gromyko and four Western Foreign
Ministers coming separate telegrams.2

After considerable general discussion with Gromyko along well known lines, he wound up with rather
stiff statement read from a piece of paper about Soviet determination to
sign separate peace treaty. When his apparent threats were sharply
rebuffed he retreated to statement that he had come to Geneva to attempt
agreed solution. Same stiff line had been taken by him with Couve de Murville earlier in day.
Gromyko did not offer a piece
of paper but kept his remarks on oral plane.

I expect see Gromyko again
tomorrow evening for more considered reply to his closing remarks. Four
Foreign Ministers agreed we should not take excessively serious view
Gromyko's statements today
but should continue talks. Soviet sources are hinting that Gromyko will make new proposals about
Tuesday but no reliable indication thus far.

Do not believe I can report any significant change in regard to Berlin
nor do I need further instructions at this point. It was consensus of
Foreign Ministers that Soviets are maximizing pressures at this point to
discover any chink in our armor on troop question and that it is
essential to stand completely firm on this point. This seemed only
chance to pull Soviets off separate peace treaty line. If despite this
they should go ahead with separate peace treaty it was agreed firm stand
on troops now would make them more cautious as to accompanying measures
affecting our vital interests.

Four Western Foreign Ministers agreed to urgent review both political
planning and sequence of events prior to military confrontation. I drew
their attention specifically to consideration of Western political
initiatives prior to possible separate peace treaty such as three-power
demarche to Moscow pointing
out that publicly announced separate peace treaty could in no way affect
rights of West in West Berlin. Encouraging to find Couve participating
fully in our discussion and got impression he continues to want to move
toward rejoining Allies on Berlin and German questions.

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–2262. Secret; Priority. Passed to the White
House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk
and cleared by Kohler.
(Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2134) Rusk was in Geneva July 20–25 to
attend the Conference on Laos.

2 Sectos
14 and 16 from Geneva, July 22. (Ibid., Central Files, 762.00/7–2262
and 110.11–RU/7–2262) The memoranda of conversation on which the
telegrams are based are ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF
2136. At 8 p.m. Kohler, who
was also in Geneva, telephoned Ball to say that they had just come out of a 2-hour
and 40-minute meeting with Gromyko. When Ball asked if the meeting had been good or
otherwise, Kohler replied
“otherwise, quite seriously.” (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers,
Telephone Conversations) Ball
relayed this message to Bundy
at 4:30 p.m. Washington time. (Ibid.)

83. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State83. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, July 23,
1962, 10 a.m.

Secto 25. Eyes only President and Acting Secy. No other distribution.
Full record on conversation last evening with Gromyko coming separate telegram.2 My guess is that we
shall have at least one more talk here. I clearly got impression that
they expect additional discussions here or later but this is no
guarantee that they will not make sudden move to press sudden and
separate peace treaty. However, Gromyko last evening both in manner and words seemed to
emphasize their preference for an agreed solution and this I
reciprocated.

Most important point arose when I, after consultation with Western FonMins, asked him very directly and
specifically what he meant day before when he said that they “would sign
peace treaty with GDR and would carry
out necessary measures to provide for undeviating respect for GDR sovereignty.” His first reply was that
this meant that after peace treaty Western Powers would have to make
their arrangements with GDR. I flatly
rejected this as an answer saying that he was merely saying “go ask the
ventriloquist's dummy” and that I knew that Soviets would not be so
insane as to transfer such vital matter into the hands of Ulbricht. He
refused to answer again except to repeat what he had said earlier. I
suspect this means either that he had no instructions at all or that
Soviet Govt has not really made up its mind.

In general, tone of meeting last evening was somewhat better than day
before and I got no impression that Gromyko was here to deliver us an ultimatum involving
war or peace.

Would greatly appreciate highest level Departmental reaction, including
Bohlen's, to two
conversations held thus far as assistance my thinking for possible third
round.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–2362. Secret; Niact. Eyes Only. Passed to the White House. According
to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot
65 D 533, CF 2134)

2 Secto 30 from Geneva, July 23. (Ibid., Central
Files, 110.11–RU/7–2362) A memorandum of the conversation is ibid.,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2136.

84. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Geneva84. Telegram From the Department of State
to Secretary of State Rusk, at Geneva1

Washington, July
23, 1962, 7:15 p.m.

Tosec 36. Eyes only for the Secretary from the Acting Secretary. Re Secto
25.2 The following comments
have been prepared by senior officers of the Department, including
Bohlen:

In view of shortage of time and necessity of it reaching you before your
next meeting with Gromyko, it has
not had White House clearance, therefore represents only Department
view.

Gromyko's comments in your two
meetings do not add any factual material or any new arguments which
would be of assistance in making a new evaluation of Soviet intentions.
General tenor of the conversation seems to us to stick squarely on
previous positions but is presented in a somewhat more definitive way in
regard to the signature of a separate peace treaty. It is likewise
noticed that Gromyko read from a
paper which would indicate that he was operating under instructions from
highest authority, but it is also noted that he tended to back away at
end of first conversation on the threat aspect of his remarks. It is
also significant that he put no time limit or date in regard to the
signature of a peace treaty and was even more evasive when pressed as to
exactly what would be its consequences other than implication of his
remark that arrangements would have to be made with GDR and not with Soviet Union.

Despite generally tougher line, it is no more possible now than it was
earlier to make any accurate prediction as to course of Soviet future
action and we are still
inclined to believe that Soviets have not definitely made up their mind
on this aspect.

The threat of Soviet action and the constant repetition about the
necessity of removal of Western troops would seem to be in line with
recent indications from Moscow of Soviet position. It is possible that
this line is dictated by a desire to probe in depth the Western position
and when satisfied that there is no give to use this as a justification
for an eventual separate peace treaty.

Another conceivable but less likely motivation is that a strong negative
Western attitude might be utilized by the Soviets as an argument against
those elements within the communist bloc (in particular East Germans) or
even within the Soviet Government who have been pressing for a radical
solution of Berlin question. A strong Western attitude would demonstrate
that any radical solution carries with it a great risk of war. We are
unable to carry the analysis any farther.

It is of course conceivable that Gromyko may show some more flexibility in your next
meeting with him, which we understand is at noon, Geneva time, tomorrow.
We have noted that Gromyko has
referred to the removal of Western forces as the “crucial point” of
discussion. You might care at the next session if he sticks to this
point to say that you had already given all the arguments as to why this
was quite inconceivable for Western acceptance and in general shorten
the conversation if there seems to be no Soviet give and tell Gromyko you would report his attitude
to the President on your return and suggest that he should do the same
with Khrushchev.3

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2362. Secret;
Niact. Drafted and initialed
by Bohlen, cleared by
Hilsman and Davis, and approved and initialed
by Ball.

2 Document 83.

3 On July 23 Davis had sent Bohlen a similar evaluation adding that Rusk might press Gromyko on what would happen to
access controls if the Soviet Union signed a peace treaty with East
Germany. Rusk might also try
to explore designating the Western troops in Berlin something other
than NATO forces. (Memorandum from
Davis; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–2362) On July 24
the Department of State sent Bundy a 2-page INR
assessment of the first two talks with Gromyko, which stated that the talks confirmed the
U.S. expectation “of a Soviet effort at this time to increase
pressure on the West over Berlin.” (Ibid., 762.00/7–2462)

85. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State85. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, July 24,
1962, 8 p.m.

Secto 48. Eyes only for President and Acting Secretary. Eyes only for
Ambassador Thompson. No other
distribution. Detailed report my luncheon and third session with
Gromyko coming separate
telegram.2 Following are my
personal comments on three sessions taken together in an attempt to help
judge where we are.

1. Stiffest moment was at end first session when Gromyko read from his piece of paper.
Otherwise our discussions in all three sessions were in more relaxed
tones even if business-like atmosphere. This means that what Gromyko has said in his own
formulations has been more moderate than language used publicly by
Soviets in this past month.

2. As you will see from record I threw two ideas into the pot in third
session. First, that Soviets use with East Germans same techniques we
used in 1949 with West Germans in reserving our rights with respect to
Berlin, a German peace treaty and Germany as a whole. Gromyko seemed to reject this
suggestion, claiming that in absence of prior agreement West would have
to deal with East Germans. At later stage, however, he showed some
interest in more information on this point and I am not at all sure that
this approach is foreclosed.

3. My second point was to refer to the use of Deputy Foreign Ministers
for further discussion on German-Berlin questions along lines our
“principles” paper. Fortunately I was able to tie this to an earlier
remark he had dropped at luncheon table that they thought it was
important to talk these matters out with US or “better still with the
US, UK and France”. He inquired whether by Deputy Foreign Ministers we
meant bilateral or quadripartite and what they would talk about. I told
him I could not today speak officially for other governments but our own
idea was that these should be quadripartite, that some of the questions
to be discussed have been formulated in our “principles” paper but that
we could review agenda of Deputies if that seemed desirable or
necessary. He said that he would not wish to comment on that suggestion
today, thereby leaving door open either for instructions or later
discussion.

4. Note that insistence by Soviets that, after East German peace treaty,
the Western Powers would be required to deal with East Germans is a proposition that seems to
assume the continued presence of the West in West Berlin. I do not,
therefore, believe that we should think that we are being presented with
ultimatum which makes the actual presence of the West the breaking
point.

5. He told me today that, upon returning from our last session in Geneva,
he had gone directly to Khrushchev and had obtained the suspension of
harassments in Berlin. This may be of some interest as indication
possible Gromyko influence and
effect of his judgment as to whether it is possible to back us down in
negotiations on presence Western troops.

6. Today I returned to a formulation I used some months ago with
Gromyko, namely, to try to
imagine the situation if Khrushchev and Kennedy were to say
to each other what we both had been saying. I pointed out that it would
be very bad to reach such an unsatisfactory result. You will see from
detailed record that matter again came up at the end in terms of keeping
contact between our two governments. Gromyko seemed genuinely disturbed when he, through a
complete misunderstanding, thought I was suggesting that even diplomatic
or indirect contacts not be maintained. I promptly reassured him on that
point but his anxiety, linked with other things he has been saying,
reinforces our analysis that he was under instructions to see how far he
could go in talking us out of Berlin but not to let the matter come to a
complete impasse. I also added, of course, that on the matter of
possible meeting between Khrushchev and Kennedy I would not
add any comments, without the instructions of the President, to what had
been said publicly and privately. He did not himself raise or pursue
“summit.”

7. I have tried to be very direct and very clear about the point of
Western forces in West Berlin and reminded him today that the President
had told Mr. Khrushchev that “no
President of the United States could make such a concession.” Such
direct statements made more than once did not bring further threatening
language from Gromyko. Indeed,
the only threats he used were those in his prepared portion of our first
session.

8. It seems to me that there may be a possibility to work out an
arrangement with the Russians governing a post peace treaty situation
which the Russians themselves would agree with the East Germans. They
could claim that East German agreement was an exercise of GDR and our rights would remain intact.
Alternatively, I think our modus vivendi approach may have a breath of
life. Further, there is always “Solution C”3 to fall back upon if
going gets tougher.

9. Home, Couve de Murville, and
Schroeder have all left
Geneva. Gromyko is tentatively
planning to return to Moscow on the 26th. I am under the definite
impression that these talks at Geneva are not our last opportunity for a
settlement and that further communication would precede drastic act on
their part. I therefore told him that I would tentatively plan to leave
late tomorrow but that I would be in touch with him tomorrow morning to
see whether either one of us felt that there were any other points we
might profitably cover here. My guess is that it would be a good thing
for both Moscow and Washington to do a little fresh thinking about these
three sessions. It is unlikely that Gromyko will receive different instructions while
Khrushchev is away from
Moscow.

10. I regret inability to button up this problem at this point but I
suspect that Soviets have not made their final decisions and have been
trying to find out whether additional public and private pressure could
produce significant Western concessions. I could be wrong and Soviets
could move toward a peace treaty at almost any time but it does not feel
that way to me.

11. Of some interest is my very private remark to Polish Foreign Minister
Rapacki that now is a good time for those who have influence in Moscow
to counsel moderation and he replied “you may be sure that is being
done.” Today, after a rather sharp retort to Gromyko during my brief remarks in the disarmament
conference, the Polish chief delegate remarked privately to one of my
colleagues that I had made a “fine statement.”

12. There has been good feeling among four Western Foreign Ministers at
Geneva and unity on the line to take at this point as well as on
necessary urgent review of Western position on contingency planning.
This plus fact that Gromyko keeps door open encourages me to think that
additional patience may work this out, distressing as it is to listen to
and to play certain long-playing records ad nauseam.

13. Of course, if it is felt that I should take several more days here to
pursue particular points I should be glad to do so but I am inclined to
think that they would cause Russians to expect some major concession on
presence of Western forces, would make our Allied consultation more
awkward, and, on basis of Gromyko's apparent present instructions, would promise
little result.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–2462. Secret; Niact. Passed to the White House.

2 Document 86.

3 For a description of “Solution C,” see the Report by Dean Acheson,
June 28, 1961, in vol. XIV, Document 49.

86. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State86. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Geneva, July 25,
1962, 1 a.m.

Secto 50. Following based on uncleared memcon Secretary-Gromyko conversation July 24.2

Secretary, Kohler, Hillenbrand had two and half hour
session with Gromyko, Ilyichev,
and Kovalev following lunch hosted by Gromyko. Gromyko
invited Secretary speak first.

Secretary opened saying he little puzzled as to what Gromyko and he could profitably say to
each other at this point. Problems at hand had been discussed at
considerable length here and US point of view had also been expressed by
President on number occasions. Secretary noted he had reported to
President what had been said in Geneva and that he personally did not
see any prospect for satisfactory progress on issues at this time,
unless Sovs advance in one of two directions: (A) To make clear that
whatever they thought needs were with respect East Germany these would
not interfere with Western presence in West Berlin and access to that
city. On larger questions in which there is common interest between US
and USSR, West had made clear to West Germany that all-German problems
and Berlin reserved from full sovereignty West Germany. We saw no reason
why Sovs could not do same with respect East Germany. (B) Alternatively,
we could try to sit down and see how to handle fact of disagreement
without conflict. US general principles paper suggested one way to
dealing with it. If there were other suggestions re handling this matter
in similar fashion, we would be happy think about them.

Secretary expressed view great deal of time had been spent in these
discussions reviewing respective points of view and it was not necessary
go over them again since they well known. Problem is where we should go
from here.

Secretary observed that in terms of longer-run future, if there was no
permanent settlement German problems on agreed basis, that was likely
cause restiveness and be source of danger Central Europe. Sincerely, as
we saw situation, if Germans stood against Germans and if Germans on
both sides were to indulge in adventures, that would gravely affect
peace Central Europe. We regard effective presence US and indeed USSR as
stabilizing factor in this situation.

Secretary recalled Gromyko's
remark at lunch it good idea if US and USSR, and preferably also UK and
France, tried discuss these problems and find solution. US had made
suggestion along these lines in its general principles paper. Noting he
was unable speak with full authority for two additional countries,
particularly since—as Gromyko
aware from reading newspapers—De
Gaulle had his own views this subject, Secretary stated
that if Sovs had any ideas for quadripartite discussions along lines we
had been talking about, we would see what could be done to get
cooperation others concerned.

Secretary said he wished add one word re President and Khrushchev. Noting he had already
exchanged some comments on this point with Gromyko, Secretary said he believed great deal depended
on whether these two men could find some basis on which our two
countries, in spite their different social systems, could move toward
better relations. However, he also believed it would be unfortunate if
President and Khrushchev just
exchanged views on this subject without coming to any apparent result.
US had tried be imaginative as to how circumstances could be created
where direct contact between these two men could take place fruitfully.
However, Secretary said, he did not think such circumstances existed
now, and there was danger two leaders reaching same point where we were
now, which would not be satisfactory to either side. Secretary pointed
out that he was making these comments only in connection his earlier
conversation on this subject, and that he had no direct instructions
from President in this respect.

Gromyko agreed both he and
Secretary had set forth in detail and in clear manner positions their
respective govts during these meetings in Geneva. He wished once more
emphasize that Sovs regretted US Govt had taken such position re main
problems, i.e., withdrawal Western forces from West Berlin. He contended
this was further evidence US Govt's desire maintain occupation status in
West Berlin and keep that city in hands three Western Powers as NATO mil base. This conclusion had not
been arrived at today; USSR had thought so before, but today Western
intentions this respect were even clearer than before. Gromyko observed he had made this
comment in view Secretary's remark at earlier meeting Sovs had only
recently started talking about West Berlin's being NATO base. Gromyko continued USSR would never agree to perpetuation
occupation regime in West Berlin and to that city's remaining NATO base eternally. USSR could not agree
to that because that ran counter interests of peace in Europe—and not
only in Europe—but also counter interests relaxation tensions in Europe
and Germany. If Sovs were to agree to this they would be helping those
who were pouring oil on fire and thus would be accomplices of West
German revanchists and militarists. It was impossible expect Sov Union
to agree to this. USSR would
not agree and regretted US Govt, and apparently its Allies, failed duly
appreciate this position.

Gromyko recalled that on more
than one occasion Western, including US leaders, for example Macmillan, De Gaulle, President Kennedy, and
Secretary himself, had stated West understood Sov desire ensure its
security, particularly in light lessons past history, when Hitler had
attacked USSR and latter had lost millions of lives in defeating Nazis.
However, while saying this, West failed draw necessary conclusions which
would lend substance to these words. USSR position re German peace
treaty and other questions to be settled in connection such treaty was
based on desire prevent events in Europe from taking tragic turn and
causing new disaster in world. Sov Govt and Sov people were resolved to
go through with this and they believed this was in accord with interests
peace in Europe and in world at large, as well as with US interests, if
such interests were correctly understood. If US was seeking peace and
good relations with USSR, this should not be in conflict with its
interests. USSR, just as US, was great power and if it was interested—as
it had to be—in matters of war and peace in all corners of world,
including Africa and Asia, then it was easy to understand reasons why it
was doubly interested in events in Europe.

Gromyko went on, saying another
aspect problem was that in pres-ent situation where there was no German
peace treaty and West Berlin was occupied city in hands Western Powers,
sovereign rights of GDR were being
crudely flouted. USSR was fully aware of US dislike for GDR, its system, its govt, and Ulbricht personally. However, this was
something that did not depend on US; fact was that GDR, its govt, and Ulbricht existed. Admitting he might be
repetitive, Gromyko stated West
Berlin did not belong to West and there was no reason why US, UK and
France should stay as bosses of West Berlin. Neither USSR, nor GDR, nor some other states could reconcile
themselves with present state of affairs. It appeared to Sovs West
failed appreciate duly these arguments which USSR had been advancing in
its quest for mutually agreeable solution.

Gromyko observed that every once
in a while US attempted link question German peace treaty and
normalization situation West Berlin with question German reunification.
He supposed that was done only for record. In his view this was waste of
time and energy. New situation existed in Germany today; two German
states had emerged from ruins Hitler's Reich and it was from this fact
that one must proceed. USSR was convinced unification would be resolved
only between two German states. On other hand question German peace
treaty and normalization West Berlin situation could not be postponed
indefinitely. It was this that he had wanted particularly emphasized in
his conversations with Secy here in Geneva. It was regrettable US failed
draw necessary conclusions from
this. USSR was convinced its position correct and in full accord with
interests peace and detente in Europe.

Referring to Secy's remark it would be well if USSR made clear in one or
two directions what situation would exist with regard to presence
Western Powers and Western forces West Berlin in event Sovs went through
with their intentions re German peace settlement, Gromyko contended he had spoken on this
during his meetings with Secy in New York and later in Geneva. During
present conversations, he had also twice replied to this question. He
continued that, if understanding was reached on appropriate questions
connected with German peace settlement, situation would be simple:
Access would be unrestricted and it would be ensured by all parties
concerned, including GDR fulfilling its
obligations; it would be ensured on basis respect GDR sovereignty, including its sovereignty
with regard transit. A different situation would exist if peace treaty
with GDR were signed unilaterally, i.e.,
without Western Powers' participation or without agreement with those
powers; then West would have to deal with GDR Govt re all questions, including transit arrangements;
USSR would have nothing to do with these. Only GDR would be responsible and Western Powers would have to
deal with GDR.

As to Secretary's remarks about desirability avoid conflict, Gromyko asserted Sov Govt had always
proceeded on that basis. Sov Govt believed both sides must do their
utmost to avoid conflict. Sov Govt believed conflict could be caused
only by Western Powers, US in particular, due to their position. If USSR
wanted create conflict for sake of conflict it would have acted
differently, and it would have had no prolonged negotiations with US in
order seek possibility agreed solution.

Gromyko recalled that, last March
in Geneva, Secy had spoken to him about Sovt flights in air corridors to
West Berlin. Secy had said these flights were complicating matters and
it would be better if they stopped. Gromyko continued that, although USSR categorically
rejected assertion that such flights were illegal, upon his return to
Moscow he had reported Secy's remarks on this point to Sov Govt and
Khrushchev personally. He had
told his govt that President apparently shared Secy's views on this
matter, but although both of them were wrong, they did appear feel this
was complicating factor for them. Khrushchev had then replied that suspension such flights
might perhaps facilitate negotiations, and had ordered them suspended
(at this point Gromyko told his
interpreter not to use “stopped” but rather “suspended” in this
sentence). Gromyko said Sovs had
not expected US to express special gratitude to USSR for this. US had
taken this for granted, although perhaps it had noted this in its own
mind. He had made these remarks by way of reply to Secretary's comment
re need not do anything to heighten conflict. Gromyko reiterated that if Sovs
had wanted conflict they would have been acting differently. However,
not to want conflict for sake of conflict was one thing; it was another
thing when legitimate interests of USSR and legitimate interests of
GDR as sovereign state were
affected, interests which were in full accord with interests of
peace.

Commenting on Secy's remark that present circumstances did not favor
direct contact between President and Khrushchev, Gromyko noted that this was apparently Secy's view on
this point and that Secy was of course free draw conclusions from
situation as he saw it. US knew Sov positions, including its latest
proposal re Western forces West Berlin, well enough and there was
nothing he, Gromyko, could add.
He did wish repeat however that he regretted very much US was taking
such position re Western forces West Berlin. He wished emphasize with
all vigor Sov Govt would never, never agree with that position and would
never accept perpetuation presence Western troops West Berlin.

Secy said he wished make observation re Gromyko's very last point, because he believed he should
draw distinction between contacts, i.e., communication, and a situation
where we would have to imagine what the two leaders could say if they
met face to face. This was of course up to the President, but he thought
that contacts, i.e., communication, were of very considerable
importance.

Referring to Gromyko's remark that
Western attitude on presence forces West Berlin had been distinct in
past but not as distinct as it was today, Secy first observed he
understood word today to mean recent days. He then recalled that
pressure on this point had come from Sov side in most recent
conversations. Of course insistence on part USSR clarified and made more
distinct basis attitude Western Powers. Secy pointed out President had
said in Vienna no US President was in position make this kind of
surrender Western position in present circumstances.

Secy said he was again sorry hear words such as “eternal” and “perpetual”
being used in connection presence Western forces. No one had said such
presence should be eternal or perpetual. What we had said was that USSR
could not unilaterally, by itself, say when it should end. To say West
insisting on staying perpetually in Berlin was incorrect and
misrepresentation Western position.

Recalling Gromyko's comment
Western leaders had expressed understanding USSR desire ensure its
security, Secy stressed this understanding did not mean that, if Sovs
alleged basic rights of West were some kind of vague threat to their
security, they could expect US move out at risk of catastrophe to West
with regard to its security. Secy said he wished assure genuine
understanding Sov security did not mean West would lie down and play
dead when alleged Sov security at stake.

As to Gromyko's remark that talk
about unification was waste time and energy, Secy stated Sov position
today inevitably led to conclusion Sovs wanted brush aside all
agreements they had concluded with West between World War II and middle
“fifties” and that apparently their solemn assurances were valueless
because they wished change situation to their advantage in spite of fact
that would violate Western vital interests. Secy strongly emphasized we
were not children and understood situation. If Sovs intended throw
existing agreements into junk heap, no one could expect West to think
any new agreement re presence and access West Berlin would have solid
backing unless Western Powers were in West Berlin. As to Gromyko's assertion there was new
situation in Germany characterized particularly by existence GDR and Ulbricht, Secy stressed there was another element in
that situation, i.e., presence Western Powers in West Berlin with access
thereto, which had not changed, was part of situation, and was as much
of a fact as any other facts cited. Sovs said that when peace treaty was
signed by them, these questions would be for GDR to deal with and Sovs would have no relation to them.
Surely this was not accurate description their position. We could not
believe Sovs would indeed turn over what they say are their security
interests to Ulbricht. Gromyko himself had said USSR would be
involved in situation in case of trouble. In any event concern with
situation must remain between signatories to agreements. As far as we
were concerned USSR and West continue be responsible for situation. We
see no way Sovs could, would or would want to transfer this
responsibility to another entity.

Re Gromyko's assertion there was
dangerous situation in Berlin, Secretary pointed out source of danger
easy to identify. There had been no source of war in that area for a
number of years, even since Jessup-Malik agreement, which had relieved
dangerous tensions and which Sovs now want throw out window. Danger or
threat did not come from our side but from East, because Sovs said
unless you do this we will make situation dangerous. West made no
demands and was not asking anything. Source of danger came from source
of demands. If that was peace or peaceful coexistence, Secretary
emphasized, then he did not understand those words. This lack of regard
for interests and position other side was element lack of reciprocity we
had been concerned about in recent discussions. Secretary agreed Berlin
was serious problem.

However, he pointed out, it was also true there were other problems, some
connected with Germany and some not. Prudence required not to translate
Berlin problem into sole determining issue in US–USSR relations. It was
not only issue on US–USSR agenda. Perhaps progress could be made on
other problems. However, if Berlin problem was treated without any
element reciprocity, then indeed it was major issue between US–USSR.

As to corridor flights, Secretary said he had been very much aware of
difference in situation this respect after his departure Geneva.
However, since he had no way of knowing Gromyko had intervened, and since he was not sure
Gromyko wanted to be
personally cognizant of situation—something the Sov FonMin did not want in Geneva—he had not
communicated with Gromyko on this
point. However, Secretary wished express gratification at hearing
Gromyko's remarks, and
thought this had been positive and helpful act on his part.

Secretary recalled he had made two remarks re possible ways dealing with
matters at hand.

One way would be for USSR to make clear its possible actions re East
Germany would not affect rights Western Powers and access. From what
Gromyko had said he
apparently did not think well of this suggestion. However, Secretary
pointed out, Gromyko was trying
make East Germany more sovereign than West Germany. Gromyko had said USSR would back up
East Germany with regard steps East Germany would take in exercising
that kind of sovereignty. Of course that would lead to very dangerous
situation, and was unwise on part USSR. The second way—possible
discussions including UK and France—US had made certain suggestions re
Deputy Foreign Ministers. Secretary wondered whether Gromyko had any suggestions of his own.

Secretary then expressed view point had been reached where, unless there
were new instructions received, both sides should report in detail to
their governments, give serious thought to what had been said, and be in
touch again, as he was sure two Heads of Government would want them to
be. Secretary expressed regret it had so far been impossible make
serious advance in Geneva, despite demonstration great efforts on our
side during past months find mutually acceptable solution. Sovs now
concentrating on point of most vital interest to West. Western position
on this had been made clear to Khrushchev by President in Vienna. Indeed it had been
clear since events of 1948/49, and therefore our attitude could not
possibly be surprise to USSR. Secretary continued that, in view what had
been said, he saw no direction in which Gromyko and he could go ahead here in Geneva. He
wondered what Gromyko's view was
on this.

Gromyko rejoined by referring to
Secretary's remark USSR security considerations with regard German peace
treaty and normalization West Berlin situation were vague and
represented very free and easy interpretation Sov arguments in favor
German peace treaty and normalization West Berlin situation on basis
free city.

There was nothing vague or nebulous in this. In fact everything was
crystal clear. There was this intolerable situation where West Berlin
was held by Western Powers in their fists and maintained as NATO base, and where GDR legitimate interests were being crudely
flouted. All of this was
nothing nebulous; these represented weighty arguments militating in
favor solution this problem. This situation will unquestionably be
changed, with or without prior understanding with Western Powers.
However, USSR believed it would be best have solution with prior
understanding with Western Powers.

Gromyko said Secretary had tried
present situation in such way as to make it look as if creation two
Germanies had been caused by USSR's violation its solemn obligations.
This was inaccurate. It had been Western Powers, and only Western Powers
which had torn up agreements between Allies and had split Germany. It
was on this basis that two German states had emerged. Gromyko said there was no need
reminding Secretary of creation such things as Bizonia or Trizonia, nor
of creation of revanchist, militarist, but independent FRG. There was no need to review history.
USSR had been from very outset in favor creation single, peaceful
Germany, but that had not been possible due to Western Powers.
Apparently no common language could be found on this point. Secretary
repeated himself and so apparently did he, Gromyko, too. However, since Secretary had raised point,
it was necessary to restore history, i.e., truth.

Gromyko contended USSR would
always remember how its Allies in war had acted with respect their
commitments as Allies. Hardly was ink dry on those agreements and hardly
had first grass grown on graves millions of dead, when West started
crudely to flout all its agreements with USSR, which duty bound remember
this and draw necessary conclusions. Gromyko asserted this was road that had led to present
situation. This all a very sad story, but must be taken into account.

Recalling Secretary's statement about transfer USSR security interests to
GDR, Gromyko asserted this question did not arise at all.
USSR did not intend to transfer its security. However, USSR had mutual
obligations to certain states, including those under Warsaw Pact, and in
event any aggression against GDR, USSR
would meet its obligation under Warsaw Pact. As to USSR, its security
was firmly in its own hands.

Gromyko then referred to
Secretary's remark Sovs trying make GDR
more sovereign than FRG and wondered why
Secretary thought FRG should be
yardstick of sovereignty for GDR. If
FRG not fully sovereign, if West had
pocketed part its sovereignty, why should GDR take its cue from that? In any event question of
greater or lesser sovereignty out of place. Sovereignty was sovereignty,
and could not be cut up in pieces and placed on different shelves. It
had been known for a long time that, if any sovereign state agreed yield
some of its sovereign rights by voluntarily entering into international
agreements to this effect, this was exercise of sovereignty.

Gromyko then observed Secretary
had for second time advanced idea continuation discussion by Deputy
Foreign Ministers. Gromykosaid he had two comments: He
was not clear what Secretary had in mind—bilateral or broader
discussions? Also he was not clear what Deputy Foreign Ministers would
have to do. He said this suggestion would remain unanswered by USSR here
in Geneva for time being. Secretary wondered whether Gromyko's last sentence referred to
four Deputy Foreign Ministers or to bilateral contacts. Gromyko replied he was talking about
Secretary's specific reference to Deputy Foreign Ministers. As to
contacts, Secretary had said present circumstances not conducive to
direct contact Heads of Government, but he understood this did not mean
indirect contacts should not continue.

Secretary confirmed Gromyko's
understanding on latter point, while noting he could not speak for
President formally. Re Deputy Foreign Ministers, US had made some
general suggestions as to what Deputy Foreign Ministers could discuss.
We had in mind Four Powers responsible for questions relating to
Germany; however, Secretary noted, he would have be in touch with those
not present here. Secretary expressed view it was important in not too
distant future agree on appropriate tasks for Deputy Foreign Ministers.
Some such tasks were contained in US general principles paper given to
Gromyko during previous
meeting in Geneva.

Secretary then noted Gromyko had
referred to Sov insistence re “GDR
interests.” He wished to remind Gromyko there were number other interests, such as those
of US and its Allies, Germany and German people as whole, West
Berliners, and peoples of USSR and US, all of whom interested in not
allowing major crisis develop. It was clear GDR interests not paramount when vast interests were at
stake in this situation. Secretary agreed there was no use in talking
about degrees of sovereignty. However, point he had wished make was that
Western Powers reserved re West Germany certain points with regard this
situation, and Gromyko had in fact praised this as something
constructive. We had also reserved re West Germany points regarding
settlement German problem as whole. In reply Gromyko's inquiry re specific points, Kohler pointed out Western Powers in
their agreement with West Germany had reserved all matters relating to
Berlin, peace settlement, and Germany as whole. Secretary said he wished
simply point out this possibility was open to USSR as well.

Re Gromyko's remark grant of
rights also represented exercise of sovereignty Secretary said he agreed
with this and recalled that US had told USSR that, if it signed treaty
with East Germany and if East Germany said to USSR what was in
Zorin-Bolz agreement, that would also be exercise of sovereignty. If,
e.g., France agreed to flights by aircraft from London to Rome, even if
such aircraft did not touch ground in France, that was also exercise of
sovereignty. Secretary observed he understood Gromyko not in position comment on
question Deputy Foreign Ministers today. Meanwhile we would give more precise thought this
question and we would be in touch with other side.

Secretary then raised question schedule. Said in normal course he would
return to Washington tomorrow, to be there in time for his dinner for
Souvanna Phouma July 26. This was not categorical imperative for him.
However, he had rather gathered impression both sides had said all they
could here, and perhaps it would be desirable for each to consult own
government. It would be useful if Gromyko could say when he was leaving for Moscow, and
whether he thought they should be in touch again before he left.
Secretary noted he would be able to stay if Gromyko thought he would have anything further from
Moscow to discuss before leaving Geneva, and of course would be in touch
if he had anything new from Washington.

Gromyko referred to Secretary's
comment GDR interests could not be
compared with Western interests, and thought Secretary probably regarded
Western interests as big mountain and GDR interests as small pebble. While it true US great power
and bigger than GDR, any state, even
small, considered its own interests, close and vital to it. Moreover
when Sovs spoke of GDR interests, they
had in mind vital, fundamental interests GDR, since West Berlin in center GDR and all air, land and water communications to West
Berlin ran through GDR territory.
Gromyko reiterated suggestion
re Deputy Foreign Ministers would remain unanswered for time being. Re
schedule, Gromyko indicated he
tentatively planning leave July 26. However, if interests negotiations
warranted longer stay and if further meeting agreed, he would not
object. Thus whether further meeting will take place depended not only
on him but on Secretary as well. Meeting closed with agreement two
delegations would check in morning whether anything new on either
side.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 110.11–RU/7–2562. Secret; Priority; Limited
Distribution. Repeated to Moscow, London, Paris, Bonn, and
Berlin.

2 A copy of the memorandum of conversation is
ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2136.

87. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State87. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, July 25,
1962, 4 p.m.

225. Eyes only Secretary. Khrushchev suggested that when I got home2 I
personally ask President—not through State Department—whether it would be better for him if
Berlin question brought to a head before or after our Congressional
elections. He did not want to make things more difficult for
President—and in fact would like to help him.

I said I would of course inform President but I could tell him that any
crisis—and particularly one as dangerous as would arise over
Berlin—would unite both parties in a demonstration of their patriotism.
He then asked if settlement of such a question as Berlin would not be
helpful to President politically. I said that in my opinion there was no
doubt that it would. He then observed that it was of course not
necessary to hold to any fixed date—and that it was even not necessarily
essential that matter be settled before end of this year.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–2562. Top Secret; Priority.

2 On July 5 President Kennedy
announced that Kohler would
be replacing Thompson as
Ambassador to the Soviet Union. Thompson left Moscow on July 27.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State88. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, July 26,
1962, 1 p.m.

228. My conversation with Khrushchev—Berlin.

I started to take my leave of K but he said he had additional subject to
discuss even though he disliked bringing up unpleasant matter on my last
visit. He had read report first Rusk-Gromyko
conversation and half of second but it was already clear our dialogue
was coming to end. He would have no choice but to proceed with signature
of treaty after which our rights there, including right of access, would
end. He emphasized that East Germans were allies and Soviets would stand
by them. On this occasion and others in conversation he showed great
sensitivity to what he considered threats and said Soviet Union great
power, not small country which could be threatened with impunity.
President had suggested time would make solution easier but he could not
wait indefinitely. From some things Secretary Rusk had said, we
apparently had idea of unending talks, but this not acceptable. Soviet
Govt had tried many different proposals to find solution but we insisted
on maintaining occupation in center of sovereign GDR.

I replied Secretary discussing this matter with Gromyko and in any event our position
had been made so clear there was little I could add. I pointed out
however that in 1959 we had endeavored to meet Soviet problem and find
ways to take Berlin out of cold war. These proposals had not been
accepted. It was Soviet side and not we that had focused world attention
on Berlin to point where smallest thing became test of our intentions. I
pointed out that psychology of people of Berlin and West Germany had
become very important. Many people on our side felt that acceptance of
Soviet proposals meant we would lose not only Berlin but rest of Germany
and consequently all of Europe. I said that they and we knew what
Ulbricht wanted in West
Berlin. K had himself said that our troops in Berlin had no military
value and we agreed with this appraisal, but they were essential to
maintain confidence of people of Berlin.

K said we often referred to prestige but did not take into account
prestige of Soviet Union. Continuance of occupation would be humiliating
to East Germany and Soviet Union. He said we also referred to our
commitment to people of Berlin but we had no right to make such
commitment when it involved interests of Allies who had made enormous
sacrifices in war. I said I thought in matters of this kind it was
important to try to get other person's point of view. I asked him what
he would do if he had Soviet troops in similar situation and we said we
would cut them off. I knew he would respond that he would sign treaty
and withdraw (before interpreter reached this sentence K interjected to
say exactly that). I got impression that this remark had some effect. K
said he was considering bringing matter before UN and in this connection made some vague reference to
possible commission of jurists—in order that Soviet Union could make
clear its position before signing treaty. He said he was discussing this
possibility with his colleagues but no decision had been taken and he
had not made up his own mind whether this was best course but it had
certain appeal for him.

K took usual line on German reunification.

This part of conversation ended by my telling him he should find way to
give us better choice of alternatives than those now before us and I
illustrated this with a long anecdote. He was cordial throughout
discussion and I had impression he considered he had to move ahead but
deeply troubled. He emphasized many times this was the one problem
standing in way of good relations between us and I believe he is sincere
in this.

I said I hoped he would study carefully reports Rusk-Gromyko conversations as Secretary had fully set forth
our position. At dacha in afternoon he had Semenov, their German expert,
present, indicating he expected continue Berlin talk, but did not do so
in any specific way.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.61/7–2662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

89. Telegram From the Embassy in Denmark to the Department of State89. Telegram From the Embassy in Denmark to
the Department of State1

Copenhagen, July
28, 1962, noon.

76. Eyes only for the Secretary from Ambassador Thompson. Reflecting upon my talk with
Khrushchev have following
conclusions:

(1) Am more convinced than ever that he at least does not intend push
Berlin question to point of real risk of war. Much will depend, however,
upon attitude his colleagues and allies as well as upon how we handle
the matter. Believe line taken by President and your representation of
our case at Geneva was just right but suggest we must be extremely
careful on the one hand to show we are serious in our determination to
defend Berlin and on other to avoid engaging their prestige particularly
in the military field as they are unbelievably sensitive about this. I
think, for example, we should for the present play down any boasts about
our military superiority and in Berlin itself avoid any action that
could be considered by them as annoyance on our part. At same time we
should proceed vigorously with contingency planning which they will know
about but without publicity.

I believe Khrushchev is likely to
bring Berlin problem before UN and
probably will personally present Soviet case. Suggest we should be
thinking about how to prevent neutrals from proposing compromise
solutions unacceptable to us and from giving him impression he can
proceed with his plans with strong support from world opinion. I have
some thoughts on this to put before you upon my return.

[Here follow paragraphs 2 and 3 in which Thompson gave his assessment of the Soviet position on
disarmament.]

Blair

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/7–2862. Secret.

August-September 1962: Contingency Planning, the Death of Peter Fechter, and the Abolition of the Office of the Soviet CommandantAugust-September 1962: Contingency Planning, the Death of Peter Fechter, and the Abolition of the Office of the Soviet Commandant: Document List

Document 90: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, August 1, 1962, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 962.72/8–162. Secret; Priority. Also sent to Bonn and repeated to Paris, Moscow, London, USAREUR, USAFE, and SHAPE.

Document 91: Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, August 2, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret. According to another copy, this memorandum was drafted by Cash and Hillenbrand on August 1. (Department of State, Central Files, 661.62B1/8–262)

Document 92: Memorandum of Conversation

WashingtonAugust 9, 1962, 3:06 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information but it was approved in S on August 21. The time of the meeting is taken from Rusk's Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

Document 93: Memorandum From William Y. Smith to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington,August 9, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 505 Berlin Contingency Planning. Top Secret. Initialed by Smith. A similar account drafted by General Gray is ibid.

Document 94: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 13, 1962, 10:32 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–1362. Secret; Limited Distribution; Eyes Only. Drafted by Anderson. The time of the meeting is taken from Rusk's Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

Document 95: Transcript of Conversation Between Frank E. Cash, Jr., and Arthur R. Day

August 19, 1962, 7:45 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. Cash was in Washington; Day was in Berlin.

Document 96: Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at Berlin

Washington, August 20, 1962, 8:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2062. Confidential; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by Cash, cleared by Tyler, and approved by Rusk.

Document 97: Telegram From the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (Norstad) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Paris, August 21, 1962.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Norstad Papers, Subject File, Dowling. Secret; By Special Means; Personal. Repeated to Bonn personal for Dowling, to CINCUSEUR personal for General Freeman, and to USCOB personal for General Watson. The source text indicates that it was delivered to Gilpatric in McNamara's absence and passed to the Department of State.

Document 98: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, August 21, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.62A/8–2162. Secret; Priority. Received at 8:58 a.m.

Document 99: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 21, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Cash and approved in S on September 6. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office.

Document 100: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, August 23, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2362. Secret; Niact. Received at 12:31 p.m. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, USAREUR, and SHAPE.

Document 101: Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, August 23, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 510 Partition of Berlin. Secret.

Document 102: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 23, 1962, 3:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2362. Secret. Drafted by Anderson and approved in S on September 7. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office. A detailed summary of this conversation was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 510, August 23. (Ibid., 611.61/8–2362)

Document 103: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)

Washington, August 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

Document 104: Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at Berlin

Washington, August 23, 1962, 7:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.54/8–2362. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Brandin and Penberthy and cleared in draft by General Gray, Bundy, Tyler, Secretary Rusk, and ISA. Also sent to Bonn and Paris and repeated to London, Moscow, and USAREUR.

Document 105: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, August 25, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2562. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, USAREUR, and SHAPE.

Document 106: Letter From President Kennedy to Senator Mike Mansfield

Washington, August 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2862. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information DEAR MIKE: I want to thank you for your thoughtful memorandum of August 25 about the situation in Berlin.A copy of this memorandum, attached to a White House memorandum of transmittal, dated August 30, is ibid., 762.00/8–3062.

Document 107: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, August 31, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin, BQD-CC. Top Secret. Drafted by Kaysen.

Document 108: Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at Berlin

Washington, August 29, 1962, 9:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ausland, cleared in draft by Rusk and in substance by Gray and Nitze, and approved by Brandin. Repeated to Bonn, Paris, Moscow, London, USAREUR, and USAFE.

Document 109: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 30, 1962, 10:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–3062. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Cash on August 30 and approved in S on September 6. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office.

Document 110: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 31, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany. Secret. Drafted by Davis on September 1. The meeting was held in President Kennedy's office.

Document 111: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, September 1, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, USAREUR, and SHAPE.

Document 112: Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of the Interior Udall and Chairman Khrushchev

Petsunda, Georgia, Soviet Union, September 6, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Drafted by the U.S. interpreter, Kamman, with additions and corrections by Udall, who visited the Soviet Union for 11 days beginning August 29. A summary of the conversation, transmitted in telegram 616 from Moscow, September 7 (ibid., Central Files, 033.1100–UD/9–762), is printed in vol. V, Document 139.

90. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State90. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, August
1, 1962, 11 p.m.

134. Paris also for USRO, Stoessel and
McGuire. USAREUR for POLAD. SHAPE for US Element Live Oak. Ref: Berlin tel 120 Dept,
sent Bonn 108, Paris 62.2 Following Soviet threat that helicopter might
be shot down if it remained vicinity Karlshorst July 30, we were faced
with question how to proceed with respect future flights. To abandon
flights, which had been made for many years, seemed clearly unwise (as
Bonn noted in Embtel 313 Dept).3 However,
also recognized greatest discretion called for in choice and timing of
flights. Safest course seemed to be to fly at an early time brief,
innocuous flight at high altitude, and thereafter fly carefully spaced
and controlled flights to maintain our right to do so and to fulfill at
same time intelligence purposes. Brief flight of 13 minutes therefore
flown today at altitudes above 1000 feet avoiding Karlshorst area. It
was without incident. Press inquiries re possibility such flight having
occurred have been answered with statement that routine helicopter
flights took place (many normally occur each day over US Sector) but we
do not divulge their routes. Pattern and character of future local
flights being carefully considered and will be subject of separate
message.4

Lightner

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 962.72/8–162. Secret; Priority. Also sent to Bonn and
repeated to Paris, Moscow, London, USAREUR, USAFE, and
SHAPE.

2 Telegram 120 from
Berlin, July 30, reported that the Soviet BASC controller had protested a U.S. helicopter flight
over Karlshorst and had stated that if it returned, it would be shot
down. (Ibid., 962.72/7–3062) Later that day Major General Watson, U.S. Commandant for
Berlin, sent a letter to his Soviet counterpart vigorously
protesting this threat. (Telegram 121 from Berlin, July 31; ibid.,
962.72/7–3162)

3 Telegram 313 from Bonn, July 31, agreed with
the Mission at Berlin's analysis that the Soviet threat introduced a
new element of intimidation, but stressed that it should be viewed
with caution since it could not be confirmed. (Ibid.)

4 On August 2 the Department of
State advised the Mission at Berlin that local flights were being
reviewed by the Departments of State and Defense. Pending completion
of the review, the JCS requested
that flights over Soviet installations in East Berlin be suspended
and that other flights into the Eastern sector be kept to the
minimum consistent with operational requirements. (Telegram 115 to
Berlin; ibid., 962.72/8–162)

91. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy91. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy1

Washington, August 2,
1962.

SUBJECT

Contingency Planning for Soviet-GDR Peace Treaty

At their meeting in Geneva on July 23,2 the four Western Foreign Ministers agreed that the
developing situation indicated that it would be prudent to have a
quadripartite review of Western contingency planning concerning a
Soviet-GDR peace treaty.

The purpose of this memorandum is to review the existing plans and
revalidate the fundamental assumptions supporting them prior to engaging
in the quadripartite re-examination. These assumptions, broadly stated,
are:

1) that inasmuch as the West cannot in the last analysis prevent the
conclusion of a Soviet-GDR peace treaty,
Western efforts should be directed toward minimizing the importance of
the treaty; and

2) that the Western Powers are prepared to accept implementation of
existing procedures on ground access to Berlin by East German personnel
substituting for Soviet personnel.

Assumptions Underlying Plans for Western Response to Peace Treaty

The complex of assumptions underlying the specific plans for the Western
political and diplomatic response to the separate peace treaty, itself,
are as follows. The Western Powers must realistically assume that the
Soviets will probably carry out their announced intention to sign a
peace treaty with the GDR. Available
political and economic countermeasures are insufficient to prevent the
signature of the treaty or to affect subsequent Soviet actions
appreciably. They would, in addition, probably have unacceptable side
effects. In these circumstances, Western reaction should be such that
the signing does not appear to constitute a victory for the Soviet bloc
such as the erection of the Wall was considered in some quarters. If the
Western Powers adopt a position of deep concern and foreboding over the
signing of a separate peace treaty, this will necessarily make that
signing appear to be a defeat of very substantial proportions. If the
Western Powers treat it, on the other hand, as an action which has no
necessary significance unless efforts are made to interfere with Western access rights,
there would be much less basis for assertions of a resounding loss.

Therefore, Western efforts should be directed toward minimizing the
importance of the treaty. To achieve this result, it is necessary to
establish widespread acceptance of the legal and political futility of
the act, and to limit states outside the Communist orbit from adhering
to, or supporting, the treaty. At the same time, the position should be
maintained that the conclusion of the separate peace treaty would be
another repudiation by the Soviets of their solemn obligations and of
basic international principles.

Assumption Underlying Plans for Withdrawal of
Soviets from Check Points

If, at any time, it seems that the withdrawal by the Soviets from their
functions with respect to Allied access to Berlin is imminent, the three
Governments would presumably act in accordance with the agreed
contingency plans. The assumption underlying these plans is that the
Western Powers are prepared to accept execution of existing procedures
on ground access to Berlin by East German personnel substituting for
Soviet personnel.

This matter has been the subject of intensive unilateral and multipartite
discussion. From 1959 to 1961 the quadripartite position was that in the
absence of their explicit delegation as agents of the Soviets (which was
considered unlikely), East Germans would not be permitted to date-time
stamp Allied travel documents as the Soviets do. Instead there would be
instituted the so-called “peel-off” procedure, which in essence was
intended to identify Allied movements as being entitled to unrestricted
access to Berlin, and would have involved the handing over to East
German personnel at the check point of a copy of the Allied travel order
but would not accept stamping of a travel order as a condition of
passage. However, as the result of the Macmillan visit to Washington in the spring of 1961, and
after informal US discussion during the following months, the US and UK
revised their positions to permit implementation of existing procedures
by East German personnel. Persist-ent physical interference with access
to Berlin was chosen as the point at which the West would have to
demonstrate its determination. The French and Germans subsequently—and
somewhat unenthusiastic-ally—agreed. The essential argument in favor of
this position was that the earlier plans did not draw the line at a
point which would receive public understanding and support in that they
would involve a procedural innovation likely to give rise to criticism
that the West was making an issue over who stamped a document.

It was argued that a Western position of leaving well enough alone and
not being the one to demand a change in its favor would appear
reasonable and unprovocative, and that US allies would move to this position in any event. There
would possibly be some questioning in the US press, public, and Congress
as to whether the most suitable breaking point had been chosen. There
would also be grave difficulties in making the US position plausible to
the uncommitted countries. All this would be apparent to the Soviets,
and they would be encouraged to press ahead to exploit the Western
disarray. In the face of Bloc pressures and Allied disunity, it seems
likely that the US, UK, and France would eventually accept the same
paper-stamping from the East Germans that they now accept from the
Soviets. It would be better to straighten this issue out beforehand to
avoid a last-minute change under fire.

Since the decision to accept East German stamping was made, both the US
Embassy in Bonn and the US Mission in Berlin have questioned it. Their
essential argument is that although who stamps a document is not a good
issue over which to use force if necessary, the issue is actually much
more than that and really boils down to whether or not the US, the UK,
and France are determined to maintain their right of free and
unrestricted ground access to Berlin. They argue: 1) that the question
of “persistent physical interference with access to Berlin” will never
arise; 2) that substitution of East German personnel will be the most
visible and objectionable single action that is ever taken by the
Soviets; and 3) that thereafter the East Germans will take one
infinitesimal step after another—each much less saleable as a breaking
point than substitution—until, over a period of time, by gradual erosion
Western ground access is completely at the mercy of the Ulbricht regime. Khrushchev recently said to Gorbach and
Kreisky when the Austrians
visited Moscow that this was more or less what he had in mind, i.e. that
action in the period after the peace treaty will be so slow and
circumspect that the West will never be provided with a point at which
the use of force can be justified. Those who object to East German
stamping argue that it will lead at best to self-blockade on the ground
and at worst to de jure acceptance of the GDR or withdrawal from Berlin or eventually both.

Although these arguments have a certain weight, the point can be made
that there is nothing inevitable about the erosion of the Allied
position. The Soviets have had a similar eroding capacity since the
ending of the blockade in 1949. By being firm on essentials and skillful
in the handling of individual disputes, the Western Powers have
prevented any substantial erosion of their basic access rights. In a
number of cases present procedures are actually an improvement over
those which existed in the immediate post-blockade years. Hence, this
line of argument would go, there is no intrinsic reason why, by alert
reaction to attempts to change established procedures, the Western
Powers should not be able to preserve their essential access against
GDR attempts to erode it, given, of
course, the continuing unwillingness on the Communist side to press any
specific dispute to the point of major confrontation.

Contingency Plans for Peace Treaty

Three stages are envisaged in the agreed contingency planning for the
treaty. The first is action, to be taken when indicated by events, to
prepare public opinion so that the conclusion of a separate peace treaty
will not be regarded as a Soviet victory. The second begins when
invitations are dispatched to a peace conference, or its organization is
announced. The third is after signature of the treaty.

For the first stage, guidelines have been prepared as the basis for a
series of high-level, authoritative public statements. These guidelines
set out the essential points that: 1) by the Bolz-Zorin exchange of letters at the time
of the last Soviet-GDR treaty in
19553 the Soviets reserved for themselves the processing
of the traffic of the Western garrisons in Berlin which passes through
East Germany; 2) subsequently the Western Powers have continued to hold
the Soviet Government responsible when problems have arisen concerning
Berlin, communications therewith, or Germany as a whole; 3) the mere
conclusion of a purported “peace treaty” would not in any way change the
existing situation; and 4) the Western Powers will continue to look to
the Soviet Government to fulfill its responsibilities and will take
whatever action seems necessary and proper to the extent to which the
Soviet Government fails to do so.

In the second stage, representations would be made to the Governments of
all the states invited to attend the peace conference, which would
include suitable emphasis upon the legal arguments against a separate
peace. The representations would also develop the point that this treaty
would do nothing to establish peaceful conditions in Europe, but would
be much more likely to have precisely the opposite effect. Primary
responsibilities for representations to the Governments invited have
been assigned.

At the same time, the Three Powers and the Federal Republic would sent
notes to the Soviet Government covering the legal aspects and pointing
out to the Soviet Government its obligations arising out of Four Power
responsibility. Drafts of such notes have been prepared.

These notes would also be published as a statement of the Western
position. Supplemental talking points have been prepared for press
guidance and for use in discussions with the various countries invited
to the Soviet peace conference. For the third stage, after signature of
the treaty, a draft has been prepared for a statement to be made by the
Three Powers in conjunction with the Federal Government. Essentially
this statement would say: 1) that the Soviet Government has knowingly
created a situation which could lead to a breach of the peace; 2) that
the so-called “peace treaty” has no international validity; 3) that it cannot affect in any way
whatsoever the obligations of the USSR under agreements and arrangements
on the subject of Germany, including Berlin, previously concluded
between France, the UK, the US and the USSR; 4) that the three Western
Powers are prepared to defend their interests with respect to Germany
and to fulfill their obligation to maintain the freedom and security of
Berlin; 5) that they are, nevertheless, prepared at any time to resume
negotiations with the Soviets looking toward a just and reasonable
settlement of the questions of Germany and European security; and 6)
that they hope that, in view of the danger implicit in its course, the
Soviet Government will recognize the wisdom and importance of resuming
negotiations.

If the second stage campaign has been successful, and few or no nations
outside the Sino-Soviet bloc have signed the treaty, this fact would be
capitalized on to minimize further the significance of the treaty and
even to ridicule the Soviet diplomatic effort.

It may be advisable for the Western Governments to point out publicly
that the coming into force of the treaty will not give rise to any
untoward results so long as the Soviets and East Germans do not take
unilateral actions injurious to Western interests such as altering
present access procedures, or attempting to interfere with the presence
of Allied troops in West Berlin, or with its other links to the West.
The announcements should be coordinated with any steps toward Solution
C, which, under the circumstances, might be pertinent.

The position taken by the Three Powers should be endorsed by all the
NATO Governments.

An additional legal and historical background paper has been prepared for
use in diplomatic and press guidance.

Possible Military Measures

No specific decision has yet been made as to whether military measures
should be taken in connection with the peace treaty. Nothing in the
current planning would preclude the undertaking of military measures,
including a further buildup, in an attempt to affect the terms of the
treaty or its subsequent implementation, but this would require a subtle
campaign to avoid the impression that the purpose was to prevent the
calling of a conference or the conclusion of a treaty, over which the
West can exercise no control. A real problem in such a course would be
whether these measures—particularly a buildup—could be sustained over,
and whether they would be effective against, the long period of very
cautious, piecemeal treaty implementation that may ensue. However, the
possibility of influencing by military measures the content of the
treaty and its implementation is certainly worth examining. The JCS is currently studying the question of
possible military measures taking into account the level of the present buildup. A decision
concerning the desirability of a buildup will be difficult to take in
advance, because it will have to be governed somewhat by the state of
the discussions with the Soviets at the time and by the indications of
whether diplomatic moves have some prospect of influencing the Soviets,
or whether they are determined to go ahead in an uninhibited way. Once
the JCS has completed its studies, a
basis will exist for taking appropriate US decisions in the light of the
estimated need when it has been concluded that the Soviets plan to
proceed with their treaty.

Conclusion

In the review, therefore, of Allied contingency planning for a separate
peace treaty, I would propose that we continue to maintain the existing
basic assumptions:

1) that inasmuch as the West cannot prevent the conclusion of a
Soviet-GDR peace treaty, Western
efforts should be directed toward minimizing the importance of the
treaty; and

2) that the Western Powers are prepared to accept implementation of
existing procedures on ground access to Berlin by East German personnel
substituting for Soviet personnel.

A further relevant subject is that of the relationship of possible
military mobilization measures to existing contingency planning. This
can be examined once the JCS has
completed its current studies.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret. According to
another copy, this memorandum was drafted by Cash and Hillenbrand on August 1.
(Department of State, Central Files, 661.62B1/8–262)

2 Presumably Rusk is referring
to the meeting on July 21; see Document
82.

3 Regarding these letters, September
20, 1955, see footnote 3, Document
8.

92. Memorandum of Conversation92. Memorandum of Conversation1

WashingtonAugust 9, 1962, 3:06 p.m.

SUBJECT

Secretary's Conversation of August 8 with Ambassador Dobrynin

PARTICIPANTS

(See attachment)2

The Secretary stated that he would like to report briefly on his
conversation of August 8 with Ambassador Dobrynin.3 He said he could report briefly because no perceptible
business was transacted. Apparently Mr. Dobrynin had no fresh instructions on any subject that
came up and the conversation did not advance any of the issues
discussed. The Secretary said he had mentioned three subjects:

[Here follow sections on a nuclear test ban treaty and non-diffusion of
nuclear weapons.]

3. Deputy Foreign Ministers' Forum. The Secretary recalled that the
question of a Deputy Foreign Ministers' forum had been raised with
Gromyko as early as the
previous spring. The Secretary had asked Dobrynin whether he had instructions from Gromyko on the question of
establishment of a Deputy Foreign Ministers' forum for discussion of
matters relating to Germany and Berlin. Gromyko had said at Geneva that
he would have word for us as to whether the subject would be dealt with
in this way. Dobrynin replied
that he would mention this question to Moscow but observed that Khrushchev and Gromyko were on vacation now.

The Secretary said the question of the UN
delegation had come up and that Dobrynin had said nothing about Khrushchev's coming. He had said the
Soviet delegation was usually decided upon around the first of September
and had predicted that Gromyko
would probably be there.

The Secretary invited comments or questions. Lord Hood said it was a
rather depressing story.

The Secretary agreed. He had asked Dobrynin whether it would be safe for him to take a
vacation in August, but Dobrynin
had not been responsive.

Mr. von Lilienfeld asked what
impression the Secretary had as to the next move.

The Secretary said he thought that exploratory talks and probes have
about run their course. For some time both he and Dobrynin had been repeating themselves.
The Secretary stated he had been as long winded and repetitious as the
Soviets. He said that unless they have something new to offer he does
not see much coming out of the bilaterals. He felt that they might seek
a different forum or might have something to say to some other member of
the Western group. He recalled that Gromyko at Geneva had indicated that he was glad to
pursue bilateral talks but had referred to talks with the Western Four
as “better still”.

The Secretary recalled that he had emphasized to Dobrynin that we could not accept
charges that we have delayed. If we had delayed a year and a half in
agreeing with them, they have likewise delayed that long in agreeing
with us. He had told Dobrynin, however, that we can always rush to a
crisis, while a resolution of differences must necessarily proceed more
slowly. As to what the Russians
are going to do, the Secretary said they seek to leave the impression
with us that something is going to happen. We are not inclined to think
they will announce the signing of a peace treaty with East Germany
overnight. They will probably take some action with other governments of
calling a conference first. Next Monday will be the anniversary of the
wall and the Soviets might be inclined to celebrate it with harassment
or a new move. The Secretary said he did not know what they will do and
was by no means certain they had themselves decided. He mentioned it was
about time for another Soviet space spectacular.

Lord Hood said they probably have not decided what to do but that one
idea in their minds is probably to sign a peace treaty.

The Secretary recalled that he had not had reactions from all of the
Western Four on whether if the Soviets called a conference we should
propose a meeting of Foreign Ministers or Deputy Foreign Ministers in
response.

As to the coming debate in the United Nations General Assembly, the
Secretary thought the introduction of specific substantive questions
could lead to confusion. He thought, however, we would find wide support
for the idea of talking instead of shooting—for the idea that neither
side should take any action which would aggravate tensions. He thought,
however, that a number of solutions on the question of troops or of
access would look easier to the UN
membership than to those of us who bear primary responsibility.

Lord Hood said he had received comments from his government on a number
of papers, but not on this specific proposal regarding Western responses
to a Soviet call for a conference.

Mr. von Lilienfeld said that he had
received and transmitted to us comments on the conference question but
not on the related papers. He commented that we should do something to
regain the initiative of action on our side.

The Secretary said he did not know how much we could rely on Soviet
advance planning, but that they wanted to send their Minister of
Agriculture in September. He said if we were expecting to precipitate a
crisis with another state, we would certainly not be sending one of our
cabinet members to visit the state at the time.

Lord Hood asked whether we thought the Soviets, if they decided to go
ahead with a peace treaty, might not want to minimize the awkward
consequence by compensating gestures. They might well be interested in a
meeting of Deputy Foreign Ministers and propose that we seek to agree on
how to handle our disagreements.

The Secretary commented that this might be a rational reaction, but if
the Soviets were not pressing matters to a crisis it seems they would
have desired to pick up
various opportunities which have been before them to avoid a crisis. In
recent months they have increased their public commitment to action on
Berlin, and have increased for themselves the prestige problem involved
in not doing anything.

Mr. von Lilienfeld commented that
they had in several ways, however, seemed to accept the idea that the
West would still be in Berlin in the future.

Mr. Lebel asked whether they would
be likely to precede a move in Berlin with a move in the UNGA.

The Secretary replied that he would feel more relaxed if he thought
GA action would necessarily be their
first move.

Lord Hood raised the question whether they could get the United Nations
to approve the idea of a peace conference.

The Secretary said that we will be in a powerful position in the United
Nations if we say to the Assembly in effect, “Ask the Berliners and ask
the East Germans what they want to do”. This fact may give the Soviets
some pause in deciding what to do in the United Nations. He asked if
anyone had any doubts as to what the sentiments of the Berlin people
would be.

Mr. von Lilienfeld recalled they
had made their views clear in every case where they had had an
opportunity to do so. He added that there had been indications that the
Soviet test series might be concluded by October and this might have a
bearing upon Khrushchev's
attendance and Soviet strategy at the Assembly.

The Secretary said there are enough hints and noises around to indicate
that the anniversary of the wall may take on some significance to the
Soviets. We do not, however, expect a move of the kind that would
precipitate a military crisis.

Lord Hood commented there may be harassments.

The Secretary and Mr. Hillenbrand
recalled that our mission in Berlin had sent a message indicating the
possibility of harassments at Friedrichstrasse and possibly a move to
cut off access to East Berlin.4 Mr. Hillenbrand said we have contingency plans for this
possibility, but that they should be reviewed.

The Secretary commented that we could well have some move of that
sort.

Mr. von Lilienfeld asked if there
had been any shift in emphasis by the Soviets from the question of the
presence of Western troops to the question of sovereignty of the GDR.

The Secretary said not really. If this were the Soviet intention they had
overlooked opportunities to make it clear. The Secretary recalled that the only stiff talk by the
Russians to him was on the first day of his recent Geneva meeting with
Gromyko. Gromyko had read from a paper on that
occasion and the rest of the several days of conversations appeared to
be an effort to soften the impact of the prepared statement. Even as
Gromyko was reading it, he
pointed out that the statement did not take into account things which he
had already said that same day.

Mr. Hillenbrand, in response to
the Secretary's question, said he considered the difference between
Gromyko's statement on the
first day and on subsequent days to be more a difference of tone than of
substance.

The Secretary recalled that when he had rejected Gromyko's threat, Gromyko had not come back and redoubled
it.

The Secretary stated he supposed that all intelligence services were
alerted with their antenna out to sense any indications of a new Soviet
move. Our intelligence service had been alerted.

Lord Hood asked what was next as regards the exchanges with Dobrynin.

The Secretary said that they owe us comments on two propositions, namely,
the proposal regarding a Deputy Foreign Ministers' forum and the matter
of non-dissemination involved in the Irish Resolution. He did not expect
that Dobrynin would be giving us
further comments on the test ban question in the near future.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. The source text bears no
drafting information but it was approved in S on August 21. The time of the meeting is taken from
Rusk's Appointment Book.
(Johnson Library)

2 Not printed.

3 A short memorandum
of the Secretary's conversation with Dobrynin on August 8 is in Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/8–862.

4 Telegram 160
from Berlin, August 8, received in the Department of State at 11:44
a.m. (Ibid., 661.62B/8–862)

93. Memorandum From William Y. Smith to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)93. Memorandum From William Y. Smith
to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington,August 9,
1962.

SUBJECT

Briefing for the President on Berlin2

IN ATTENDANCE

The President

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Deputy Secretary Gilpatric

Mr. McCone

General Lemnitzer

Ambassador Dowling

Mr. Bundy and various
“horse holders”

1. The briefing you tried to arrange in August 1961 finally came off a
year later. The intervening period has been used both to widen the areas
of agreement and to sharpen those of disagreement among the Allies. Mr.
Ausland's briefing followed
the attached text3 very
closely. Only two interruptions of significance occurred at points
indicated in the text.

2. The first major interruption occurred when Secretary McNamara observed that the Allies
still could not agree on what sort of mobilization was needed in Phase
II (non-combatant actions after significant blockage of access) and that
this agreement was not likely to be achieved until consensus had been
reached on what military measures to take (e.g., when to use tactical
nuclears) in Phases III and IV. The President asked what the
difficulties were in reaching agreement with our Allies. In the ensuing
discussion, the following points were made:

a. Secretary McNamara
acknowledged our European Allies wanted to use nuclear weapons earlier
in the military operations than did we. In response to the President's
question as to whether the Allies chose this course in order to
eliminate the need for economic and military build-up actions, Secretary
Rusk and Secretary McNamara agreed that the Allied
feeling came from several sources:

(1) The Europeans prefer to rely on the early use of nuclear weapons
because of their deterrent effect.

(2) The Germans especially fear that reliance on conventional strategy
would enable the Russians to seize part or all of Germany and then
negotiate.

b. Secretary McNamara said he
thought the European arguments were wrong for three reasons: they
overestimated the strength of the USSR; they imply that their salvation
rested on the early use of tactical nuclear weapons without
understanding the effects of these weapons; and finally, they afforded
the Allies an excuse not to build up the conventional forces they had
agreed to in the NATO Council.

c. The President wondered how much real difference there was in our
positions, since we were only asking our Allies to build their forces to
30 divisions, and the planning for these goals rested on an assumption
of early use of tactical nuclear weapons. Secretary McNamara replied that analysis last
summer had shown that with 30 divisions we could hold a considerable
period of time—not months, but at least some weeks.

d. As an aside, the President asked whether we had asked the Germans to
build their conventional forces to 750,000 men as reported in the New
York Times this morning. The Times article sounded so authentic and
precise that the President questioned if it had been backgrounded. It
had not been. Secretary McNamara
pointed out that the story was wrong on two counts: we had indeed asked
the Germans to increase their forces, but not by any definite number,
and the Germans had not refused. Furthermore, Defense Minister Strauss
had requested Secretary McNamara to ask him to build up Germany's
conventional forces. Mr. McNamara did so, and that's how our request came
about.

e. The President asked why Adenauer
didn't stand up and support US positions before De Gaulle. The answer
was that the Germans are sure of our support, but are not as sure of the
French; therefore they defer more to French whims. But they do not
always give in. The President said that perhaps we spent too much time
reassuring our Allies. Ambassador Dowling commented that the time will soon come when
indeed we should ask the Germans if their protests are serious and to
let them know that we are becoming concerned about their motives in all
this discussion.

3. The second interruption occurred when the President asked whether
there is as much disagreement between the US and our Allies on the use
of tactical nuclear weapons as there seems to be. He would agree with
the Europeans that if the Russians started a mass attack against Europe,
we almost would be forced to use nuclear weapons against the first
Russian who came across the line. Therefore, our disagreements seemed to
be exaggerated. We seem to be involved in a theoretical argument with
our Allies; and no one ever gives on these. He questioned if we couldn't
find some way around the impasse, say by telling our Allies that we
would agree to the early use of tactical nuclear weapons if they would
build up 30 divisions. We could do this, since the 30 division figure
assumed the early use of nuclear weapons. Such an approach would put the
pressure on them. The following points were then made:

a. Secretary McNamara said if
weapons agreed to the early use of nuclear weapons, our Allies would say
this obviated the necessity for going to 30 divisions, just as
Kissinger's article had done in the July issue of Foreign Affairs.
(Kissinger actually said that more than 30 divisions would be needed to
implement successfully a strategy employing tactical nuclear
weapons.)

b. Secretary McNamara also said
it was wrong to assuredume the early use of nuclear weapons since, as
Secretary Rusk had stated earlier,
all the heads of governments would want to know the conditions which justified the use of nuclear
weapons and to reach this decision would require time and some
conventional defensive efforts.

c. The President said that if there were no Berlin situation, he would be
inclined to agree with the Allies on the use of tactical nuclear
weapons. It is the Berlin situation in which we might become involved in
actions to restore access which makes the European position invalid.

d. Secretaries McNamara and
Rusk agreed that the Allied
reluctance to build up conventional forces sprang from two basic
factors: they believed that nuclear strategy offered the best hope of
insuring deterrence, and also they did not want to spend the money.

2. Several other matters were discussed briefly:

a. The President asked what we would do in the next couple of months in
Berlin planning. The answer was to get greater Allied agreement on
military mobilization plans. Secretary McNamara said he expected progress in the next 4–6
weeks.

b. The President asked how our planning stood to meet a Russian action
for signing a GDR peace treaty over some
weekend. The answer was we have fairly good plans, but that this is
considered an unlikely event. The Russians will want to exploit the
signing of the peace treaty and perhaps call some sort of peace
conference. Thus, although the signing of a peace treaty may occur, it
is unlikely to occur suddenly.

c. The President asked what we should do if the Russians take the Berlin
problem to the UN. Secretary Rusk said this might not be all bad
because the general philosophy at the UN
is: “Continue talking, don't shoot.” The President asked if we couldn't
somehow tie any Khrushchev
proposal to a plebiscite in West Berlin which would let the Berliners
choose whether they preferred their present status, the USSR proposal of
incorporation into East Germany, or becoming a free city under the
UN. Although there was no specific
discussion of these proposals, there was general agreement that a
plebiscite would turn out advantageous for us, and that whatever the
Russians did at the UN, we would attempt
to play up the lack of free determination of the East German people in
these events.

d. In response to a presidential request to Secretary McNamara about whether Congress should
be asked for powers to call up additional reserve forces this fall,
Secretary McNamara said he
thought such a request should await the adjourning days of Congress.
During the interim he would talk to Senator Russell and Congressman
Vinson to let them know that the Administration would probably ask for
authority to call up 50,000 to 100,000 men if needed. During this brief
discussion, Secretary McNamara
gave one of his numerical recitations of what we had called up last year
and how we stood at the present time. It was impressive for his
knowledge of details, if not for its overall impact.

WYS

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 505 Berlin
Contingency Planning. Top Secret. Initialed by Smith. A similar account drafted by
General Gray is
ibid.

2 The briefing was held at 10:35 a.m. (Rusk Appointment Book; Johnson Library)

3 Not found.

94. Memorandum of Conversation94. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 13, 1962, 10:32 a.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The Secretary

GER—Martin J. Hillenbrand

SOV—W.O. Anderson

USSR

Ambassador Anatoliy
Dobrynin

Counselor Georgi M.
Kornienko

The Ambassador opened the conversation by stating that he had been
instructed to convey to the Secretary the considered views of his
government on the Secretary's proposal that there be a Deputy Foreign
Ministers Conference to discuss the Berlin problem. Although he
frequently referred to a Russian language text, he stipulated that the
approach was “oral” in nature. He outlined the following position.

As the Secretary already is aware, the Soviet Government is prepared, as
previously, to explore with the other interested governments all
possibilities for settling the problems of West Berlin and Germany.
However, the Soviet Government cannot agree to the proposal for a Deputy
Foreign Ministers Conference since it would give the appearance of
negotiations which, in fact, would have no real chance of success. In
fact, there has been no progress on resolving the key issue of
withdrawing Western forces from West Berlin and terminating the
occupation regime there; a Deputy Foreign Ministers Conference is likely
to delay settlement. Secretary Rusk himself at Geneva had commented to Foreign Minister
Gromyko that he could not envisage what a Deputy Foreign Ministers
Conference would discuss. The desirability of ending the international
arms race and easing tensions among states demands “drawing a line under
World War II” and liquidating the occupation regime in West Berlin. For
its part, the Soviet Government has earnestly sought to resolve the
problem of West Berlin. Premier Khrushchev himself has made a number of compromise
proposals: e.g., the recent one that certain UN forces be introduced into West Berlin. Unfortunately,
the U.S. Government has shown no real interest in settling the West
Berlin problem. The Soviet Government feels that “the American position”
would put the Soviet Government in a position of settling the West
Berlin problem in the absence of “our allies” who participated in World
War II against Nazi
Germany. This faces the USSR with the necessity to sign a peace treaty
with the GDR. The Soviet Government
feels it cannot remain inactive on the West Berlin problem because those
who oppose an improvement in the international climate have been taking
advantage of the absence of an agreement, as witness recent developments
in West Berlin.

The Secretary stated that, first, he would like to correct an apparent
misunderstanding. When discussing the possibility of a Deputy Foreign
Ministers Conference in Geneva with Foreign Minister Gromyko, he did not state that he did
not know what such a Conference would discuss. On the contrary, he had
discussed this subject with specific reference to the statement of
General Principles previously given to the Foreign Minister and had
pointed out to the Foreign Minister that the General Principles
indicated the line along which the U.S. thought Conference discussion
might go. However, Soviet views thereon were desired and requested. The
Secretary then expressed a hope that the Soviet Government will give
further thought to steps which the four Commandants in Berlin might take
to alleviate local tension. In this context, the Secretary alluded to
recent press reports of incidents along the Berlin wall occasioned by
strong emotions accompanying the anniversary of the building of the
wall. Ambassador Dobrynin
commented that the views of his Government on the situation in West
Berlin along the wall were conveyed in his Government's most recent
note2 and he had seen nothing but brief press reports of
subsequent developments.

After referring briefly in a commendatory vein to the progress of the
Soviet Union's two men in space, the Secretary reverted to the subject
of Berlin and said that he regretted the Soviet government had not
reacted favorably to the proposal for a Deputy Foreign Ministers
Conference. The proposal was not intended to be a means to delay
agreement but was advanced in a sincere belief that, if acted upon, it
would constitute a positive step. He assured the Ambassador that the
Soviet Government's views, as conveyed by the Ambassador, would be given
careful study.

Note: Subsequent to the conversation reported above, Mr. Anderson obtained from Counselor
Kornienko, on a personal and
informal basis, a copy of the Russian language text from which
Ambassador Dobrynin had read
during his interview with the Secretary. An informal translation of the
Russian text is attached.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/8–1362. Secret; Limited Distribution; Eyes Only. Drafted by
Anderson. The time of the
meeting is taken from Rusk's
Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

2 For text of the August 10 Soviet
note, which protested new provocations in West Berlin against the
Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic, see Department of
State Bulletin, August 27, 1962, p. 320; for a response by the
Department of State on the following day, see ibid., pp.
319–320.

3 Not printed.

95. Transcript of Conversation Between Frank E. Cash, Jr., and Arthur R. Day95. Transcript of Conversation Between Frank E. Cash, Jr., and Arthur R. Day1

August 19, 1962, 7:45 p.m.

Message from Mr. Day:

“Following the shooting of the refugee on Friday,2 we in the Mission and General Watson considered that we should
keep the initiative with the Soviets and keep the pressure on them which
resulted from this incident. Meanwhile, the action of the West Berlin
crowds against Soviet busses near Friedrichstrasse3 led us to believe that sooner or
later the Soviets would react in some way to this situation.

We therefore decided that General Watson should invite the Acting Soviet Commandant to a
Four Power Commandants Meeting to discuss means of reducing tension in
the city. We decided that General Watson should inform the Soviet Acting Commandant that
he was lifting the ban on the entry of the Soviet Commandant and his
Political Advisor into West Berlin for the purpose of conducting this
and subsequent meetings.

Meanwhile, at about 1800 hours today another Soviet bus was attacked by a
crowd about one block from Friedrichstrasse and about 19 windows in the
bus were broken by stones before the bus could proceed. About 1900, the
Deputy Soviet Commandant requested a meeting with General Watson and also with the British
Commandant, which we assume is related to the incident of an hour
earlier.

We considered that it was highly desirable to move ahead with the
initiative we had earlier determined on in order to keep the discussions
with the Soviets concerned with the basic issues of tension along the
Wall and not to narrow it to the bus incidents. We therefore met
urgently with the UK and French and agreed that Watson should send a letter tonight
along the line of that which I described earlier proposing a Four Power
Commandants meeting for tomorrow afternoon.

We asked the Soviet Deputy Commandant to call on Hulick, Acting Deputy Commandant, at
2300 at which time we intended to deliver the letter to him. He did not
appear, however, and we have now taken steps to deliver the letter to
Soviet Headquarters.

We intend to meet with the British and French tomorrow morning to discuss
with them the line of action to take with the Soviets should they accept
this invitation.

I should tell you that the atmosphere in Berlin right now has a
considerable anti-American overtone as a result of the shooting on
Friday and our inability to aid the wounded refugee. The crowd which
formed during the day along the border attacked by jeers and slogans the
Americans as well as the Soviets. Within the past hour we had a small
demonstration outside the Mission gates in which autos passed back and
forth blowing their horns in protest. I don't want to exaggerate this
sentiment, but it does exist and it is difficult to say right now
whether it will die away or increase.

We would be interested in any comment you may have with regard to the
course of action we have taken.

Cash: I think it is logical and reasonable. I see no problem as far as we
are concerned. I will discuss it with Mr. Tyler and if we have any further word, will call you on
the KY–9.

Day: We would be interested in any guidance you would have on what we
should discuss with the Soviets, but unless you have something else,
don't call. We are sending a telegram with the text of the letter to the
Acting Soviet Commandant. Hulick
advises that we have been informed there is no one at the Soviet
Headquarters tonight to receive the letter, but our messenger will go
anyway and try to leave it.”4 End of Transcript.

Mr. Day also advised that at 2130
the Soviet Deputy Commandant called at both US and UK Headquarters. He
was told General Watson was
not available, but would be writing the Soviet Commandant. At the
British Headquarters, he spoke with the “Military attache” (an aide to
the UK Commandant) and simply asked that the Soviet bus at the War
Memorial be permitted to return to East Berlin without the special
British military and West Berlin police guards which had been
arranged.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin.
Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. Cash was in Washington; Day was in
Berlin.

2 On August 17 PETER FECHTER had been shot while
trying to escape from East Berlin. He bled to death within sight of
Checkpoint Charlie. On August 21 the President sent a memorandum to
Rusk asking for an account
of the shooting and subsequent events. (Ibid.) A copy of Rusk's account, August 24, is
ibid.

3 In response to the shooting, crowds in West Berlin
on August 18, 19, and 20 stoned buses carrying guards to the Soviet
war memorial in West Berlin.

4 Following this
conversation, the letter was delivered at 2:15 a.m. on August 20 to
Soviet Headquarters in East Berlin. Seven hours later it was
returned. It was released to the press that morning. (Telegrams 214
and 215 from Berlin, August 20; Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/8–2062) For text of the letter, see Documents on Germany,
1944–1985, pp. 822–823.

96. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at Berlin96. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Mission at Berlin1

Washington, August 20, 1962, 8:45 p.m.

188. For Hulick from Secretary.
Re our telecon2 I wish confirm that I understand
problem of possible use US forces to control crowds if West Berlin
police prove inadequate. I agree maximum use should be made of West
Berlin police but in final analysis Three Powers are responsible in West
Berlin. West Berliners cannot have it both ways—they cannot have our
protection on basis occupation rights and on other hand ignore our
directives. You should not therefore shrink from use US forces if this
becomes necessary to maintain law and order.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/8–2062. Confidential; Priority; Eyes Only.
Drafted by Cash, cleared by
Tyler, and approved by
Rusk.

2 No record of this telephone
conversation has been found.

97. Telegram From the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (Norstad) to Secretary of Defense McNamara97. Telegram From the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (Norstad) to Secretary of
Defense McNamara1

Paris, August 21,
1962.

PRS 2078. 1. Although escapees have been shot, injured and killed before,
the particular characteristics of Friday's incident have understandably
caused a reaction not only in Berlin, but throughout the world. We must
accept the fact that a solution to this problem, or at least some action
on our part, is of a higher order of urgency than heretofore. The
so-called “mobs” in West Berlin are a factor to be considered, but we
cannot let mobs dictate actions in a time of such sensitivity and on a
matter of such importance.

2. Circumstances make it necessary that we be prepared to deal with a
recurrence of this type of incident, unlikely as an exact repetition may be, but our preparations
must not in themselves raise the level of danger. I feel, therefore,
that something along the following lines should be considered.

a. We should make it known publicly that we consider Friday's incident as
having gone beyond the limits of the local military and political
situation in Berlin and having constituted an offense against humanity
without regard to political boundaries. We must make it clear that,
while the responsibility of rendering medical aid in East Berlin is
clearly that of the Soviet Union or its East German satellite, failure
on the part of the appropriate authorities to take prompt and effective
action in a case of this kind will compel Western Allies to do so.

b. We should have available, but not prominently displayed, the U.S. Army
medical personnel capable of dealing with a situation of this kind, and
similar action should, if possible, be taken in the French and the
British sectors.

c. If medical attention is not made immediately available by the Soviets
or the East Berlin authorities, a Western representative should notify
the guards, or other Soviet or East German officials, actually on the
spot, of our intention to render such aid. This announcement should be
followed promptly by the movement of the medical personnel to the relief
of the victim.

d. Medical teams should give immediate attention and should move the
victim to a West Berlin hospital facility, unless the Soviet East Berlin
authorities announce their intention to promptly and effectively take
charge of the case.

e. We must be prepared, that is, the Berlin Commandant must be
authorized, to use the military force necessary to protect the medical
team in the performance of its mission, including gunfire, if necessary.
Troops, tanks, or other military equipment which may be needed, should
be positioned to give the support required, but the conduct of our
personnel and the location of weapons should not be such as to
constitute unnecessarily a challenge, a dare, to the Soviets.

3. By telephone call from Watson I have learned that an ambulance will be
stationed at the Friedrichstrasse Gate and a statement will be issued
this afternoon. I have no other information on these points, but I
suggest that a statement saying we will deal with the situation, without
being specific, may be far more effective and would not risk the mere
presence of an ambulance suggesting the limits of our action in case of
another incident, or serving as an invitation to escapees, or as an
implicit condonation of the shooting of those attempting to leave East
Berlin.2

1 Source: Eisenhower Library,
Norstad Papers, Subject
File, Dowling. Secret; By Special Means; Personal. Repeated to Bonn
personal for Dowling, to CINCUSEUR personal for General Freeman, and to USCOB personal for General Watson. The source text
indicates that it was delivered to Gilpatric in McNamara's absence and passed to the Department of
State.

2 On August 21 Dowling transmitted his concurrence
in the course of action laid out by Norstad. (Telegram 520 from Bonn; ibid.)

98. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State98. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to
the Department of State1

Bonn, August 21,
1962, 1 p.m.

530. Policy. Eyes only for the President and the Secretary. I called on
Adenauer at my request late
yesterday. He had just come from long meeting with party leaders (which
in fact was still in session) and appeared despressed. After asking
about my home leave, he remarked “we have problems, don't we?”, and
fetched from his desk telegram he had just received from Paris saying
De Gaulle was calling special
Cabinet session this week to consider political and military questions
relating to European unity. He implied he was concerned about what
De Gaulle might have in mind,
saying that nothing could be done without America. I replied I thought
America was still present. “But is it”, he countered. I said perhaps
that was what I wanted to talk to him about.

I then recounted for Chancellor concern regarding his attitude which I
had found in Washington—concern which I shared and was at loss to
account for—and gave him the President's letter,2 together with
German translation which I had prepared for him.

Adenauer read translation eagerly,
and was amused re reference to poultry, saying “Senator Fulbright
certainly keeps after the President and me, doesn't he?”As he read
further, his face brightened perceptibly, and at end he exclaimed, “This
is a wonderful letter. It is just what I wanted from the President. I am
so glad.” He then asked me if he might interrupt conversation to
telephone Brentano, who was still at party meeting, saying he assumed it
would be all right to say he had had word from the President. I assured
him that it was.

When Adenauer returned to room, I
referred to his fears, expressed in previous conversations, re influence
on US opinion towards Germany of Shirer book,3 etc., and said as result of my stay at home I could
reassure him on this score. I went on to say, however, there was a
development which was disturbing, and that was spate of reports out of
Germany about his lack of confidence in US policy and of German doubts
and suspicions generally, which was beginning to find counter-reaction
re German attitudes both in Washington and in American opinion
generally. I referred to the President's conviction re necessity for
preservation of unity in face
of test on Berlin which we may face in coming months, and said this was
mutual task. Adenauer agreed, but
said recent stories I referred to had all come from American
correspondents in Europe and Washington. I said this was not wholly
correct, to which Chancellor rejoined by asking with innocent air what I
thought could be done. I replied, equally straightfaced, that I thought
best solution was to confine discussion of any divergence in views to
official channels. He agreed, and commented that he had recently had
very good talks with Eisenhower and Norstad,4
both of which had heartened him—although at same time he implied that
what he had been waiting for was word from the President himself.

Adenauer then admitted that he had
been disturbed by European interpretations of Taylor's attitude towards nuclear
defense as set out in his book.5 I replied that I would have thought
Taylor's statements before
Senate committee,6 and more especially the President's
recent statements, as well as McNamara's report to NATO meeting in Athens,7 would be most adequate reassurance for most
doubtful of Europeans. I then argued again that voicing doubts re
American policies to journalists, rather than official exchanges, could
only result in eventual erosion of unity which he clearly wished.

Conversation concluded by Adenauer
asking me to convey his special gratitude to the President for his
“wonderful” letter; “and it came at just the right moment”, he remarked.
He added he would reply to the President shortly.8

As I was leaving, Adenauer referred
to the situation in Berlin, saying that hindsight showed both Western
forces and West Berlin police should have made effort to aid refugee who
was left to die on Eastern side of wall last week, and he urged that we
take measures to meet any future situation of this kind. I replied that
Western Commandants had been meeting during afternoon to determine what
might be done in future, and I was hopeful we might find positive
measures to recommend to our governments. “Do it soon”, he said; “and
let the West Berliners know”, saying we must appreciate the emotional
strain which the populace was under.

Dowling

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.62A/8–2162. Secret; Priority. Received at 8:58
a.m.

2 In his letter, dated August 16, the President
thanked Adenauer for his sympathetic attitude on the question of
U.S. poultry exports to Germany, explained the rationale for recent
U.S. military assignments, and reiterated U.S. determination to
maintain adequate levels of nuclear weapons in Europe. (Ibid.,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204)

3  William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, New York,
1960.

4 A report on Adenauer's
conversation with Norstad on August 16 was transmitted in telegram
865 from Paris, August 17 (vol. 13, Document
151); no record of the meeting with Eisenhower, who
visited Germany at the beginning of August, has been found.

5 The Uncertain
Trumpet, New York, 1960.

6 For a summary of Taylor's testimony before the
Senate Armed Services Committee on August 9, see The New York Times,
August 10, 1962, pp. 1–2.

7 Regarding McNamara's report
at Athens in May, see vol. XIII, Document
137.

8 In his reply of August 22, the Chancellor said that
the President's letter had relieved him of a great worry.
(Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D
204)

99. Memorandum of Conversation99. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 21, 1962, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

USSR

Ambassador Anatoliy F.
Dobrynin

US

The Secretary

Mr. Frank E. Cash, Jr.,
EUR/GER

The Secretary opened by commenting that he wanted to say a few words
about the present situation in Berlin. He said he felt it was very
important that the Soviet and Western Commandants get together to deal
with the problem of tensions in the city. He said it was necessary to go
back to the building of the wall, itself, to find the major cause for
the sense of deep dismay and anger felt by both West and East Berliners.
The separation of families and the splitting of the life of the city had
made a deep impact. It was inevitable that the wall would contribute to
tensions in Berlin. Following the building of the wall there had been a
number of incidents mostly the result of East Berliners trying to get to
West Berlin. There had been shootings, violence, and bullets flying into
West Berlin endangering lives, all of which had created a sense of
dismay and outrage. Last Friday when the East Berlin police shot an 18
year old boy and left him lying for one hour with no assistance, a wave
of revulsion and horror had gone around the world. It is hard to
understand how anyone could be so callous, and we cannot believe that
this represents the policy or the attitude of the Soviet Government. On
more than one occasion we have urged that the four Commandants should
meet to consult on the way to handle problems arising in Berlin. We
think such a meeting could improve the situation. Neither the Soviets
nor we want these problems put in the hands of the Germans on both sides
of the wall, leaving it to them to stir up a situation reaching beyond
Berlin with which the Great Powers, rather than the Germans, must deal.
During the last two days the Soviet Deputy Commandant has come without
appointment to ask to see General Watson. General Watson has asked the Acting Soviet Commandant to meet to
consult on recent events. We
will take the necessary steps to maintain law and order in West Berlin,
but this can be difficult in a city of 2–1/4 million people. The
demonstrations since the incident on Friday have created problems, but
these are matters where quadripartite cooperation is required because
one thing leads to another. The US, French, and British Commandants have
urged a meeting with the Soviet Commandant to reduce tensions and ensure
law and order. The Secretary said he would urge once again that this
matter be reconsidered so that the Soviet Commandant could meet with his
Western counterparts. He hoped very much that the Ambassador would send
the President's and his genuine urging that the Commandants get together
to handle these problems in a peaceful fashion.

Ambassador Dobrynin said the only
information he had was from the Western press, but it seemed that there
had been stoning of Soviet soldiers and buses. This is really a matter
of great concern. He would report what the Secretary had said.

The Secretary said that there was a direct connection between the killing
of the 18 year old boy on Friday and the stones thrown at both Soviet
and American soldiers. He noted that for a time the Soviets had refused
an escort for their buses.

Ambassador Dobrynin said there was
no change in the position of the Soviet Government, but he would report
what the Secretary said.

The Secretary said he wished to underline the importance of the Soviet
Government's permitting the East German regime to carry out incidents
which caused tension. He said one could not logically create tension in
Berlin and then complain that the city was a source of tension.

Ambassador Dobrynin said that the
Secretary knew the Soviet arguments, and there was no need to repeat
them.

The Secretary and Ambassador Dobrynin agreed that they would say to the press that
they had had an exchange of views on the current situation in
Berlin.2

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Cash and approved in S on September 6. The meeting was held in
Secretary Rusk's
office.

2 For text of this statement, see
Department of State Wireless Bulletin, No. 233, August 22, 1962.
Following this conversation Tyler briefed the Ambassadorial Group. The group
also considered the draft of a note to the Soviet Union protesting
the killing of PETER FECHTER. (Telegram 485 to Bonn, August 21;
ibid., Central Files, 611.61/8–2162) For text of the U.S. protest
note, delivered to the Soviet Foreign Ministry on August 24, see
Department of State Bulletin, September 10, 1962, pp.
378–379.

100. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State100. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, August
23, 1962, 4 p.m.

241. Paris also for USRO and McGuire.
SHAPE for Stoessel and US Element
Live Oak. USAREUR for POLAD. Part one of three-part
message.2

Summary

The Soviet action in liquidating the office of the Commandant in East
Berlin is long step in direction in which they have been moving for some
time.3 Timing may have been influenced by
increased pressure being brought to bear by Allies for Commandants to
meet and by strong reaction in West against GDR activities along wall for which Allies were holding
Soviets responsible. However, move of this sort had very likely been
planned for some time for relatively early execution. To Soviets it must
have seemed highly desirable to eliminate once and for all their special
responsibilities for East Berlin as distinct from Soviet Zone. By their
act they have formally lopped off East Berlin from greater Berlin and
have left Western sectors in effect as 3-power managed city in midst of
East Germany with specific Soviet presence and quadripartite as well as
unilateral functions remaining in it (quadripartite—BASC, Spandau; unilateral—war
memorial).

Operationally, we shall be confronted very likely by Soviet efforts
reduce role of Allied Commandants to level of Soviet troop commander.
Immediate practical effects on our operations however will not
necessarily be great. (This is not to say there will not be such
effects—witness threat of Autobahn trouble on August 24.) While this is
so, psychological and long-term importance of this formal Soviet step
should not be underestimated. With passage of time, perhaps even matter
of months, image of Berlin in eyes of world and even of Berliners
themselves will likely be considerably affected. In absence effective
counteraction on our part, connection of Allied presence in West Berlin
to its origins in 4-power post war occupation control will become vaguer
and vaguer until it may be lost entirely at which time Allies will
appear simply to be managers of
entity known as West Berlin and located in midst of GDR. Within West Berlin there is danger
that if Commandants lose substance of their role which gives them right
and power to control the city, Berliners will be less and less willing
to accept such control. There has been evidence of this already in
recent past.

Meanwhile Soviets can be expected to attempt to graft Allied Berlin
presence onto NATO, having cut it away
from 4-power principle. When they consider this graft psychologically
complete, by which time Allied access to East Berlin would presumably
have ceased, they will if their past tactics are any indication take the
further concrete steps which logically follow from it. Among latter
would be further pressure to secure international acceptance of West
Berlin as free city, recognized 4-power presence in West Berlin,
etc.

While this is bleak enough picture, it is of course nothing really new.
We had not foreseen maneuver in this particular form on part of Soviets
but had been aware that their efforts being directed along lines
described above. Soviet move accelerates certain trends and brings more
clearly into focus problems which face us here. Effective steps can be
devised to meet continuous Soviet challenge. As this challenge becomes
more basic in its nature, however, and latest development is quite basic
in its attack on our position, our responses must be weighed with
particular care.

Hulick

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/8–2362. Secret; Niact. Received at 12:31 p.m. Repeated to Bonn, London,
Moscow, Paris, USAREUR, and
SHAPE.

2 In part two (telegram 244,
August 23) the Mission examined the likely short-term effect of the
closing of the Soviet Commandant's office. (Ibid.) Part three is
Document 105.

3 For text of the August 22 Soviet
statement abolishing the post of Soviet Commandant in Berlin, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents,
1962, pp. 714–715. In response, on August 24, the United
States, the United Kingdom, and France stated that the abolition
would “have no effect whatsoever on either Allied rights or Soviet
responsibilities in Berlin.” For text of the tripartite statement,
see ibid., pp. 715–716.

101. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)101. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military
Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative
(Taylor)1

Washington, August 23,
1962.

1. Attached is a Klein memo to
Bundy2 on the
latest Berlin development. I think all its points are well taken.

2. In summary, Klein reminds that
if the East Germans stop Allied military access into East Berlin, our
contingency plans call for stopping Soviet access to the Tiergarten memorial. But the
Soviet communique of yesterday3 ties
Allied access between West Germany and West Berlin to their access to
the Tiergarten memorial and Spandau. HENCE, if the East Germans stop us
at Friedrichstrasse and we follow through with our plan of stopping
Soviet access to the Tiergarten memorial, the Soviets could use this
sequence to “justify” halting Allied access from West Germany to West
Berlin, and the fat would be in the fire. Klein ends by noting that a State-Defense-JCS working group worked last night to
develop possible courses of action.4

3. There is a Berlin Task Force meeting this morning. I assume the course
or courses of action from last night's study will be discussed. The
“vital interest” logic would unfortunately indicate the following
course:

a. If the East Germans block us at Friedrichstrasse, no “vital interest”
is affected;

b. Therefore, don't follow the plan of blocking Soviet access to their
memorial because if we do,

c. They will block our access from West Germany to West Berlin—a “vital
interest.”

4. I personally cannot help thinking of the way we used the selfsame
“vital interest” logic a year ago to justify our acceptance of The Wall,
only to wring our hands a few months later for not having reacted more
vigorously. My idea of a logical approach to this problem is to try to
deduce the Soviet motive for executing this latest move, because it
surely wasn't pointless. As I see it, there are three major possible
motives, either singly or in combination:

a. Remove their (Soviet) responsibility in world opinion for the
atrocities at the Wall;

b. Prepare the way for the East Germans to make a de jure as well as de
facto international boundary of the sector-sector border (the extended
erection of customs-type shacks at crossing points would support this
theory).

c. Establish a Freeman-Yakubovsky channel for Berlin
matters in order to dry up the usefulness of our Allied officials in
Berlin, thus tending to reinforce the idea of West Berlin as just a
piece of municipal real estate inside the DDR, not worth all the local wrangles, which hereafter can
be “settled” at military CINC
level.

5. Whatever the motive, we should not back down one inch on anything
anywhere, or the Soviets will have taken us again. If we are blocked
from East Berlin, we should shut the Soviets off from their Memorial as
planned. If they then make trouble on the autobahn for us, tant pis; we
cannot avoid trouble with those birds unless we are prepared to back down every time they scowl
at us. So maybe it's better to have a little trouble sooner. Above all,
General Clay is so eternally
right when he says that if we stand up to them like men they will back
down, not bomb New York and Washington.

[1 paragraph (8–1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

L

1 Source: National Defense
University, Taylor Papers,
Box 38, 510 Partition of Berlin. Secret.

2 Dated August 22, not printed.

3 See footnote 2, Document 100.

4 No
record of this meeting has been found.

102. Memorandum of Conversation102. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 23, 1962, 3:05 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F.
Dobrynin, Soviet Embassy

Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counselor, Soviet Embassy

The Secretary

William R. Tyler, Assistant
Secretary for European Affairs

William O. Anderson, EUR/SOV

After discussing another matter with the Ambassador,2 the Secretary stated he might mention press reports
received during the day concerning a problem involving Soviet armored
vehicles used to carry members of the Soviet armed forces to the
memorial in West Berlin.3 The Ambassador then interjected a statement
that he had no information beyond what he has seen in the American
press. The Secretary continued that he could understand Soviet concern as regards the problem created
by stones but we are concerned by the fact that recent reports indicate
that armed Soviet men are riding outside armored vehicles. This practice
would seem to destroy the logic of using the armed vehicles for crossing
into West Berlin. We for our part are trying to avoid incidents, the
chances of which would seem to be increased by positioning armed men
outside the vehicles. The Ambassador interjected quickly that the Soviet
soldiers are not brandishing arms. The Secretary went on to say, as a
point of information, that we in fact escort our own armored vehicles
when they are passing through the streets of West Berlin. He would hope
that this matter can be worked out quickly on the spot. The Ambassador
commented that these matters essentially are details and can be worked
out by the proper persons. The Secretary added that we have noticed that
details have a habit of growing into matters of concern and should be
taken care of at the outset. He added that “we” (i.e., the Secretary and
the Ambassador) should not have to talk about such things as the passage
of a few vehicles.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/8–2362. Secret. Drafted by Anderson and approved in S on September 7. The meeting was held in Secretary
Rusk's office. A detailed
summary of this conversation was transmitted to Bonn in telegram
510, August 23. (Ibid., 611.61/8–2362)

2 Memoranda of the conversations on the non-diffusion
of nuclear weapons and U.S. relations with the Federal Republic of
Germany are ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D
330.

3 In telegram 251
from Berlin, August 23, Hulick reported that three APCs had appeared at Checkpoint Charlie with armed
soldiers standing in them. Although the soldiers sat down when
asked, they stood up again on the way to the Soviet war memorial in
West Berlin and on the return trip. (Ibid., Central Files,
762.00/8–2362)

103. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)103. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)1

Washington, August 23,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin

The Berlin crisis has warmed up a lot in recent weeks and looks as if it
is getting worse. The Soviet Government has not stated any new deadline,
but has indicated on every channel its continued belief that the only
way of making progress is for the Western occupation forces, in one way
or another, to get out of West Berlin. We have of course said that this
is impossible. This has been said in conversations between Rusk and Gromyko, around the Laos meeting, between Rusk and Dobrynin here, and on the pen-pal circuit (which
Dobrynin reads but does not
talk about). The latest pen-pal exchange is attached for your
information.2

We have no hard intelligence estimate of Soviet intentions about a peace
treaty, but yesterday's abolition of the Soviet Commandant's office
looks like the first in a series of steps aimed at changing their
official position on Berlin still further. The most notable phenomenon
to me in recent weeks has been the constant increase in Soviet noises
and the lack of any correspondingly angry public statement on our side.
This owes much to the President's own temper, and much also to the fact
that the Soviets have been crying wolf since 1958.

In my own judgment, the most useful thing you can do with Dobrynin if he brings up Berlin—and
perhaps even if he does not—is to say as clearly and emphatically as you
can that it would be a most dangerous business to confuse our calmness
and good manners with any weakening of determination whatsoever. Any
move against our vital interests in Berlin will be met by appropriate,
prompt, and energetic responses, and no one can doubt the dangers which
such activity would imply for all concerned. Moreover, if the Soviet
Government insists upon forcing the issue in terms of propaganda and
public opinion, we shall have no alternative but to make clear just who
it is that is disturbing the peace in Berlin.

You should of course say none of this in tones of threat, but rather in
the interest of clarity of communication. The importance of your saying
it is precisely that you are not Foy
Kohler or Chip Bohlen and can speak with the authority of political
engagement in this Administration.3

McG. B.4

At a second meeting on September 6 Dobrynin told Sorensen that he had been instructed to relay a personal
message from Khrushchev that
nothing would be undertaken before the congressional elections to
complicate the international situation or aggravate tensions between the
United States and the Soviet Union. This included a German peace
settlement and West Berlin. (Memorandum for the files, September 6;
ibid.) For Sorensen's recollection of these meetings, see
Kennedy, pp. 667–668.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National
Security Files, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

2 Not attached, but
presumably Documents 73 and 78.

3 In a
memorandum for the files on his lunch with Dobrynin at 1:15 on August 23,
Sorensen reported that
the conversation was general, “representing more of a ‘get
acquainted’ session than a significant exchange of views.” With
regard to the fall elections, Sorensen stated “that the President
could not possibly lay himself open to Republican charges of
appeasement in his response to any buildup in Berlin pressures
between now and November 6.” (Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Cuba, General,
1962)

4 Printed from a copy that bears these
typed initials.

104. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at Berlin104. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Mission at Berlin1

Washington, August 23, 1962, 7:44 p.m.

508. Paris for Stoessel also pass USRO,
McGuire and US Element Live Oak. Following is guidance for dealing with
movement of armed Soviet personnel in APCs on way to Sov War Memorial:

1. Upon arrival at checkpoint Sov officer
should be told that APCs will be allowed
to proceed to destination, but armed personnel must remain inside
vehicles rather than ride outside with consequent display of
weapons.

2. When armed personnel are inside vehicles, vehicles should be permitted
to proceed.

3. Issue of word “escort” should not be forced on Soviets. Vehicles,
however, should be accompanied. If Sovs
demand that there be no escort, they should be informed that US vehicles
will accompany them to be of assistance and to see that trip proceeds
without difficulty.

4. If Soviets disregard these conditions en route and armed personnel
appear on outside of vehicles, Soviet vehicles should not be stopped
short of destination because of danger of incident from collecting
crowd.

5. Every effort should be made to persuade British to follow similar
procedure on return trip.

6. If Soviets fail to comply, matter should be referred to
Washington.

7. This message being transmitted through military channels to USCINCEUR, CINCUSAREUR and USCOB.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.54/8–2362. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.
Drafted by Brandin and
Penberthy and cleared in
draft by General Gray,
Bundy, Tyler, Secretary Rusk, and ISA. Also sent to Bonn and Paris and repeated to
London, Moscow, and USAREUR.

2 On
August 24, Dowling, who was
in Berlin, asked for reconsideration of this guidance. In particular
he wanted authority for the U.S. Commandant to demand assurances
that the Soviets would not allow armed personnel to appear outside
the APCs and, failing this,
authority to deny access to West Berlin to the APCs. (Telephone message; Kennedy
Library, National Security Files, Germany, Berlin, and telegram 254
from Berlin; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/8–2462)
Dowling explained that
Soviet use of armed guards was a “deliberate and flagrant
provocation” that would undermine confidence in West Berlin if
allowed to go unchallenged. The authority was granted in telegram
214 to Berlin, August 24. (Ibid., 762.54/8–2462)

105. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State105. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, August
25, 1962, 4 p.m.

268. Paris also for USRO and McGuire.
USAREUR for POLAD. SHAPE for Stoessel and US Element Live Oak. Ref Berlin's
241 and 244 to Dept, 215 and 217 to Bonn.2

Part three of three-part message. Among longer-run problems covered in
part one, following four deserve further elaboration:

1. Soviet presence in West Berlin.

Soviets have eliminated any unique aspects their presence in East Berlin,
which now simply part of their presence in Soviet Zone generally. Only
Soviet activities for which they will assume responsibility relating to
special status of Berlin are now in West Berlin. This situation has two
significant aspects: Soviet presence West Berlin is something Sovs will
foster as contribution to thesis of 4-power West Berlin; and it is also
basis for Soviet claim for access rights to West Berlin. In latter
respect Soviets can be expected argue that all four are now in same
situation. War Memorial may become most important of symbols Soviet
presence since it unilateral and thus can be presented as their “sector”
in West Berlin giving them right of presence. Soviet presence in West
Berlin would no longer be based, therefore, on previous right of
circulation all four powers in 4-power city including East Berlin, but
on principle of right of access to installations.

Under these conditions we can expect long-term problem of our relations
with Soviets to develop along two lines: first, issues re right of
Soviet access to West Berlin; and secondarily, issues re right of free
circulation within West Berlin, involving Sov relations in West Berlin with Allied Commandants. In
latter connection, Sovs could
conceivably attempt designate a representative in West Berlin, perhaps
installing him in offices in quadripartite ACA Building as representative of Sov High Commissioner.

2. “Meaning” of Soviet presence in West
Berlin.

In Mission's tel 100 to Dept, 87 to Bonn,3 point was made that Sovs might eventually seek to transform
their CINC relations with Western CINCs into Warsaw Pact-NATO pact relations. This connection, it
significant that in both USSR and GDR
communiques4 commenting on abolition post of Sov Commandant, emphasis was placed on
NATO pact character of Western
Allied garrisons in West Berlin.

In seeking to establish Warsaw Pact-NATO
pact equivalence, Sovs probably would
wish to give some role in West Berlin to Czech and Polish military
missions “accredited” to ACA. In light
of their own past conduct re military missions, Sovs could not insist on right of Czech and Pole military
missions to reside in Western sectors. They might, however, insist on
their right of access to ACA Building to
conduct business and to raise questions regarding West Berlin. Thus
issue of access to, and circulation within, West Berlin of Czech and
Pole military missions may also become problem in our relations with
Sovs in future.

3. West Berlin attitude toward Allied Kommandatura.

There have been over the years frustrations on part West Berliners with
cumbersome tripartite machinery. In addition, events particularly in
past year have brought some increase in uncertainty of West Berliners
regarding our determination in long run to maintain security of city. If
there is added to this a downgrading of Commandants as result
development higher level contacts with Yakubovsky, restiveness of West Berliners with Allied
control likely to increase. This tendency should not be over-emphasized
since West Berliners are aware their ultimate security lies with three
Western governments. However, it can be expected that pressure by West
Berlin government on Allied Kommandatura through attempts to assert
independence and take unilateral actions will increase. We have seen
numerous symptoms of this in past few months (S-bahn posters, arming of customs police, etc.). Though
incidents on borders will continue for immediate future to be most
inflammatory issue, it is likely that, over long run, problems posed by
East German claims to “sovereignty” over S-bahn will take on crucial significance.

4. Signing of German peace treaty.

To extent that Sovs are successful in
achieving any of goals described in foregoing sections, they would have
brought about additional conditions which they have insisted be part of
peace treaty. Re other clauses of peace treaty, Sovs might be expected in near future to begin harassment
designed to change mechanism of Allied land access to West Berlin,
perhaps initially along lines of association and eventual substitution
East German Vopos for Soviet personnel on access routes. This
connection, Mission wishes re-affirm views expressed in our tels 98 and
99 to Dept, sent Bonn 85 and 86,5 emphasizing
that, as Sovs achieve goals, peace treaty when finally signed
will be simply formalization of conditions existing at that time (as we
have just experienced with dissolution of Soviet Kommandatura in East
Berlin).

Hulick

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/8–2562. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Bonn,
London, Moscow, Paris, USAREUR,
and SHAPE.

2 Telegrams 241 and 244 from Berlin are parts one and two of the
three-part message. See Document 100 and
footnote 1 thereto.

3 Telegrams 98, 99, and 100, July 26, speculated on Soviet and East
German “erosive” actions that might be taken against West Berlin in
light of their recent statements. (Department of State, Central
Files, 762.00/7–2662)

4 For text of the August 22
East German statement, see Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik, 1962,
pp. 961–962.

5 See footnote 2 above.

106. Letter From President Kennedy to Senator Mike Mansfield106. Letter From President Kennedy to Senator Mike
Mansfield1

Washington, August 28,
1962.

1. Your memorandum concentrates mainly on the problem of East Berlin. I
think the truth is that East Berlin is not an issue of war and peace for
us, and therefore we should not adopt any of the more drastic
alternatives proposed in your memorandum. The time for a fight over an
effective Western role in East Berlin passed, if it ever existed, many
years ago—about the time of the first blockade. Our contingency plans
therefore do not call for shooting over developments which may affect
the relatively unimportant access we now have to East Berlin.

2. The crucial question remains that of West Berlin, and our attention is
currently focused on what we should do to sustain the vital interests
which do indeed exist there, in the event of further Soviet steps
looking toward the increasingly complete incorporation of East Berlin
into East Germany. There may be important things which we can do to
strengthen our own ties to West Berlin, and perhaps the ties of West
Berlin to West Germany, in this event. The three basic rights—of
presence, access, and viability—which we have been asserting throughout
this Administration all relate to West Berlin and not East Berlin; it is
on this position that we shall continue to base our planning.

3. I entirely agree with your view that we should keep our Allies with us
as we move ahead in this crisis and use the UN wherever it can help us. But both Allies and the UN seem to me to have their main importance
in connection with West
Berlin, and not with the remnants of our role in a section of the city
which has been under effective Soviet control for a decade and a
half.

Sincerely,

JFK3

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/8–2862. Secret. The source text bears no
drafting information DEAR MIKE: I want to thank you for your
thoughtful memorandum of August 25 about the situation in
Berlin.2

2 A copy of this memorandum,
attached to a White House memorandum of transmittal, dated
August 30, is ibid., 762.00/8–3062.

3 Printed from a copy that bears
these typed initials.

107. Memorandum for the Record107. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, August 31,
1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting in the Cabinet Room, August 29, 1962, to Review Berlin
Contingency Planning2

PRESENT

The President, The Secretary of State, Mr. Ball, Mr. Brandin, Mr. Cash; Mr. Nitze; General Taylor, Mr. Bundy, Mr. Kaysen

The Secretary opened by remarking that General Clay would be in for a briefing on
the subject in the morning before seeing the President. The President
said he would get Clay's
reaction on the problem to be discussed today.

The Secretary then sketched our present situation. The Soviet Union is
pushing the Western Powers out of East Berlin, and at the same time
striving to make West Berlin a Four-Power city in which they have an
active role. We are now nearly at the end of the first process; the
second part is beginning to move forward more rapidly. The problem on
which we must shortly make a decision is thus whether we should not
begin to head off the Soviet efforts to increase their role in West
Berlin. The Secretary's first inclination was toward such action, lest
there be serious consequences
for the confidence and morale of the West Berlin population, which in
turn would react on our position in West Berlin. The immediate problem
in turn divides as follows: we might try: to increase our own presence
in East Berlin, decrease the Soviet presence in West Berlin, or both. He
is asking our Mission in Berlin and our Embassy in Bonn to supply us
with a complete catalog of Soviet activities in West Berlin. These now
go far beyond the activities related to BASC, Spandau and the War Memorial, and include, for
instance, TASS offices and Polish and
Czech Military Missions. For the present, the Secretary believes that we
should keep to our plan of refusing to show identification of allied
military personnel to East Germans in East Berlin. If, as a consequence,
the Soviets refuse to permit entry of our military personnel into East
Berlin, then we should respond by closing West Berlin to the
Soviets.

The President asked whether we should make this trade on the particular
point of showing identification. He also remarked that the War Memorial
may be a particularly sensitive point with the Soviets, and it might
well be an affront to them to be excluded from the War Memorial if we
admitted them to West Berlin at all.

Mr. Bundy and Mr. Nitze then presented Ambassador
Dowling's argument. We have
nothing to lose in East Berlin; our present minimal activity is of
marginal significance. On the other hand, if we allow Soviet presence in
West Berlin to increase, we run a double risk. First, the show of Soviet
military power in West Berlin affects the West Berliners adversely in a
way which harms Berlin's long-term viability. Second, we may, through
usage, create a situation in which it is easy for the Soviets to tie our
access to West Berlin from West Germany with their access to West Berlin
from East Berlin. The President again commented on the probable special
sensitivity of the War Memorial. Mr. Nitze noted that the location of the Memorial was the
result of a deal between the British and the Russians. He went on to
suggest that while there may be no need to deny access to the War
Memorial, we could require them to come to it by the Brandenberg Gate,
which meant a journey of less than 100 yards in West Berlin. Further, we
could require that they come in buses and not APC's. The President thought the alternative: use of APC's and the Brandenberg Gate, or use of
buses and the Friederichstrasse Gate, a reasonable one to present to the
Soviets.

The Secretary then directed the attention of the group to the draft
telegram for Berlin and the European capitals, inviting their comments
on the alternatives which the Secretary had stated (attached).3 The President remarked that there was nothing to prevent the Soviets
from doing what was sketched in the first paragraph of the message;
namely, equate Soviet position in West Berlin with allied access to West
Berlin. Mr. Bundy pointed out the
importance of usage in this respect. Although there was nothing to
prevent them from making this identification now, our acquiescence in
the increasing Soviet presence in West Berlin would make such an
identification more natural.

The President again asked whether we should not continue to permit Soviet
access to the three special areas. Mr. Nitze urged the advantages of early action. Since the
immediate tension had lessened, and the hostile actions of the West
Berliners which had caused the Soviets to put their troops into APC's are not continuing, this was an
appropriate moment for us to ask the Soviets to return to buses. He
referred to the arguments of Mr. Hulick in Berlin 282 (attached).4

The President asked why it would not be sufficient response to an East
German request for papers from our troops, to deny ourselves entrance to
East Berlin, and then admit the Soviets on credentials good only at the
Brandenberg Gate. Mr. Bundy
thought this would be an inadequate response, and that neither the
Soviets nor the Germans would feel it sufficiently forceful. General
Taylor remarked that
relations between East and West Berlin were a microcosm of relations
between West Germany and Berlin, and we should consider any action
within Berlin in this light. Mr. Bundy pointed to the central question of what trade we
were willing to make. In his judgment our access rights in East Berlin
for their access rights in West Berlin was an advantageous trade. Mayor
Brandt shared this view, and
had indeed urged it.

The President asked whether a request for passes was an appropriate issue
on which to hand such a trade. Mr. Bundy responded that the significance of the request was
not as important as the problem of substantive judgment on whether or
not the trade was in our interest. If it was, we should find the
earliest occasion to make it. The Secretary pointed out the asymmetry of
the “paper” issue. Since the Soviet Union and the East Germans wish to
create a state frontier at the sector boundary, they would be happy to
show whatever papers we asked for.

The President observed that he saw no specific danger in Soviet presence
at the War Memorial, BASC and Spandau.
Mr. Nitze and Mr. Bundy responded that the issue was not
their presence. The issue was our control of the terms on which they
could come to West Berlin. If we did not assert our control, then we would be moving rapidly to a
Four-Power West Berlin. General Taylor asked Mr. Nitze whether we were not in fact already in this state;
Mr. Nitze thought not yet.

Mr. Nitze asked that we return to
the question of what should be done now. He would recommend that we
request the Russians to return to the use of buses and indicate that we
will not permit entry in APC's. The
President asked whether he would recommend that we require them to come
through the Brandenberg Gate as well. Mr. Nitze said he was willing to wait on this point.

The President asked whether we have ever sent tanks or other armoured
vehicles into East Berlin. Mr. Brandin responded that we have sent tanks only as far as
the Friederichstrasse checkpoint. Our own patrols in East Berlin have
been made in jeeps; the soldiers do carry side arms. Secretary Rusk remarked that if the Soviets come
through the Brandenberg Gate, the use of APC's is no longer an issue, since they in fact are not
going through any significant part of West Berlin. The President asked
Mr. Nitze to repeat his argument,
and Mr. Nitze again stated that
the central issue was our control of Soviet access for West Berlin. In
answer to the President's question as to whether this was in doubt, Mr.
Nitze cited the Soviet
protests on the issue of our escorts for their APC's as evidence of their efforts to erode our control.
General Taylor and Mr. Nitze said that we had yielded to this
protest, in part at least, by agreeing to describe our accompanying
vehicles in other terms than as “escorts.”

The President asked whether we should tie permission for the Soviets to
use APC's to acceptance of our escorts.
General Taylor responded that we
should not accept any restrictions on the use of our own vehicles in
West Berlin.

The President summarized the issues as follows. Should we do something
now or wait? Should we confine the Soviets to the use of the Brandenberg
Gate and permit APC's? Should we give
the Soviets the choice of coming in buses or using the Brandenberg Gate,
or should we give them only the alternatives of exclusion or the use of
the buses through the Brandenberg Gate? Should the War Memorial be in
the category of BASC and Spandau as
points to which we would continue to permit Soviet entry even if we
excluded them from the rest of West Berlin, or should it be treated
along with the rest of West Berlin? The Secretary indicated that he
would have the outgoing telegram re-drafted to request comment on these
questions. He agreed that as presently drafted it seemed to reflect
decisions on some of them, which in fact have not yet been taken. In
response to the President's question, he said that the draft had not
been discussed quadripartitely.

Mr. Nitze pointed out that if we
are going to make any request, we must be prepared to respond to Soviet
refusal to accede to it. He would recommend that we block their access
to West Berlin if they do not accede to whatever request we think appropriate. The President
again raised the question of whether we should take the initiative in
making a request or wait to respond to some Soviet move. His own
inclination was to wait. The Secretary pointed out that we were dealing
with a symbolic, rather than in a substantive realm. The problem
essentially is how do we give the Soviets an unmistakable signal as to
our intentions within West Berlin. Mr. Nitze thought it was better to take the risks of action
now than to defer them.

The President then remarked that he saw no harm in the APC's as such, since we could stop them at
any time. They did not limit our vital rights of access or military
presence. Further, we could stop them at any time. The Secretary
responded that this was just the problem. General Taylor observed that although the
initial use of the APC's might have been
a natural reaction of the Soviet Commander to the violence offered to
his troops, their use was no longer justified. The President said that
the reaction of the West Berliners to the APC's was understandable and not unexpected, but in itself
was not a sufficient reason for us to take action. Further, it might
have been easy if we had prevented the entry of the APC's at their first appearance, but now we
were in a different position. Mr. Nitze pointed out that the West Berliners' feelings were
not the issue, but rather our confrontation with the Soviets. The
President again raised the question of whether we should take the
initiative, and indicated that he preferred to respond to a Soviet move
that went outside the existing rules.

The Secretary raised the question of whether it might be useful to move
in the opposite direction by putting more American and other Western
troops in East Berlin. Mr. Nitze
and Mr. Bundy pointed out the
possible difficulties our troops could create for us. The arrest of a
number of American soldiers, in the absence of a Soviet Commandant in
Berlin, might well put the President in a difficult position.

Mr. Bundy went on to review the
problem of passes. He pointed out that last year we engaged our prestige
on the issue of whether American military personnel would show passes to
East Germans, and we succeeded in making our point. If we now retreated
from this position, the Soviets and Germans both would read it as
weakness. The President agreed that American military personnel should
not show passes to get into East Berlin and that we should rather deny
ourselves entry. He observed that on the Autobahn the situation was of
course different. Mr. Bundy
remarked that if we denied ourselves access to East Berlin, in order to
avoid showing passes to East Germans, we must at that point cut off
Soviet access to West Berlin. Without Soviet presence in East Berlin,
there was no justification for a Soviet presence in West Berlin. He
repeated Mayor Brandt's point that
we no longer have any important interest in access to East Berlin, and therefore we should not
trade anything in West Berlin for access to East Berlin.

The President asked whether the alternative might be to limit the Soviets
to the three areas mentioned, and again raised the question of timing.
Mr. Bundy gave his view that now
was the time to deal with the APC's. The
President expressed his preference for staying on our pres-ent position
for the moment. General Taylor
pointed out that we had a middle course of action; namely, requiring
that the Soviets use the Brandenberg Gate for APC's going to the War Memorial. The Secretary said that
this was also the notion of the British Commandant. He observed that we
probably could get Allied agreement to restrict access to the three
places mentioned under specified contingencies. Mr. Bundy remarked that in order to come
out with this result, we had to push for a great deal more, rather than
merely ask for it.

The President suggested that the message be revised to reflect the
discussion and sent out. In response to the President's question, the
Secretary gave his judgment that it was not an appropriate moment to
send General Clay back to
Berlin.

CK5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Germany, Berlin, BQD-CC. Top Secret.
Drafted by Kaysen.

2 The meeting was
held at 5:46 p.m. (President's Appointment Book; ibid.)

3 Not found. The telegram as transmitted at
9:10 p.m. is printed as Document
108.

4 Telegram 282, August 28, analyzed the shift from
initial Soviet bellicosity in presenting APCs with armed guards at Checkpoint Charlie to
compliance with the U.S. regulation on Soviet movements in West
Berlin. The telegram suggested that this was not a Soviet
“backdown,” but more likely a desire not to precipitate a crisis
over access to West Berlin. (Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/8–2862)

5 Printed from a copy that bears
these typed initials.

108. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at Berlin108. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Mission at Berlin1

Washington, August 29, 1962, 9:10 p.m.

244. Paris pass USRO, Stoessel, McGuire,
and US Element Live Oak. Reference: Berlin's 282.2 Subject: Allied Access to East Berlin and
Soviet Presence in West Berlin.3

1. We agree that one possible interpretation of recent Soviet actions is
that their efforts are directed toward complete elimination Allied
position in East Berlin and strengthening Soviet presence in West
Berlin. Even before abolition
Soviet Commandant, they were already well on way toward elimination
Allied position East Berlin, unless Allies were prepared acquiesce in
unacceptable conditions, such as showing identification. They may now be
attempting guard against Allied action against their position West
Berlin, by switching equation from Allied position in East Berlin versus
Soviet position in West Berlin versus Allied access to West Berlin.

2. One response open to us is to direct our efforts toward maintenance
East Berlin-West Berlin equation. We could conceivably do this in two
ways, by increasing our presence in East Berlin and/or by reducing
Soviet presence in West Berlin.

3. With regard to Allied presence in East Berlin, we believe it is
questionable as to how much we can accomplish. Our presence in East
Berlin is not, however, in itself of same fundamental importance to us
as Soviet position in West Berlin probably is to Soviets. We believe,
however, we might consider expanding our activities in East Berlin, such
as uniform personnel in official cars. We have also considered
possibility of increasing travel into East Berlin by individuals, but
wonder whether this would be desirable.

4. With regard to any effort to reduce Soviet presence in West Berlin, we
would have to move carefully, if we want to bring our Allies along with
us. We believe our first moves might be directed toward control of
Soviet movement in West Berlin. On basis that the shorter the distance
travelled the less likely there will be difficulty, we could, for
example, insist that Soviets enter West Berlin at entry point nearest
installation they wish to get to.

5. We recognize that course of action outlined above could produce
situation which could lead to ending Allied movement in East Berlin and
Soviet movement in West Berlin. It could also lead to Soviet action
against air or surface access to West Berlin. Soviets could withdraw
from BASC or otherwise harass air
access. They could also harass Allied convoys or trains. We believe that
this is risk we might have to take.

6. Request you submit urgently your suggestions for possible action
directed toward following objectives, either as alternative courses or
in combination:

a. Restricting Soviet presence in West Berlin, and

b. Increasing Allied presence in East Berlin.4

7. You should not at this time discuss above with our Allies.

8. Request other addressees direct any comments on this message to
Berlin, so they can be taken into account in preparation their
suggestions.

9. In this connection, request you expedite reply to Deptel 2405 (not repeated other posts), which requests
inventory Soviet activity West Berlin.

10. This message being sent separately through military channels.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/8–2862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by
Ausland, cleared in draft
by Rusk and in substance by
Gray and Nitze, and approved by Brandin. Repeated to Bonn, Paris,
Moscow, London, USAREUR, and
USAFE.

2 See footnote 3, Document
107.

3 On August 27
Klein had sent a
memorandum to Bundy giving a
similar analysis of the question of Western access to the Eastern
sector of Berlin. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Germany, Berlin)

4 The analyses were transmitted in telegrams 307 and 310 from Berlin,
August 31. (Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/8–3162)

5 Dated August 29. (Ibid.,
762.0221/8–2862)

109. Memorandum of Conversation109. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 30, 1962, 10:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

General Clay

Mr. Cash

The Secretary opened by asking General Clay when he was last in Europe.

General Clay said he had been in
Europe ten days ago, just after the refugee PETER FECHTER had been shot
at the wall. He had seen Mayor Brandt.

The Secretary said the East Germans had been putting out the line that
they had not gone to the assistance of Fechter out of fear of the West
Berlin police.

General Clay said that a similar
incident had happened before in the British sector, but there had been
no crowds to witness the event.

The Secretary said that one subject that is currently under consideration
is how to bring into balance the question of East and West military
personnel entering East and West Berlin. He said there were two ways
this could be accomplished:

1. we could increase our presence in East Berlin; or

2. we could cut back Soviet bloc presence in West Berlin.

It is feared that the Soviets might achieve a quadripartite West Berlin
and then equate their access to West Berlin to our access to West
Berlin. He said he would appreciate General Clay's reactions.

General Clay responded that if
we were not careful we would soon face the alternatives of either
shooting or getting out of West Berlin if we waited until our vital
interests were affected. We should try to avoid being faced with these
alternatives. He would increase the Western presence in East Berlin. He
would put an end to the use of the APC's. If the Soviets interfere with our increased presence in
East Berlin, he would take action against Soviet personnel in West
Berlin.

The Secretary asked General Clay's views about action against the Czech and Polish
Military Missions.

General Clay said he did not
think such action would have much immediate value concerning Berlin
other than to impress the Czechs and Poles with the seriousness with
which we view the situation. He added that he would force the Soviets to
interfere first with our increased presence in East Berlin.

The Secretary said he would appreciate General Clay's comments on whether or not we
would risk increased conflicts with the East German police if we
increase our presence in East Berlin, an idea which he, incidentally,
found attractive.

General Clay said this would
provide a logical excuse for running the Soviets out of West Berlin. He
felt that cutting both Western presence in East Berlin and Eastern
presence in West Berlin would look like a sign of weakness.

The Secretary said he still got the impression that the Germans and
French are not really thinking hard concerning what can be done. We
haven't had any sign of their deep interest. They will say that it is
important to keep the Soviets from signing a separate peace treaty, but
then they fail to come up with practical measures to this end. The
Secretary wondered if General Clay had any impression as to what the French and the
Germans were thinking about in this connection.

General Clay replied negatively
saying that he had stayed away from the Bonn Government on his last trip
to Europe inasmuch as it was a
business trip. He said that in his last conversation with Adenauer he gained the impression that
the Chancellor was considerably influenced by De Gaulle's position. He added,
however, that he was more concerned about the reactions of the people in
Berlin and Germany than he was about the reactions of the Government. He
thought recent developments had hurt us with the people primarily
because of lack of reaction on our part. The principle now governing
seems to be that we do nothing until our vital interests are involved.
This really backs us into a corner. We must keep the East off balance.
When General Clay was in Berlin
there was an understanding that an unarmed attempt at rescue would be
made in any case similar to the Fechter case. He was puzzled as to why
no action had occurred. The Secretary said he did not know whether the
necessary information had gotten to the officers concerned in time.

General Clay said he felt that
this was no excuse. He continued by saying that the decision to admit
the APC's had had a very bad effect. The
Germans know that we did not send armored vehicles in through Checkpoint
Charlie because we considered it would be provocative. And yet we have
admitted the Soviet APC's. He did not
think this could be interpreted as anything except a Soviet move for a
quadripartite West Berlin. If we were afraid to move in this area
because of fear of retaliation against our autobahn access, we might be
afraid to move in cases of harassment of our autobahn access because of
fear that this might then threaten air access.

The Secretary said there was no question but that we would react to
interference with our access. We would move immediately into economic
and other sanctions, but he was not sure how far other nations would
follow us. Any time we attempted to take steps in the trade field, the
others shied away from this. General Clay said he did not think particular blame could be
attached to the Germans in this regard because the British have more
trade with the Soviet bloc.

The Secretary said this might be right, but it would surprise him.

General Clay said that in
addition, the movement of Germans into and out of Berlin is tied in with
the interzonal trade. No Allied agreement covers the movement of
Germans.

The Secretary continued by saying that one of the difficulties was that
so many things were not spelled out in workable agreements in the very
beginning of the occupation.

General Clay said there was a
good deal to be said for this argument, but he didn't think this would
have made much difference after we demobilized.

The Secretary asked where General Clay had been in 1945 and 1946.

General Clay responded that he
had been in Berlin.The Secretary said that he was in the Pentagon and
the State Department, and that among the colonels there had been a very
strong feeling concerning the demobilization. However, the Pentagon had
not put up much of a fight against it.

General Clay agreed but said
that US officers in Germany had opposed demobilization. If we had kept
ten divisions in Germany, there would have been no Eastern bloc. He said
that the only charitable thing he could say was that when President
Roosevelt entered into the agreements with the Soviets he intended to
keep ten divisions in Europe to see that the agreements were carried
out. If this had happened the world would look entirely different today.
The General said he was unhappy with the present situation because if we
did not take the initiative we would soon be backed into a corner.

The Secretary said he knew the President would be interested in General
Clay's views.

General Clay said he had been
shocked at both the lack of assistance for Fechter and the admission of
the Soviet armored cars, but it was difficult to be critical of the
people in the field who are trying to comply with what they think is
desired of them. The only way we can change the course of events is by
taking the initiative.

The Secretary asked if General Clay would have the Soviet troops for the War Memorial
moved through the Brandenburg Gate.

General Clay said there would be
obvious advantages in doing so because there would only be a short
distance to travel, and there would be no crowds. This would remove the
necessity for armed escorts. It would be an improvement over the present
situation. In addition, the opening of the Brandenburg Gate would be a
boost for West Berlin morale. This idea has considerable merit but only
if it were a part of a series of things to be done to establish and
maintain our position.

The Secretary asked if General Clay had any travel plans for the immediate future.

General Clay said he did not
except that he planned tentatively to go to Berlin with the Atlantic
Council in November.

The Secretary said there seemed to be some difference between Mayor
Brandt and Bonn. Brandt was trying to get more
circulation across the wall, and this would mean more dealings with the
East Germans.

General Clay said the West
Berliners were a little more realistic and were unconcerned about minor
forms of recognition. This is a political issue in West Germany but not
in Berlin. Brandt has to live with
the situation, and the Chancellor doesn't. Increased circulation would
have considerable effect in relieving tensions. The Secretary said he
had seen a report that the East
Germans were trying to make an assessment of East German feeling about
the wall.2

General Clay said they had
always had trouble in getting police to guard the wall. He thought the
East German forces along the wall would be tougher without the Russians
than if the Russians were there.

The Secretary asked how much effort the West Berliners were putting into
attempts to seduce the East German police covertly.

General Clay said he felt they
were doing a pretty good job in this regard.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/8–3062. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Cash on August 30 and approved in
S on September 6. The meeting was
held in Secretary Rusk's
office.

2 Not further identified.

3 During a meeting with the President at 11:30 a.m., Clay advocated increasing
“appreciably” the presence of U.S. soldiers in East Berlin and
ending the Soviet use of APCs in
West Berlin. In case the East Germans demanded documentation from
U.S. soldiers entering East Berlin, he recommended that the United
States abstain from entering the Eastern sector and consider denying
Soviet access to West Berlin including BASC, Spandau, and the war memorial. (Memorandum,
August 30; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Germany,
Berlin)

110. Memorandum of Conversation110. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 31, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

German Ambassador's Farewell Call

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Ambassador Grewe of the
Federal Republic of Germany

Mr. William J. Tonesk, Deputy Chief of Protocol

Mr. Richard H. Davis,
Acting Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

NATO Council

The President received Ambassador Grewe at 11:30 this morning for his farewell call and
after preliminary courtesies the President commented on the importance of the NATO Council to which the Ambassador is
being assigned as the German representative. He added that the
appointment of Ambassador Finletter indicated our great interest in the NATO Council and remarked that as the
prestige of permanent representatives arise, the significance of the
Council will increase.

The Ambassador replied that his predecessor on the Council, von Walther,
had been a distinguished representative and he was looking forward to
his own work. He expressed the opinion it might be useful to have some
representative from the Ambassadorial Group on Berlin speak to the
Council from time to time on the work of the group. He thought the
Council felt it had not received in the past a full and up-to-date
briefing.

UK Entry Into CM

The President referred to newspaper reports of the Chancellor's recent TV
interview regarding Great Britain's entry into the Common Market and
asked the Ambassador what he thought. The Ambassador somewhat
embarrassedly explained that Macmillan in his answer to a question in the House of
Commons in July had stated that entry into the Common Market did not
mean entry into a European political union. There then followed
Macmillan's letter of July 25 to the Chancellor seeking to clarify this
statement.2 The Chancellor in his TV interview was
merely reflecting the earlier Macmillan statement. The Chancellor's remarks had been
interpreted in a negative way and perhaps the formulation had been
unfortunate. The President asked in view of the Rome Treaty how one
could separate the economic from the political union of Europe to which
the Ambassador replied that the political union was not formally linked
with the Treaty, but in substance, of course, it could not be separated.
The German public as well as most of the German political leaders
realized this and he was sure Germany supported Britain's entry.

Western Foreign Ministers' Meeting

The President requested the Ambassador's views on the possibility of a
Western Foreign Ministers' Meeting to which the Ambassador replied that
since it was a German suggestion, they had been happy about the
President's press conference statement.3 They had understood the French also favored the idea
but it later came out that they did not. The Germans hoped at least at a
later stage that the Foreign Ministers could meet in view of the new problems and the new situation
which had arisen in Berlin. The President expressed agreement that a
meeting should take place some time in the coming weeks either in
Washington or in Europe.

Possibility Soviets Introducing German Question
Into UN

In reply to the President's general question on this subject, the
Ambassador expressed the opinion that the Soviets would not raise the
question of Berlin in the UN in a
specific manner since they probably estimate the votes would go against
any change in the status quo. The Soviets might discuss Berlin and
Germany in general in the GA in order to
persuade the neutrals of the justice of Soviet proposals and to create a
favorable atmosphere to carry out further Soviet intentions.

The Ambassador continued that the Soviets would probably emphasize the
existence of two German states and the need for both to enter the UN. This had a certain appeal to the
neutrals. It would be necessary to explain to them that this favors the
Soviet viewpoint. Moreover, there was a problem of non-recognition which
has become even more difficult.

Recognition of East Germany

Picking up the Ambassador's last remark, the President asked whether we
could through the years continue to persuade other governments not to
recognize the East German regime. The Ambassador said “yes” but that
sacrifices would be necessary. Bonn was considering all aspects of this
question but it was a painful decision. The President wondered whether
the Soviets would pay rather heavily to get this non-recognition policy
reconsidered and whether it was possible we might get something better
rather than undergo a gradual erosion of our position. The Ambassador
expressed some doubt that the Soviets would be willing to pay anything
for recognition and pointed out the great difficulty for West Germany
because all their old policies and indeed the Constitution would have to
be revised if the non-recognition policy were abandoned. The President
expressed appreciation of the internal difficulties. The Ambassador
added that he was speaking only personally on this subject as he had no
authorization to raise the question.

Soviet Use of APC's

The President referred to his talk with General Clay yesterday4 and our concern with the Soviet use of APC's in conveying their personnel to the
Soviet War Memorial in the British sector. There was a question whether
we should prohibit or limit them. What were the Ambassador's views? The Ambassador felt the problem
was the Soviet attempt to equate their access to BASC, Spandau, and the War Memorial with
Western access to West Berlin. The problem of APC's was important from a psychological point of view. He
expressed the opinion it was important now to equate Western patrols in
East Berlin with Soviet access to the War Memorial and Spandau. The
important point was reciprocity. The President remarked the question was
whether to prohibit the APC's from
coming since the necessity for them had passed. Perhaps we should
require them to go through the Brandenburg Gate in the future but not to
permit them to use APC's to Spandau.

Recent Exchange of Letters

The President said he appreciated the Chancellor's reply to his latest
letter5 and said he
believed the exchange had been useful. The Ambassador agreed but
expressed the opinion it was necessary to have more personal
contacts—not necessarily between the President and the Chancellor but,
for example, between Secretary Rusk and Schroeder.

US Commitment to Europe

The President wondered where the stories had arisen about a change in US
strategic posture. The Ambassador replied that he thought the trouble
had arisen from a change in US strategic concepts which was necessary.
He was hopeful that viewpoints now had been brought much closer
particularly through meetings between Strauss, McNamara, Nitze
and Gilpatric. He realized there
were different accents in US and European strategic concepts. The
President referred to a talk he had with a “European” yesterday6 who wondered whether the US would really carry
out its nuclear commitment to defend Europe. The President had replied,
of course, but the very question revealed a strong current of disbelief
which was probably encouraged by the French. The President added there
should be no doubt of a US commitment since US security was so
intimately tied to Europe's.

The Ambassador answered that he fully believed this as his speeches in
this country attested. He admitted there was an unhappy influence from
the French side which we should try to counter.

Miscellaneous

The President referred to the fact the Ambassador had been here during
two Administrations and during times which had been difficult and
expressed his opinion that relations between the two countries were
basically sound though they had their ups and downs like all relations.
He commented that the
Ambassador had the chance in NATO for
very effective service in the common cause.

The Ambassador said he looked back with great pleasure on his service in
Washington and thought that something had been achieved during his tour
of office. The Alliance had passed through difficult times, particularly
last year, but had met the test on the whole well. We had agreed on
sharing financial burdens, there had been an enormous increase in
exchanges, etc.

The President referred to a University of Michigan survey on the American
mood toward Germany and contrasted it with the Shirer book. The
Ambassador replied he thought the mood of the great majority of
Americans toward Germany was favorable but a certain circle of
intellectuals was quite negative. Their influence was out of proportion
to their numbers and they had a certain appeal.

The Ambassador then remarked he wanted to emphasize how much he
appreciated the President making himself available to see him on
frequent occasions and he wished to stress the good cooperation which he
had enjoyed with the Department of State. He said he realized some of
the arguments he had used, he would not have used in the President's
position but he hoped the President realized he had to speak of German
national interests.

The President concluded by again expressing his appreciation of the
Ambassador's efforts through a difficult period. Since 1958 the
exist-ence of Soviet missiles had made operations more hazardous and
most people did not appreciate that we were operating under a much more
difficult pattern than before. He expressed agreement with the
Ambassador's remarks on the usefulness of more frequent meetings and
again expressed the thought the recent exchange of letters with the
Chancellor had been helpful. The Ambassador remarked that the Chancellor
is 86 and had deep-rooted distrust. The President remarked that the
period of John Foster Dulles was often referred to as “rosy” in our
relations but that if we really looked back at that period there had
been difficult times too. The Ambassador agreed.

The meeting closed with a mutual exchange of courtesies.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Germany. Secret. Drafted by Davis on September 1. The meeting was held in
President Kennedy's office.

2 Regarding Macmillan's exchange of letters with
Adenauer in July, see
Macmillan, At the End of
the Day, pp. 123–125.

3 For
a transcript of the President's news conference on August 29, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp.
648–655.

4 See footnote 2, Document
109.

5 See footnotes 1 and 7, Document 98.

6 This conversation has not been further
identified.

111. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State111. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, September
1, 1962, 1 p.m.

667. Paris also for USRO and McGuire;
SHAPE for Stoessel and US Element
Live Oak; CINCUSAREUR for POLAD.
Reference: Deptels 580, 586, Berlin's
307, 310.2 I have
already commented on problem raised by Clay in Berlin's 270 and 2823 and have little to add to excellent concrete
suggestions made in Berlin's 307 and 310. As far as General Clay's views are concerned I agree
with basic thesis but would like to add following observation on tactics
we might utilize in dealing with Sov
presence in West Berlin.

The Russians have a real interest in maintaining a presence in West
Berlin, not only as a means of influencing a possible Berlin settlement
but also in providing themselves with a means to intimidate Western
policy and action on access to West Berlin. Course of events since
construction of wall, culminating in action of 22 August shows that
while they may be willing to liquidate 4-power structure, they strongly
wish to retain unilateral right of presence in West Berlin. This
presence is important to them not only in symbolic and prestige terms,
but in important process of equating their access to West Berlin through
Friedrichstrasse with Allied access to West Berlin. As pointed out in
previous messages, they are not interested in equating Sov entry into West Berlin with Allied
entry into East Berlin, since East Berlin was sealed off by the wall and
would be closed completely at any time by administrative requirements
concerning identification. Addition of jeeps to SovAPC's may indicate that Sovs are
attempting to make their “convoys” to war memorial even look like Allied
convoys on Autobahn, thus emphasizing that they are seeking to establish
this equation.

Aside from connection between Sov access
to West Berlin and Allied access to West Berlin, presence of Sov forces at war memorial and Spandau has
intense emotional and symbolic significance for Russians. They simply
could not leave an unprotected war memorial in West Berlin or risk the release of Hess, Shirach
and Speer without profound effect on their propaganda of unilateral
victory in World War II and their charges of continued activity by
“Hitlerites” and “revanchists”.

Therefore, Soviets would not willingly relinquish their rights concerning
memorial and Spandau and I believe they would go a long way in making
certain concessions or seeking time before forced to do so. In no sense,
would they give up these rights without intense retaliation.

I do not place as much emphasis on our presence in East Berlin as a basis
for cutting off West Berlin to Sovs. Our
continued presence in East Berlin serves no definite purpose and actual
or symbolic presence of our forces there has only marginal utility in
relation to our greater objectives in West Berlin. If we send increased
numbers US personnel into East Berlin as a means of policy, we simply
invite a program of individual harassment which would immerse us in a
maze of protests obscuring our basic objectives.

As set out in mytel from Berlin,4 we
should now concentrate on containment and control of Sov presence in West Berlin rather than to
strive towards any symbolic or propaganda advantages in maintaining our
presence in the East sector. Therefore, I agree with Gen Clay that under no circumstances must
we show identification as a price of entering the East sector.

I agree completely with Gen Clay
about presence of SovAPC's in West Berlin and in Embtel
6525 we have proposed plan
which would lead to their removal from scene. While breaching wall at
Brandenburg Gate may be too much to hope for, we could settle for
Sandkrug Bridge but insist that Sov guards travel in buses rather than
in armored cars.

For reasons advanced, most effective way to deal with Sovs would be to institute selective
controls on entry of Sov war memorial
and Spandau guards rather than by instituting a blanket prohibition
which would include BASC personnel. If
Sovs equate their entry with Allied
access to W. Berlin, we could by various initiatives control, or
prohibit, their access to objectives in W. Berlin which they too may
consider important for their purposes. While we should seek by various
means to prevent the Sovs drawing a precise relationship between West
Berlin and Allied access routes, we should recognize that this is
precisely what they may do. Therefore, we should be prepared to deny
them access to West Berlin on same grounds they may hinder our access,
rather than becoming involved in East sector.

BASC is an entirely different matter.
Just as it in Soviet interest to maintain physical presence at memorial,
it is certainly in our interest to maintain Sov presence
in BASC. When Sovs fail to participate in BASC we could be faced with a situation of grave import
which could require immediate implementation of our contingency plans in
order to maintain free and uncontrolled air access to Berlin. We should,
in short, do nothing to make Sov presence in BASC impossible as long as they wish to maintain it.

One way of assuring this for the time being is to treat Sov presence at
war memorial, Spandau and BASC as
separate problems rather than as one. What we should seek to prevent is
Sov use of entry for changes of
guard at memorial as mechanism for supplying personnel for other Soviet
undertakings in West Berlin. Provisions for relieving guard at memorial
should be confined to that alone. If and when problem arises about
Spandau and BASC, it should be dealt
with in terms of situation existing at that time without connection with
provisions concerning memorial.6

Dowling

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/9–162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.
Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, USAREUR, and SHAPE.

2 Telegram 580 is printed as
telegram 244 to Berlin, Document 108.
Telegram 586 summarized Clay's views as presented to the President in their
meeting on August 30 (see footnote 2,
Document 109). Regarding telegrams 307 and 310, see footnote 3, Document 108.

3 Telegram 270, August 25, summarized the pros and cons of showing
identification papers in entering East Berlin and concluded that to
do so would damage U.S. prestige and serve no useful end.
(Department of State, Central Files, 762.54/8–2562) Regarding
telegram 282, see footnote 3, Document
107.

4 See footnote 1, Document 104.

5 Dated August 31. (Department of
State, Central Files, 762.00/8–3162)

6 On September
4 Norstad cabled his
concurrence with these views. (ECJCJ–9–13923; Eisenhower Library,
Norstad Papers, Policy
File, Berlin-Live Oak)

112. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of the Interior Udall and Chairman Khrushchev112. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of the Interior
Udall and Chairman Khrushchev1

Petsunda, Georgia,
Soviet Union, September 6, 1962, 1 p.m.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

K: I know Nixon and Eisenhower, and I must say that
Kennedy is better in this respect. As a
President he has understanding, but what he does not yet have is
courage—courage to solve the German question. If he resolves this
problem, he will rise to the heights. But he is faced with the necessity of solving it. Because
the German situation is no longer tolerable. A treaty will inevitably be
signed. If we and the President can agree, then there will be great
opportunities for cooperation in science, technology, and outer space.
Without a solution to this problem, our relations will continue to be
cancerous and exacerbated. So we will help him solve the problem. We
will put him in a situation where it is necessary to solve it. We will
give him a choice—go to war, or sign a peace treaty. We will not allow
your troops to be in Berlin. We will permit access to West Berlin for
economic or commercial purposes, but not for military purposes.
Everybody is saying nowadays that there will be a war. I don't agree.
Sensible people won't start a war. What is Berlin to the United States?
And a war could easily began there—if someone struck a blow at us, we
would strike back. Do you need Berlin? Like hell you need it. Nor do we
need it. But the President is not in a position to come to agreement.
I'm telling you this off the record—I don't want to hurt your chances in
the November elections. The President is boxed in—he can't move. To sum
it up, Congress won't let him come to terms. If he had support in
Congress, he could come to terms. But as it now stands, if the two of us
made an agreement, Congress would veto it. You remember when Nixon came
here, and Congress had just declared Captive Nations Week. I asked him,
“Was that very smart?” He said, “I never would have done such a thing
myself, but I can't vouch for fools in the Congress.” I'm telling you
this just between you and me. But you have many such fools in
Congress.

U: There are some who are demagogues in the negative sense.

K: They should be gotten rid of. And so—we'll sign a peace treaty. If any
lunatics in your country want war, Western Europe will hold them back.
Except for Adenauer and DeGaulle—those two have some unusual ideas of
their own. But they will get wise in a hurry. War in this day and age
means no Paris and no France, all in the space of an hour. It's been a
long time since you could spank us like a little boy—now we can swat
your ass. So let's not talk about force. We're equally strong. You want
Berlin. Access to it goes through East Germany. We have the advantage.
If you want to do anything, you have to start a war. And nowadays that
course is insanity. We ourselves will not start a war. We don't need
one, nor do you. The economy of your country is more developed than
ours, but ours will be as strong as yours one day. So, let us have
peaceful competition. But we can have peace and come to agreement sooner
once the Berlin issue is eliminated. Out of respect for your President
we won't do anything until November. If it depends on us, there will be
no war. I think the reply of the President to our note on the U-2 was satisfactory from this
standpoint.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

U: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for the opportunity to meet with
you. I will respect your request to keep these remarks off the record,
and will convey your messages to President
Kennedy.

K: Yes—tell the press we talked about electric power plants.

U: Yes, I would like to tell them of our discussion of power stations and
water development. On Berlin, the President has made his position very
clear. He shares your views about the insanity, the suicide of nuclear
war. He is a strong leader—a courageous man, a man of steel, just as you
are. You, the President, and I myself were all participants in the last
World War. The President respects your problems and your position, and
you should attempt to understand his position on this grave question. I
am sure the President has no greater ambition than to solve the Berlin
problem peacefully, and to put an end to nuclear weapons testing, which
has been the topic of discussion at Geneva. This is a time of dangers,
and he will always do his best to find peaceful solutions to world
problems.

K: We wish him success. We will freeze the Berlin question until
November. Then he and I will continue our dialogue. I don't know what
its outcome will be, but we will sign a peace treaty with Germany. Then
we shall see whether you bring us to the brink of war. It takes two to
jump at the brink; one person can't jump alone—and you have many on your
side who must jump together (motioning with his hands). I personally do
not want to jump. Please give my best personal regards to the President,
his family, and his daughter from me and my wife.

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Drafted by the
U.S. interpreter, Kamman, with additions and corrections by Udall,
who visited the Soviet Union for 11 days beginning August 29. A
summary of the conversation, transmitted in telegram 616 from
Moscow, September 7 (ibid., Central Files, 033.1100–UD/9–762), is
printed in vol. V, Document 139.

September–November 1962: U.S. Policy on Berlin During the Cuban Missile CrisisSeptember–November 1962: U.S. Policy on Berlin During the Cuban Missile Crisis: Document List

Document 113: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 7, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.5162A/9–762. Secret. Drafted by Meloy and approved in S on September 18. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office.

Document 114: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, September 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. Drafted by Klein.

Document 115: Report by the Military Sub-Group of the Washington Ambassadorial Group

Washington, September 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, G/PM Files: Lot 59 D 258, NATO Military Plans. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. A record of the discussion of this paper by the Military Sub-Group on September 12, Sub BQD-Military 33, is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, FRC 65 A 3501, 092 Berlin, Germany.

Document 116: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, September 17, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–1762. Secret. Repeated to London, Bonn, Moscow, Paris, USAREUR, and SHAPE.

Document 117: Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson)

September 17, 1962, 3:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192. No classification marking. Stevenson was in New York; Rusk was in Washington.

Document 118: Telegram from the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, September 18, 1962, 4:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–1862. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Tyler and approved by Rusk.

Document 119: Memorandum From the Vice President's Military Aide (Burris) to Vice President Johnson

Washington, September 18, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice President's Security Files, Col. Burris' Reports. Secret.

Document 120: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Embassy in Germany

Berlin, September 25, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–2562. Secret. Repeated to the Department of State, London, Moscow, Paris, SHAPE, and USAREUR. The source text is the Department of State copy.

Document 121: Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations

Washington, September 25, 1962, 7:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–2562. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Mautner (BTF); cleared by Anderson, RPM, and INR; and approved by Cash. Repeated to Berlin and pouched to Moscow, London, and Bonn.

Document 122: Memorandum of Conversation

Berlin, September 25, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Hulick on September 28. A note on the source text indicates that it was not cleared with Bundy. Bundy visited Berlin September 25–26 as part of a trip to Europe. Additional documentation on the trip is ibid., Trips and Conferences Series, McGeorge Bundy Trip to Europe.

Document 123: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, September 25, 1962, 9:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–2562. Top Secret; Priority; No Other Distribution. Drafted and approved by Kaysen. Repeated to Copenhagen eyes only for Bundy, who was en route from Berlin. The situation described in this telegram had been discussed by Rusk and Ball and Schroeder and Bundy on September 24 and by Ball and Kaysen (twice) and Kaysen and Bundy on September 25 before arriving at the decision to approach Globke on the problem. For a record of the Kaysen-Bundy telephone conversation, see Declassified Documents, 1982, 1351; records of the other telephone conversations are in Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192.

Document 124: Editorial Note

Document 125: Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy

Moscow, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Khrushchev Correspondence. No classification marking. The full text is printed in volume VI.

Document 126: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New York, September 29, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/9–2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, Bonn, and Berlin. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Davis. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2150)

Document 127: Editorial Note

Document 128: Record of Meeting

Washington, October 5, 1962, noon.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Secret. Drafted by Kaysen. The time of the meeting is taken from the President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.) A similar record drafted by Creel is ibid. A summary of the meeting was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 925, October 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/10–662) For Brandt's account of this meeting, see Begegnungen und einsichten, pp. 94–95. Brandt had also discussed Berlin with Tyler, Hillenbrand, and Creel at 10 a.m. (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–562)

Document 129: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New York, October 6, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/10–662. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Bonn, Paris, Berlin, Moscow, and London.

Document 130: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 9, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, France, General. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Tyler and approved in S on October 12 and in the White House on October 24. The source text is labeled “Part 1 of 4 Parts.” Parts 2 and 3 dealt with Laos and the Congo respectively; Part 4 also dealt with Berlin, containing a 2-paragraph discussion between Rusk and Couve de Murville on contingency planning. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–962) Couve de Murville was in the United States to attend the 17th session of the U.N. General Assembly.

Document 131: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 10, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–1062. Secret. Drafted by Creel and initialed by Tyler.

Document 132: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, October 15, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2175. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Hillenbrand. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, Berlin, and USUN.

Document 133: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, October 16, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files, eyes Only Telegrams Microfilm. Secret; Priority.

Document 134: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 17, 1962, 10 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Creel and approved in the White House on October 26. The meeting was held at the White House. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 1021, October 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/10–1862)

Document 135: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–1862. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky on October 21 and approved in the White House on October 23. The meeting was held in the White House. The source text is labeled “Part I.” Part II, which dealt with Cuba, is scheduled for publication in volume XI; Part III, which dealt with nuclear testing, is printed in vol. VII, Document—; and Part IV, which dealt with U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations, is printed in vol. V, Document 151. A summary of this conversation was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 958, October 20. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/10–2062) Gromyko was in the United States to attend the 17th session of the U.N. General Assembly.

Document 136: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 18, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–1862. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on October 23. The meeting, which was held at the Department of State, took place during Rusk's dinner for Gromyko. A summary was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 953, October 19. (Ibid.)

Document 137: Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 18, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

Document 138: Record of Meeting of the Military Sub-Group of the Washington Ambassadorial Group

Washington, October 22, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, 092 Germany. Top Secret. Prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.

Document 139: Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency (Smith) to Director of Central Intelligence McCone

Washington, October 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cuba, Intelligence Materials. Top Secret. At the 10 a.m. meeting of the Executive Committee of the NSC on October 23 President Kennedy had asked McCone for an analysis of the effect of a blockade on Berlin. (Minutes of the Executive Committee; Department of State, Central Files, 611.3722/10–2362)

Document 140: Record of Meeting No. 1 of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee

Washington, October 24, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 65 D 438, Cuban Missile Crisis. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. At the second meeting of the Executive Committee of the NSC, October 23, at 6 p.m., President Kennedy confirmed Nitze as the chairman of the subcommittee on Berlin-NATO preparations and invited him to meet regularly with the Executive Committee in this capacity. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Executive Committee Meetings, Record of Action for Meeting No. 2) In an attachment to his record of the Daily White House Staff Meeting on October 24, Legere indicated that, in addition to representatives of the JCS, CIA, USIA, Treasury, and OSD, Nitze, Thompson, Hillenbrand, Schaetzel, Klein, and he were members of the subcommittee. Legere and Klein sent their joint account of the meeting to Bundy on October 24. (Ibid., Countries Series, Germany, Berlin)

Document 141: Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions

Washington,October 24, 1962, 11:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.3722/10–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Thompson, cleared by Tyler, and approved by Rusk. Sent to the NATO capitals, Bern, Stockholm, Vienna, and Berlin.

Document 142: Paper Agreed by the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee

Washington, October 24, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but is attached to a memorandum from Nitze to the Executive Committee of the NSC, October 26, which states that the paper was agreed by the subcommittee at its meeting on October 25. A 2-page record of the second meeting of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee is in Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 65 D 438, Cuban Missile Crisis.

Document 143: Memorandum for the President

Washington, October 27, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but is attached to a memorandum from Nitze to the Executive Committee of the NSC, October 27, stating that it had been agreed by the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee at its meeting that day. A record of the fourth meeting of the subcommittee, held at 11 a.m. on October 27, is in Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 65 D 438, Miscellaneous.

Document 144: Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

Document 145: Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Regional Organizations

Washington, October 28, 1962, 1:47 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–2862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ausland and Kranich; cleared by Kitchen, Hillenbrand, Tyler, R/PM, and the Department of Defense (ISA); and approved by Johnson. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAFE, and USAREUR.

Document 146: Memorandum From David Klein and Colonel Lawrence J. Legere to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 29, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. Initialed by Klein.

Document 147: Editorial Note

Document 148: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, November 5, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/11–562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Bonn and repeated to Paris and Moscow.

Document 149: Memorandum From the Chairman of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee (Nitze) to President Kennedy

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Ret'd from Mrs. Lincoln 11/5/62.”

Document 150: Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations

Washington, November 7, 1962, 15:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 737.56361/11–762. Secret; Priority; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Cash and Mautner, cleared by Thompson and Kranich, and approved by Hillenbrand. Repeated to Bonn and London.

Document 151: Memorandum From the Chairman of the Advance Planning Subcommittee (Rostow) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 9, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret. Initialed by Rostow.

113. Memorandum of Conversation113. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 7, 1962, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

De Gaulle Visit to Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador Hervé Alphand,
French Embassy

Mr. Jean-Claude Winckler, Counselor, French Embassy

Mr. Francis E. Meloy, Jr., WE

The French Ambassador called on the Secretary at his own request
following his return from Paris for a general discussion.

The Secretary, who had not yet seen the De
Gaulle-Adenauer
communique,2 inquired of Ambassador
Alphand as to its contents.
The Ambassador, who had just seen the communique, outlined very briefly
its major points. The Secretary commented that it would appear that the
communique contained a good deal more than such documents usually do.

Ambassador Alphand repeated that
the De Gaulle visit had gone very
well especially in its public relations aspects. The fact that De Gaulle speaks some German had been
helpful. The Ambassador said that the press had played up the dramatic
aspects of the visit, noting that this was the first time a French Chief
of State had paid a state visit to Germany since 921 A.D.

Ambassador Alphand said he hoped
that the United States would not consider the De Gaulle-Adenauer understandings and the Franco-German
rapprochement to be against U.S. interests. The Secretary said certainly
not. At the expense of appearing somewhat naive he still felt he should
point out that the United States had been engaged in two major world
conflicts in which France and Germany were on opposite sides. An
understanding between France and Germany for the drawing together of
those two countries was therefore very much to be desired. On the other
hand, however, if it should develop that there was contemplated a French-German axis or
understanding at the expense of NATO
and the Atlantic Community, the United States would very definitely be
disturbed. Ambassador Alphand
emphasized that such intent had been expressly denied.

The Ambassador inquired as to how the Secretary saw events developing
with regard to Berlin. The Secretary said that he had asked our
intelligence people to prepare an assessment of the current situation
and future probabilities and that we would share this assessment with
the French and our other allies in the next meeting on Berlin. The
Secretary had a hunch that we are in for a serious time. The Soviets
might withdraw from the air security center and attempt to insist that
we fly from Schoenfeld. There may also be harassment in the air corridor
to Berlin and indications of a Soviet build up of antiaircraft weapons
in the corridor pointed this way. The Secretary said he could tell the
Ambassador very privately that we may need to ask further congressional
authority for calling up reserve troops.3

The Secretary went on to say that we are concerned by the German defense
budget reduction which may signal to Moscow a lack of sense of urgency,
determination and firm common purpose.

The Secretary asked if there were any possibility that an additional
French division might be assigned to NATO. The Ambassador replied that French troops returning
from Algeria are being modernized and re-equipped. He was not in a
position to say if any additional forces could be committed to NATO. The Secretary asked if the
modernization of the French troops is something the Soviets could pick
up. The Ambassador thought that the Soviets were well aware of this.

Ambassador Alphand asked if the
Secretary anticipated a separate peace treaty between the Soviets and
East Germany. The Secretary said that he did not think this likely
within the next few weeks but that it could possibly happen before the
end of the year. Ambassador Alphand said that the French Foreign
Minister shares this view.

The Secretary said he would like to comment on the Cuban situation in
connection with possible Soviet moves regarding Berlin. It appears that
the Soviets are making a hurried crash effort at antiaircraft
installations in Cuba. While there have been some tanks and other arms
sent to Cuba, by far the greatest part of recent Soviet military
shipments to Cuba has been antiaircraft materiel. The Soviets are
training Cubans in the operation of this equipment which they have never
done before. This may be a sign
that the Soviets expect a serious crisis in Berlin and want to put Cuba
in the best possible position to resist any U.S. move which we might be
tempted to make as a result of an emergency in Berlin. The Soviets may
be trying to anticipate and get braced for a Berlin crisis. We should
not link Soviet actions in Cuba too closely to Berlin but they may be an
indicator.

The Secretary said of course the United States would not trade an easing
of the Cuban situation for concessions in Berlin. He commented in
passing that we do not understand the recurring waves of alerts in
Cuba.

The Secretary expressed appreciation to Ambassador Alphand for information being passed to
us by the French regarding Cuba.

Ambassador Alphand said the French
are concerned for the entire Caribbean area, and for the effects on the
rest of Latin America if the Soviets are successful in Cuba.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
033.5162A/9–762. Secret. Drafted by Meloy and approved in S on
September 18. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office.

2 For text of the September 7
communiqué, see Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik,
1962, pp. 1045–1046.

3 Later in the day President Kennedy sent
identical letters to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of
the House seeking authorization to activate units of the Ready
Reserve. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: John F. Kennedy,
1962, p. 665. The necessary authority was passed by both Houses and
approved by the President on October 3.

4 Ambassador Alphand also asked whether the United States was
considering bringing the Berlin question before the United Nations,
expressing the French view that the United Nations was not competent
on the issue. Rusk replied
that the United States would not take such an initiative unless
there were a direct threat to the peace. (Memorandum of
conversation, September 7; Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/9–762) A memorandum of the conversation on the Common Market
is ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D
330.

114. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy114. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy1

Washington, September 10,
1962.

SUBJECT

“Preferred Sequence of Military Actions in the Berlin Conflict”

The attached paper on the “Preferred Sequence of Military Actions in the
Berlin Conflict” is submitted for your approval prior to being tabled
first in the Ambassadorial Group and then in the NATO Council.2

The paper as it now stands reflects the agreed views of the Departments
of State and Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It also takes
cognizance of many of the substantive comments and criticisms submitted
earlier by General Norstad
(General Norstad's message ALO
749, attached)3 although all of General
Norstad's objections clearly
have not been met.

Three basic differences remain. First, there is General Norstad's objection to the concept of
the sequence paper. General Norstad questions the political and military wisdom of
our spelling out in any such form our view of the possible sequence of
events in Berlin. He also thinks it unrealistic to attempt to predict
such a sequence. Instead, he prefers the cataloguing of possible actions
to meet the Soviet challenge without putting such actions in any
specific order. Mr. Nitze, on the
other hand—and this is also the view of the Departments of State and
Defense and the JCS—denies that the
sequence paper is intended to establish a hard and fast line of
development. It is a conceptual framework for planning purposes,
spelling out challenges from the other side.

Second, there is the question of procedure. General Norstad argues for an oral
presentation rather than the tabling of a written document. Apart from
his apparent concern about possible leaks, he claims that this effort
will be misunderstood and lead to unnecessary confusion and division in
NATO. Paul Nitze denies this. He insists that introduced in an
appropriate context, and given a proper explanation of the sequence
paper's uses and limitations, a written document is a more manageable
vehicle for these purposes than an oral briefing and less likely to be
misinterpreted and/or misunderstood by the individual representatives in
the Council.

Lastly, there is a remaining substantive difference which is somewhat
camouflaged by the language of the paper. General Norstad objects strongly to the
restrictions the sequence paper imposes on the use of nuclear weapons
prior to Phase IV. As the responsible military commander in the field, he feels these
restrictions tie him down unnecessarily and deny him the means he needs
to carry out his mission. Like the French and Germans, although probably
for different reasons, he tends to favor a selective use of nuclear
weapons earlier in the scheme, after less extensive non-nuclear
combatant action than the U.S. Government (as reflected in NSAM 109)4
would prefer. Nitze, however,
claims that the use of nuclear weapons at a point in the sequence scheme
which General Norstad seems to
prefer, would not really serve the purposes allegedly intended.
Moreover, Nitze denies that the
language of the paper dealing with the use of nuclear weapons is
over-restrictive. He considers that the language now incorporated at the
end of paragraph 2 of the general introduction provides whatever leeway
is really needed to deal with the problems as they develop.

McG. B.

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top
Secret. Drafted by Klein.

2 Not attached to the source text, but a copy of this 6-page paper
(BQD-M-30) is in Department of State, G/PM Files: Lot 69 D 258, Poodle
Blanket. On September 8 Secretaries McNamara and Rusk had sent the President a joint memorandum
attaching a copy of BQD-M-30 and stating that he should approve a
U.S. position on a preferred sequence of military actions in a
Berlin conflict based on it. (Kennedy Library, National Security
Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin)
Kennedy, Rusk, McNamara, Tyler, Hillenbrand, Lemnitzer, Nitze, Bundy,
and Klein met at 6 p.m. on
September 10 to discuss the preferred sequence, and the President
agreed to the position. (Notes by Klein; ibid.) On September 13 the Washington
Ambassadorial Group discussed the paper further, numbered the
paragraphs, and made some minor revisions. At this meeting Rusk stated that NATO acceptance of the preferred
sequence could be an important signal to induce Soviet caution in
Berlin and warned that the four Allied NATO Permanent
Representatives should be prepared to deal with suggestions for new
political initiatives from the other members of the Alliance. (Topol
337 to Paris, September 14; Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/9–1462) For text of the revised paper, see Document
115.

3 Not attached to the source
text, but a copy is in Department of State, G/PM Files: Lot 59 D 258, NATO Military Plans.

4 For
text, see vol. XIV, Document 185.

115. Report by the Military Sub-Group of the Washington Ambassadorial Group115. Report by the Military Sub-Group of the Washington Ambassadorial
Group1

Washington, September 12,
1962.

BQD–M–30 (Revised)

REVISED MILITARY SUB-GROUP PROPOSAL FOR WASHINGTON
AMBASSADORIAL GROUP REPORT ON THE PREFERRED SEQUENCE OF MILITARY ACTIONS
IN A BERLIN CONFLICT

General

1. In its instructions to NATO military
authorities, CM(61)104,2
the Council expressed several considerations that ought to underlie
Berlin planning. One dealt with the need for military and other actions
to fit together in an overall
strategy. The Council has previously been informed concerning the
tripartite Live Oak military plans, and the Council has before it a
paper on the NATO-Tripartite
relationship. SACEUR's and SACLANT's plans, along with the
appraisal by the Standing Group in consultation with the Military
Committee, have now come before the Council. It yet remains to be seen
how these tripartite and NATO military
actions might fit in relation to each other and to the various
non-military activities that likewise would be part of the overall
strategy seeking to preserve vital Alliance interests.

2. The Council may therefore wish to give attention to what would be my
government's conception of the preferred sequence of military actions in
the event military force must be used in the Berlin situation. It cannot
be too strongly emphasized that the account which follows will always be
subject to the nature of Soviet action, and in this connection the
Allies must be prepared at all times to use nuclear weapons if the
nature of the Soviet response clearly requires their use in accordance
with NATO guidelines on use agreed at
Athens.3

3. In the account which follows, the extensive non-military actions which
would be taken are broadly described merely to cross-reference their
general timing relative to military actions. No attempt has been made to
describe Western reaction if Soviet action should threaten NATO territory or integrity beyond the
point of a Berlin blockade, since it is assumed that present NATO strategy would be applied in such
event.

4. Any attempt to set out a preferred sequence of Western action has to
remain rather general and cannot establish firmly separated categories
and concepts for various phases. Soviet action against Western access to
Berlin can be initiated in various ways whose differing natures would
tend to influence Western reactions to a large degree.

5. Governmental decisions will be necessary for implementation of any of
the military plans at the time. Several factors which bear decisively on
such decisions will remain of uncertain nature and indeterminable
relative weight. Such factors are, for example: Soviet reaction to prior
military and non-military moves in a heightening crisis, the danger of
stimulating uprising and revolt in East Germany or satellite areas, the
state of world and home opinion, and the relative state of Western and
Soviet mobilization.

6. Governments will also have to consider whether steps are necessary to
ensure that the Soviet Union remains in no doubt as to the continued
validity of the existing Western guarantees for West Berlin.

7. The broad, general considerations relating to progress through the
several phases are:

a. There is a compelling necessity for the Allies to succeed in
protecting their vital interests relating to Berlin and to ensure that
this success is recognized in the Free World. They should make clear to
the Soviet Union the enormous risks involved in opposing Allied
communications to Berlin by force. The purpose of Allied operations,
however, should not be to overpower the Soviet Union or to disintegrate
the satellite area, but to make the Soviet government change their
policy on Berlin. Therefore, the Allies should give the Soviet Union
opportunity to draw back and even—without creating the appearance of
failure on our part—help them to cover up this retreat.

b. No military operations after the initial probes would appear
convincing to the Soviet Union unless preceded or accompanied by urgent
Western actions to increase their military strength and readiness for
war. The most effective means of inducing the Soviet Union to change
their policy may be intensive mobilization measures themselves.

c. The Allies should take all practicable advantage of the possibilities
of measures which do not initiate offensive military action before
taking stronger steps. Such measures on the military side might include,
for example, mobilization, build-up and deployment of forces, certain
alert measures, certain maritime and air measures, and, on the
non-military side, economic embargo measures and diplomatic actions.

d. The Allies should take all practicable advantage of the possibilities
of non-nuclear military action before proceeding to the use of nuclear
weapons. This does not necessarily mean the implementation of all
available non-nuclear plans.

Phase I

8. If Soviet/“GDR” administrative or
other action interferes with Berlin access by ground or air the Allies
will initiate action designed to deter Soviet/“GDR” continued or additional interference and, failing
that, to establish the fact that the Soviet Union/“GDR” intends to use force to interfere with
Berlin access.

9. Planning for the appropriate action to meet a variety of contingencies
(interference with air access to Berlin, ranging from minor
administrative harassment to a determined Soviet effort to interdict all
Allied transport; interference with ground access to Berlin, Allied
and/or German; harassments within Berlin) is being conducted among the
four governments.

10. The purpose of such planning is to agree as far as possible in
advance what in each contingency would be the appropriate response and
countermeasures, with final decisions, however, being reserved for
governments at the time, as is normally the case in contingency
planning. This planning is continuous and continuing.

11. It is hoped that a quick and determined Allied response to the
initial Soviet move will deter the Soviets from continued or additional
interference. This proved
to be the case in March 1962 when the Soviets initiated harassments in
the air corridors.

12. If, however, this hope is falsified, and when the degree of
interference reaches a point where continued access is in doubt, an
Allied military probe of Soviet/“GDR”
intentions will be launched without delay. Selected Live Oak plans, such
as Jack Pine, Free Style, and Back Stroke4 (which is
an operation identical with Free Style but conducted from the Berlin end
of the autobahn) will be executed. Any unblocked mode of access would
continue to be used.

13. Control of military operations will remain tripartite, but NATO military and political authorities
will be kept informed and consulted if time permits, and NATO governments would be asked to
undertake appropriate states of vigilance or alert (see OES TS
CTS/62/1).5

14. Western action would either restore access or make it clear that
force is being used by the Soviet Union/“GDR” to deny access to Berlin.

Phase II

15. If the actions under Phase I have shown that force is being used by
the Soviet Union/“GDR” to deny access to
Berlin, the Allies will bring increasing pressure, short of offensive
combat, to bear on the Soviets in an effort to induce them to desist and
re-open access.

16. This phase would be characterized by intense diplomatic activity
(e.g. representations in Moscow, mobilization of world opinion against
the USSR, and any other action which would seem relevant [,(French would
delete) for instance, at the U.N.]6 conducted against the background of
mounting Western pressures. These would include a growing military
build-up; naval measures (national, tripartite, and/or NATO) and air measures; and economic
countermeasures, including repressive measures against Bloc maritime and
air traffic, of ascending intensity up to and including a full embargo,
together with restrictions on the movement of Soviet Bloc nationals and
officials, with the aim ultimately, in this or a later phase, of
isolating the Bloc. The aim of all these measures would be to bring
increasing pressure to bear on the Soviet Union to restore our rights
and vital interests.

17. A major element of military action will be for NATO nations to mobilize and deploy
jointly additional military forces, particularly into the Central
Region, at an accelerating rate, while at the same time rapidly increasing the combat readiness
of all M-Day forces, with the dual purpose
of (1) achieving force levels and states of readiness necessary to the
defense of NATO and the launching of
BERCON/MARCON operations,
and (2) displaying to the Soviets that armed conflict will be the
consequence of continued infringement on vital Allied interests.

18. Any unblocked access to Berlin should continue to be used fully. In
the event of partial or intermittent blockage of air access, the three
Powers would if necessary use fighter escorts in an effort to keep
flights going. Should the risks and loss of aircraft be too great to
warrant further flights unless air operations were deliberately extended
outside the corridors (i.e., beyond Jack Pine operations), NATO would have to face, in the light of
the state of the military build-up and the general situation, the
necessity for taking appropriate measures concerning air access.

19. The length of this phase cannot be forecast since it will depend on
the development of events, notably in the air corridors and in Berlin
itself. If the blockage of Berlin is total, and if the pressures applied
by the Allies lead to violent Soviet response, the Allies may be
compelled to move on the operations envisaged for Phase III. But in the
absence of such compulsion, there are advantages for the Allies in not
moving too early into Phase III, because the growing military build-up
will be a firm demonstration of Allied determination to assert their
rights in Berlin, and this and other Phase II measures need time to have
their impact on the Soviets.

Phase III

20. If, despite Allied actions in Phase II, Berlin access has not been
restored, the time will have come to draw on the catalog of plans “from
which appropriate action would be selected by political authorities in
the light of circumstances and with the aim of applying increasing
pressure which would present with unmistakable clarity to the Soviets
the enormous risks in continued denial of access” (para. 6 (b) of NAC Resolution 104).

21. At the present stage of the NATO
deliberations, there is no question of approving the execution of any
particular plan since it is laid down in para. 8 of the NAC Resolution that “the execution of
approved plans will be the subject of decisions by governments at the
time.” The Council may, however, wish at this stage, in the light of the
Standing Group's appraisal in consultation with the Military Committee,
and in view of the fundamentally political purposes of the military
operations planned, to consider the preferred sequence in which plans
might be implemented.

22. If there is consensus on the general considerations set out in the
introduction to this paper, it would seem to follow, in accordance with
the concept that operations
should be graduated but determined, that the initial operations to be
executed by the Allies in this phase (possibly after a further
appropriate tripartite probe) should be non-nuclear and should not be
open to misinterpretation by the Russians as an attack directed at the
stability of the Soviet satellite empire (notably East Germany) or on
the Soviet nuclear strike capability. Accordingly, the choice would seem
to lie among:

a. Air operations which, though extending outside the corridors, would be
related to reopening air access.

b. Ground operations with limited objectives on one of the main access
routes, with appropriate air support.

c. Intensified maritime control or blockage measures.

d. Some combination of the above.

23. If these operations fail to make the Soviets back down, the courses
of action which might achieve NATO aims
would be to increase conventionally the scope of the action, to add
another action, or to take some form of nuclear action. Without
knowledge of the actual circumstances that would exist in such a
critical situation, it is hardly possible to judge which of these
courses would be chosen at the time. Whichever course is adopted,
general war would be imminent. If the course chosen were conventional
action and this fails to make the Soviet Union back down and has not
precipitated general war, the last remaining pressure to be exerted will
be to resort to some form of nuclear action.

Phase VI

24. Whenever nuclear action were taken, and whether it were
demonstrative, selective, or otherwise, events would have moved into a
new phase, dominated by the nuclear equation.

1 Source: Department
of State, G/PM Files: Lot 59 D 258,
NATO Military Plans. Top
Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. A record of
the discussion of this paper by the Military Sub-Group on September
12, Sub BQD-Military 33, is in the
Washington National Records Center, RG 330, FRC 65 A 3501, 092
Berlin, Germany.

2 Not found.

3 For documentation on the North
Atlantic Council meeting at Athens May 4–6, see volume XIII.

4
Jack Pine was a tripartite plan to maintain air access to Berlin;
Free Style and Back Stroke were tripartite platoon sized probes from
Helmstedt and Berlin, respectively, to determine if the Soviet Union
was prepared to use force to prevent passage of Allied convoys on
the Autobahn. (Memorandum from Nitze to McNamara, I–25251/62, July 20; Washington National
Records Center, RG 330, FRC 66 B 3542, 091 Germany)

5 Not found.

6 Brackets
in the source text.

116. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State116. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, September 17, 1962, 5 p.m.

412. Policy. Paris also for USRO and
McGuire. USAREUR for POLAD. SHAPE for Stoessel and US Element Live Oak. Sov shift Sept
4 to Sandkrug Bridge for Memorial guard transit and return to buses Sept
14 have for time being
corrected troublesome situation which contained constant danger of
incident. At same time Sov attempt to exploit use of armor for
political-psychological reasons in West Berlin has been halted.

More important perhaps is that Allies have regulated a significant
element of Sov activity in West Berlin. On their face the actions the
Sovs have been induced to take have been minor. However, that Allies
have required Sovs to change place of entry and mode of transport for
War Memorial guard is significant. It could put allies in better
position to deal with anticipated period of Sov efforts exports exploit
presence in West Berlin.

Furthermore, Allies' moves presumably have somewhat improved West Berlin
confidence. This regard, difficult to evaluate importance of these
moves, but it is not likely that of themselves they will do more than
reduce the generally negative balance that now exists, or that their
effect will be durable in the face of any further Sov encroachments that
West is unable or unwilling to rebuff.

Return to buses by Sovs puts heavy responsibility on Allies for
preventing even minor attacks by West Berliners on these vehicles.
British have taken elaborate police precautions on route to Memorial for
initial days, and Brandt issued good statement Sept 14 to effect West
Berliners should not make task of Allies difficult by untoward behavior
in this respect. Acid test efficacy of these measures will be next
emotion-laden (Fechter-type) incident.

Explanation for Sov decisions to change crossing point and return to
buses is probably simplest one, namely that issues were not considered
by Sovs as propitious, or as important enough, for making stand which
could clearly have escalated and might even have resulted in their being
denied access to West Berlin entirely. To this degree Sov acquiescence
evidence that they value their presence in West Berlin. In addition, by
insisting that Allied messages re changes be conveyed via CINC channel,
and by emphasizing this aspect in press treatment on crossing point
shift, Sovs undoubtedly hoped drive home point that Allies were forced
to comply practically with recent abolition of office of Sov Commandant
in East Berlin. (That there was no East German publicity about UKMLM call on HQGSFG re APC's may be due to non-involvement East Germans and some
Sov loss of face over issue.)

It must be anticipated that Sovs will exploit these events in future,
perhaps to provide justification for demands of their own re Allied
access to West Berlin. They may furthermore have plans for sector/sector
retaliatory action, such as further limitation in number of crossing
points as rumored here in last few days.

Hulick

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/9–1762. Secret. Repeated to London, Bonn,
Moscow, Paris, USAREUR, and
SHAPE.

117. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson)117. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State
Rusk and the
Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson)1

September 17, 1962, 3:58 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM AMB STEVENSON

Sec returned the call and S said he talked
to the Pres on the boat over the weekend re the proposal of Khrushchev to us about an observer
(UN) in Berlin.2 S said we owe an answer because Gromyko will raise it. S wanted to remind Sec to get someone to work
on it. Pres' reaction and S's are positive
on the whole—might have real merit from our point of view without real
loss if we establish a UN in Berlin as a
whole assuming we can get a good man. Question is he going to be an
observer for all of Berlin or West Berlin with authority to place UN observers in and out and along access
points. Sec does not think the latter comes into it now. S mentioned his having access to East Berlin
and be instructed to inform the SYG on
all aspects etc. Sec thinks now someone could be asked to have a look at
the situation in Berlin for the SYG
without taking on operational functions at this stage. S said yes. Sec said he should report back to
the GA at some point. S mentioned appointing a Swede which they
think will be hard to get etc. S said we
want veto power over this or we can be embarrassed. S wants from the Sec: 1. Shall we go ahead?
2. When? 3. What form of language? Sec mentioned taking it up with
French and Germans. S agreed but said we
should communicate privately with him—we owe him something on it.

[Here follows discussion of the Congo.]

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192. No
classification marking. Stevenson was in New York; Rusk was in Washington.

2 Stevenson had been a guest of
the President at Newport, Rhode Island, September 15–16, for the
America's Cup races.

118. Telegram from the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany118. Telegram from the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, September 18, 1962, 4:19 p.m.

745. Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary. At the President's request,
I spoke privately and very frankly to Erhard last night.2 I told him that the continuing stream
of doubts and suspicions of American motives and intentions emanating
from Europe (latest example Sydney Gruson's story datelined Bonn Sept
16) was having increasingly adverse effect here. I reminded Erhard
forcefully of our extensive commitment to the security of Germany and
Berlin, and of the scale of our financial and military contribution
compared with that of our Allies. I left no doubt that we were getting
mighty tired of the recurring cycle of suspicion, calling for
reassurances which in turn seemed to evaporate rapidly.

Erhard took my blunt remarks in good part and said he understood and
sympathized fully. He added that the current situation did not reflect
feelings of the German people, but was due to particular circumstances
“which would be overcome.” He said he would inform Chancellor and his
colleagues of our talk, and promised he would do his best personally to
ensure that a new note would be heard from Bonn in the future.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/9–1862. Secret. Drafted and initialed by
Tyler and approved by
Rusk.

2 Erhard was in Washington for
the meeting of the International Monetary Fund. A memorandum of his
conversation with Rusk on
September 14, concerning British entry into the Common Market, is in
vol. XIII, Document 49.

3 On September 21 Dowling reported that
Rusk's remarks seemed to
be having some effect as Erhard's arrival statement at Frankfurt and
his projected speech to the Berlin Industries Fair reflected the
Secretary's concern. Dowling added that he had talked to a number of
U.S. correspondents about the problem, and their despatches seemed
to be reflecting a decline in the number of disruptive reports.
(Telegram 872 from Bonn; Department of State, Central Files,
762.0221/9–2162)

119. Memorandum From the Vice President's Military Aide (Burris) to Vice President Johnson119. Memorandum From the Vice President's Military Aide (Burris) to Vice President
Johnson1

Washington, September 18,
1962.

RE

Khrushchev Moves Towards Berlin
Showdown

Information from several sources suggests that Khrushchev has conceived a schedule for
a resolution on his own terms of the Berlin problem. His discussions
with U Thant and with the departing German
Ambassador Kroll are especially
significant.2 Reports
in the press to the effect that nothing is contemplated until after the
November elections is simply a notation of the culmination of the period
of build up and preparation for the event. U Thant reported to Mr. Stevenson that he counseled Khrushchev not to bring the Berlin question before the
U.N., but urged him to continue negotiations within the four-power
framework. He conceded that it might be desirable to bring the Berlin
question before the U.N. at some later date. In this connection
Khrushchev repeated the
Soviet desire to establish U.N. presence in Berlin.

In recent years the Soviets have been known to grossly misinterpret
Western intentions. Khrushchev's
statement to U Thant that President
Kennedy and Macmillan understand the Soviet position on Berlin but
are inhibited from taking action by the necessity to accommodate
Adenauer seems typical of Soviet misinterpretation. On the other hand,
the statement could well be a crude effort to alienate the Allies.
U Thant came away convinced that
Khrushchev will proceed with
the peace treaty, but gained no impression as to timing.

Khrushchev stated quite
emphatically to Kroll just before
he left Moscow that Soviet actions leading to the separate peace treaty
will begin soon and in time to permit recourse to the U.N. if such
action appears appropriate or necessary. He stated that action would be
initiated soon to prepare public opinion for the separate treaty, the
plan for which is complete. Khrushchev noted that the treaty which has been drawn up
will render continued Western occupation of Berlin impossible.

In what might be another Soviet misinterpretation, Khrushchev has come to the conclusion
that Western leaders have proven themselves so anxious to avoid conflict
that they will accept the treaty and accommodate themselves to it.
Nevertheless, he has made the observation that he will take the matter
to the United Nations if Western actions present to him an unacceptable
risk of war. In any case, Khrushchev appears to have concluded after years of
talking and pressuring the Allies, coupled with often brazen threats of
force, that he can now, with impunity, achieve his avowed purpose and
seal another country, including the City of Berlin, within the Communist
Bloc. Whether or not the West intends basically to permit this to occur,
it has at least permitted Khrushchev to come to the conclusion that he can now
proceed with his plan. More resolute actions all along the line—often
avoided out of ostensible fear of precipitating conflict or even angry
reaction—would certainly have avoided that which appears inevitable. Our
diplomats and certain political appointees seem unable or unwilling to
accept the fact that it is impossible to negotiate politely with the
Soviets on an issue like Berlin. The Russians traditionally, and
especially the Communists more recently, understand and respond only to
recognized strength and willingness to apply it, and to firmly and
clearly stated intentions to do so in support of national policy or
position.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Vice
President's Security Files, Col. Burris' Reports. Secret.

2 U Thant had visited Moscow at the end
of August. Thompson reported on September 14 that following a
lengthy conversation with Khrushchev, Kroll was convinced that the Soviet Union planned to
sign a peace treaty with East Germany shortly after the U.S.
elections. Kroll told
Thompson that Khrushchev did not seem to believe
Western assertions that it would defend its position in West Berlin
even at the risk of war. (Telegram 672 from Moscow, September 14;
Department of State, Central Files, 601.62A61/9–1462) For Kroll's account of this final
meeting with Khrushchev, see
Lebenserinnerungen eines Botschafters, pp. 571–575.

120. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Embassy in Germany120. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Embassy in Germany1

Berlin, September 25, 1962, 8 p.m.

407. Paris also for USRO and McGuire.
USAREUR for POLAD. SHAPE for Stoessel and US Element Live Oak. Ref: USCINCEUR ECJCO 9–14604/14 Sept (not
sent all addees).2 Mission
understands that consideration being given by CINCEUR to desirability withdrawing
battle group which has augmented Berlin garrison since August 61. It is
our further understanding that in this consideration account being taken of political and
psychological factors which basic to this issue. Purpose this message is
to stress this point and the risk attached to any attempt to plan
reduction at particular point in future on assumption that conditions
then would permit it.

When battle group moved to Berlin in August 61 it was recognized
subsequent withdrawal would pose problems. Move however had definite
(and principally psychological) purpose which it by and large achieved.
Mission believes withdrawal battle group under conditions of great
uncertainty as to Sov intention re Berlin would be most unwise. In light
of past experience such move could be interpreted by important segments
of public and governmental opinion in West Berlin, the FRG and other NATO countries as a sign of US weakness on Berlin issue. At
very least it would raise serious questions in minds of Berliners as to
American intentions. Danger also exists that unintentional disclosure
plans could prove exceedingly embarrassing.

Mission believes that consideration should not be given to withdrawing
battle group unless a reasonably long period of calm has existed in
Berlin, or else when something positive could be gained from withdrawal,
for example as forthcoming gesture in connection with settlement of the
Berlin issue. Fact that it may be long time before these conditions
exist must be accepted.

General Watson concurs.3

Hulick

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/9–2562. Secret. Repeated to the Department of
State, London, Moscow, Paris, SHAPE, and USAREUR.
The source text is the Department of State copy.

2 Not found.

3 On September 25 the Embassy in Moscow
strongly supported these views, stating that withdrawal at the
present time would likely be interpreted by the Soviet Union as a
weakening of U.S. intentions with respect to Berlin. (Telegram 757;
Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–2562) In telegram 1503
from Paris, also September 25, SHAPE commented that although there had been some
tentative thinking about the possibility of terminating the Berlin
garrison augmentation, this had not gone beyond the exploratory
stage. (Ibid.) ECJCO 9–14604 had merely been an inquiry on how the
reorganization might be handled with no dates mentioned.

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations121. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and European Regional Organizations1

Washington, September 25, 1962, 7:57 p.m.

Topol 399. Deliver Finletter 8 am Sept. 26. You may convey to NAC following Department assessment.

TASS statement September 112 postponing further
pressure for negotiations until after US November elections indicates
Soviets apparently deferring separate peace treaty signature for several
months. Likely they contemplate some further discussions on Berlin
problem before actually signing treaty, which in turn would postpone
treaty action sometime beyond November. Department does not believe this
postponement excludes interim Soviet unilateral action on local Berlin
scene designed to achieve further de facto changes prior to eventual
peace treaty but probably does preclude major steps likely to entail
serious risks. Limited infringement on Allied access to Berlin, attempts
to involve GDR in control of Allied
access, harassment of local helicopter flights in Berlin Control Zone,
or maneuvers designed to affect West Berlin morale as vital ingredient
of economic viability of city still possibilities at moment.

Intelligence sources indicate existence of various bloc security
preparations scheduled for completion between September and November.
Preparations appear such as could be utilized either to implement
individual measures designed to heighten tensions considerably, or to
cope with tensions resulting from moves up to and including peace
treaty. However, although preparations are being made and planning
deadline may exist (reportedly November) current Soviet and bloc
military posture does not indicate anticipation of any imminent steps
which might be expected to provoke violent Western countermeasures.

In any event Soviet willingness revert to bus transport for WM guards September 14 suggests Moscow
opposed to exacerbation of Berlin situation at moment. However Soviets
may also believe they have established principle of CINC channel for Berlin matters with this
episode and thereby maneuvered West into tacit acceptance of abolition
Soviet Kommandatura in East Berlin. Kommandatura abolition thus far
represents only demonstrative alteration of certain institutional
aspects Berlin status but Soviets may now be encouraged attempt
additional de facto changes
implicit in measure (e.g. Allied dealings with GDR in East Berlin).

Recent indications point to Soviet consideration of UNGA as suitable vehicle for exerting
pressure on West to be more forthcoming in negotiations. Furthermore
Assembly could provide Soviets with forum for presenting their case and
for ascertaining reaction of or influencing UN members. Possibility also exists Soviets may be
contemplating UN initiative after some
unilateral Berlin move in order deter Western countermeasures. However
Soviets still appear undecided about raising Berlin issue in UN probably because they doubt UN can be confined to mere discussion
without bringing about direct UN
interference in Berlin and German question. September 5 Soviet note3 blaming Berlin tensions
exclusively on Western Powers and West Germans, without venturing
serious proposals for alleviating tensions, suggests preparation of case
for public record. Such approach would be logical preliminary if UN involvement under consideration. But it
is likely Moscow will in fact wait as long as possible before final
decision on taking issue to UN. In any
event if Khrushchev were to come to New York to present Berlin or other
issue to GA, Department believes his
major interest would be summit meeting with President
Kennedy on Berlin rather than UN debate.

Summarizing, Department believes Soviets at present in a phase of Berlin
policy in which they are exerting pressure and maneuvering to bring
about what they would regard as remunerative negotiations while
simultaneously strengthening position in Berlin to put them in more
advantageous situation for later action preempting some changes inherent
in peace treaty.

FYI. Dept. has noted Polto 253.4 Material on
Western response to peace treaty, which authorized for distribution
NAC year ago and on which NAC has not commented, presently undergoing
minor revisions. As soon as this process completed material will again
be submitted to NAC for discussion and
comments.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/9–2562. Secret; Priority; Limited
Distribution. Drafted by Mautner (BTF); cleared by Anderson, RPM, and INR; and approved by Cash. Repeated to Berlin and pouched to Moscow,
London, and Bonn.

2 For text of the TASS statement, see Pravda or
Izvestiia, September 12, 1962.

3 For text of the Soviet note, see Pravda, September 6, 1962, or Izvestiia, September 7, 1962. Extracts are
printed in American Foreign Policy: Current
Documents, 1962, p. 720.

4 Polto 253, September 5, reported that the
Belgian Permanent Representative had stressed the “absolute
necessity” for the North Atlantic Council to consult as soon as
possible on Berlin contingency plans and the philosophy behind them.
(Department of State, Central Files, 375/9–562)

122. Memorandum of Conversation122. Memorandum of Conversation1

Berlin, September 25,
1962.

SUBJECT

Conference at Berlin City Hall

PARTICIPANTS

Berlin

Governing Mayor Brandt

Mayor Amrehn

Senator for Economics, Dr. Schiller

Senator for Federal Affairs, Mr. Schutz

United States

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Dowling

General Watson

Mr. Hulick

Mayor Brandt started the
conversation by expressing his appreciation for Mr. Bundy's visit. Mr. Bundy responded by stating that Berlin
was today the most important place in the world; and that he was glad to
have this opportunity to see the Mayor just before his trip to the
United States. He indicated that the President very much hoped that the
Mayor would be able to come to Washington for a talk with the President.
(In a brief meeting with the press following the conference, Mr.
Bundy confirmed that, in
addition to seeing the Secretary, the Mayor would also be seeing the
President.) Mayor Brandt then
outlined the itinerary of his U.S. visit as follows: Saturday, Sunday,
and Monday (September 29 through October 1) he would be in New York,
conferring with the Ford Foundation on Sunday on the latter's
contribution to the viability program, and on Monday with General
Clay; Tuesday and Wednesday
he would spend at Harvard for his lectures. He indicated he would come
to Washington on Thursday morning and would be available to see the
President until Friday afternoon, when he was scheduled to depart on his
return flight to Berlin.

Mr. Bundy expressed the admiration
of the President, his Administration, and the people of the United
States, for the determination and intelligence with which the Berliners
and their Government leaders were managing their affairs under such
trying circumstances.

Ambassador Dowling then asked the
Mayor what possible actions he anticipated from the Ulbricht regime over
the next few months. Mayor Brandt
stated that indications had recently been received from the East German
regime that some arrangements in the trade field could bring some
amelioration of a humanitarian nature with respect to the problem of
movement of persons within Berlin. On the trade side, the East was not
pressing now for the original credit, but seeking an agreement to
increase the swing within the present IZT agreement. Mayor Brandt indicated that in his recent discussion with the
Chancellor, they had reached agreement to explore this matter in a
positive manner to see if the East German regime was serious, and, in
exchange for an increase in the IZT swing, would agree to procedures to
bring separated families together and to permit visits to take place.
For this purpose they are prepared to give Mr. Leopold an additional authorization as a
negotiator to work out an agreement facilitating movement of people.

Mayor Brandt then outlined three
other subjects which he had discussed with the Chancellor. The first
dealt with the question of a plebiscite in West Berlin. Admitting that
when this was first suggested a year ago the Berlin authorities had not
been enthusiastic from the timing point of view, he indicated that they
now believed a carefully tailored referendum-type plebiscite could be
very helpful. Brandt indicated that they have a plebiscite law ready;
and that all they need is agreement on exactly the right questions to be
asked. He indicated that their present thinking was that the questions
put to a vote should bring out the unquestioning desire of the Berliners
to (1) confirm once and for all Berlin's existing ties and relations to
the Federal Republic, and (2) the continued presence of the three Allied
Powers in Berlin. Elaborating on the first point, the Mayor stated it
was necessary to do something which would underline the fact that the
links of Berlin to the Federal Republic exist not because of some
article in a constitution, with respect to which the Allies have had to
maintain reservations, but as something which reflects a living and
vital element of self determination on the part of the West Berliners.
He also indicated his conviction and that of his colleagues, based on
their frequent talks with representatives of the important non-aligned
nations, that the wartime agreements, now seventeen years old, were no
longer satisfactory or convincing as a basis to obtain their support for
the maintenance of Berlin's ties to the Federal Republic and continued
presence of the three Allied Powers; and that a new and convincing basis
had to be found. He indicated his belief that a popular referendum
dealing with these two questions could produce this new basis, which
would be more convincing from an international point of view in UN discussions and elsewhere.

Mayor Brandt indicated that the
second subject on which he and the Chancellor had reached agreement was
that of making the Wall and the inhuman Communist actions connected therewith a matter of great
international confrontation. The Mayor indicated that they have received
what they consider to be reliable information to the effect that
Khrushchev has instructed
Ulbricht to be more careful and to avoid creating incidents along the
wall. He said he and the Chancellor were agreed that pressure should be
maintained on the Ulbricht regime to this end, stating that as a first
step the Federal Republic would soon be publishing a White Book. He
expressed the hope that the Allied Governments would support this
campaign with actions of their own.

Mayor Brandt stated that the third
item of discussion, on which he and the Chancellor held different views,
concerned the question of whether GDR
harassment of German civilian access might be expected in the coming
months. He reported the Chancellor as being more optimistic than he,
that because of the Ulbricht regime's economic situation, harassing of
German access was unlikely. Brandt said that he was not convinced of
this; and that in his view it was an urgent matter to determine with the
Allies at exactly what point GDR
harassment of German civilian access would be considered unacceptable
and what specific measures would be applied to counteract such actions.
He stated the Germans will take on their full share of the burden; that
they regard this as an extremely important question; but that they were
genuinely concerned that the discussions so far in the Four-Power
Steering Group in Washington have led to the idea of invoking a policy
of self denial and blockade too soon. He said a blockade raises many
problems, especially a breakdown of Berlin industry and a severe adverse
popular psychological reaction which would be much more serious than in
1948, since Berlin had now reached a much higher standard of living. He
indicated his strong desire to have the Allies, in conjunction with
Berlin and Federal Republic officials, reach an agreement on a clear
definition of what the common goal would be in the event of self-denial
and a blockade, coupled with forthright and convincing counter-measures
by the Western powers to achieve this goal. He stated it was not a
convincing position to say that preservation of everything as it exists
(the status quo) is sufficient and acceptable. He said we must return to
demanding something new and concrete to really guarantee free German
access. Referring to the Jessup-Malik solution of 1949,2 he said this was not specific or concrete enough,
having dealt more with broad principles.

Mayor Amrehn at this point asked
whether new negotiations between the President and Khrushchev were pending. Mr. Bundy responded by saying there was
nothing new about such a meeting to his knowledge and the matter rested as indicated by the
President in his recent press conference statement3 to the effect that if Khrushchev comes to the United States
for the General Assembly, the President would be willing to see him,
just as he would any other head of state or prime minister. If such a
meeting should materialize, Mr. Bundy stated that what Mayor Brandt had been saying would be more rather than less
important, especially with respect to the trade negotiations and the
idea of a referendum. With respect to the referendum, as outlined by the
Mayor, Mr. Bundy indicated it
would be important to have the support of the free expression of the
Berliners' position on the points mentioned in any future talks or
negotiations with the Soviet leaders.

Mayor Amrehn stated that after the
U.S. elections in November, Berlin would probably face a new critical
situation. Mr. Bundy responded by
saying that the whole question of Berlin depends upon the will of the
Berliners. He commented that the counter-measures taken to meet the
Soviet harassment in the air corridors in February and March seemed to
have been just about right. He said it will not always be easy to
develop effective counter-measures; and that we must be ready to take on
the responsibility of effective counter-measures rapidly. Coming back to
the question of German access rights, Mayor Amrhen asked whether or not
a new codification of these rights would be ready soon. He expressed his
belief that the details must be nailed down. Referring to the occasional
arrests which occur on the autobahn, Mayor Amrehn stated that one of the newest harassing
restrictions introduced by the GDR on
the autobahn from Berlin to Hamburg was to stipulate that the trip must
be completed within a period of four to four and one half hours, and a
restriction of halting enroute to the four designated stopping places.
Mayor Amrehn insisted that a
definite point must be fixed beyond which all agreed the viability of
Berlin will be adversely affected. He added that Berlin authorities had
some difficulty with the word viability as being too general as a
concept to cover adequately the Berliners' vital interest in access and
their ties to the Federal Republic.

Governing Mayor Brandt then
referred to the difficulties of last month with respect to the death of
PETER FECHTER and the Soviet War Memorial Guards. He expressed the hope
that it was understood in the White House that there was nothing serious
to back up the news reports regarding a breakdown in morale and
confidence in the United States. He said the people were worried, to be
sure, but that the majority were in their factories and in their homes,
as normal. The demonstrations were conducted largely by young people,
the majority of whom hold to the same beliefs and positions as the Mayor does, but on this occasion
expressed them differently than he would have. He said the main trouble
stemmed from a minority of bad elements among the youth. He felt he had
to handle the demonstrations in the way he had, with some delay in
introducing severe police measures, so as not to antagonize the majority
of the young people and turn them against him and the Allies by giving
them the impression that he and the city authorities were placing them
in the same category as the small minority of bad actors.

Mr. Bundy stated no one in the
White House had the feeling that matters had gotten out of hand; that
there was agreement that the measures taken seemed to be adequate to
cope with the situation. He stressed that there was complete
understanding for the political problem of management involved in the
situation and that there was full recognition for the courage Mayor
Brandt's government had shown
in the end. He indicated the President had full understanding for the
reaction of the young people and recognized that it was necessary and
proper for them to show their feelings under the severe provocations. He
concluded by stating that one must be ready in the future for new
incidents and be prepared to act more rapidly.

With respect to making more concrete proposals for guaranteeing
unhindered German civilian access, Mr. Bundy agreed this was important. At the same time, he
said, we must all recognize that the Soviets are not interested in
agreeing to anything like this. He took this occasion to stress the
necessity for our being frank with one another. He said Berlin
authorities should speak up when they think actions are required; and
that we must be sure that we have the closest means of communication
between Berlin and Washington. He stated that the two most important
focal points were Berlin and Washington; that while one naturally had to
take into account the views and positions of others (the Federal
Republic, Paris and London), they were, in the final analysis, secondary
compared to having the clearest understanding between the leaders in
Berlin and Washington, who were the most directly involved (should a
serious showdown, with all its implications, occur, was implied but not
stated).

With respect to the plebiscite (referendum), Mr. Bundy indicated this might have some
value, particularly if toward the end of the General Assembly the Berlin
question was thrown into the debate. If such a referendum were held, he
suggested it might be of value to have observers, such as the Indians,
present, and that a free expression of the West German population on the
questions suggested might be of some negotiation value in subsequent
talks by either the Secretary with Gromyko or the President with Khrushchev.

Ambassador Dowling asked the Mayor
whether he thought further actions by the Ulbricht regime or the Soviets
would be more likely to come
before or after conclusion of a separate peace treaty. Mayor Brandt expressed his belief it was more
likely they would come piece by piece before conclusion of a peace
treaty. Mr. Bundy then inquired
how this might affect the timing of a plebiscite. Mayor Brandt said he thought it made the
holding of a plebiscite more urgent and that one might think of holding
it in November, after the American congressional elections.

Mayor Brandt then turned to the
question of internal problems. He said these were not too serious; that
the manpower situation had achieved recently an encouraging balance; and
that there were slightly more people coming in than going out of Berlin,
the influx being predominantly of the younger generation. Senator
Schiller stated that the rate of investment in Berlin was slightly lower
than that in the Federal Republic; that there was no inflationary
problem; that Berlin productivity had improved; but that there was
presently a cautious waiting attitude obtaining with regard to new
investments in Berlin.

Mayor Brandt concluded by stating
that the decision making machinery was very important and that one could
not avoid feeling that it takes too long to reach decisions in order to
cope with serious developments. Mr. Bundy took this occasion to refer to the S-Bahn situation as posing a serious problem.
Within this context, he supported the Mayor's action in stressing
publicly the importance of the three power status and rights in West
Berlin.

The conference was concluded by Mayor Brandt passing to Mr. Bundy the greetings of President Luebke and the latter's
desire to meet with Mr. Bundy for
an hour or so at Wahn airport enroute to Cadenabbia, if this proved
feasible for Mr. Bundy.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret. Drafted and initialed by
Hulick on September 28.
A note on the source text indicates that it was not cleared with
Bundy. Bundy visited Berlin September
25–26 as part of a trip to Europe. Additional documentation on the
trip is ibid., Trips and Conferences Series, McGeorge Bundy Trip to
Europe.

2 For text of Jessup-Malik agreement, May 5, 1949,
see Foreign Relations, 1949, vol. III,
p. 751.

3 For a transcript of the President's news conference
on August 22, see Public Papers of the Presidents
of the United States: John F.
Kennedy, 1962, pp. 631–639.

123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany123. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, September 25, 1962, 9:21 p.m.

827. Priority—deliver 8 a.m. Eyes only for the Ambassador from Kaysen.
FYI. The President requests that you
call Globke and convey to him orally the following
message with the request that in turn he convey it personally to the
Chancellor at Cadenabbia as soon as possible. You may add whatever you
think is appropriate in the way of reassurance that the number of people
in the U.S. Government who are now aware of the situation is still
limited and will remain so as long as possible. End FYI.

The President wishes the Chancellor to know of a potentially troublesome
matter that has just come to his attention.

In the course of investigating the activities of registered agents acting
for foreign governments in the United States, the staff of a Senatorial
committee has come into the possession of an exchange of teletype
messages, dated in October 1961, between General Julius Klein and Mr.
Julius Epstein, who was at that time in the employ of General Klein. In these messages, General Julius
Klein reported that during a conversation in the Chancellor's office he
was shown three cables sent by the German representatives in Washington
and Paris to the Foreign Office. From the teletype it appears that
General Klein, with the excuse
that he could not read German rapidly, asked and received the
Chancellor's permission to take the cables to his hotel for more careful
study. Before returning them the following morning, General Klein had photostatic copies made for
his own purposes. The teletype to Epstein sets forth the text of the
three cables verbatim and uncoded. These cables were No. 1007 of October
5, 1961, from the German NATO
Delegation in Paris to the Foreign Office, and Nos. 2712 and 2714 of
October 8, 1961, from the Germany Embassy here to Bonn.

When these teletypes came into the possession of the Senatorial
committee, a member of the staff of that committee realized that these
cables formed the basis of the articles that have recently appeared in
Rheinische Merkur and Der Spiegel. These articles were written by the
same Julius Epstein to whom the teletypes were addressed. Epstein is no
longer in General Klein's
employment.

The cables contain a detailed account of discussions between the Four
Powers following the President's conversation with Foreign Minister
Gromyko. This account is
reproduced almost word for word in the articles, although with a greatly
distorted emphasis.

In view of the fact that the staff of a Congressional committee now know
the source of these articles, the Chancellor's relations to the whole
story may become public at any time. As is well known, the U.S.
President cannot control the actions of the legislative branch. Further,
so many people are involved in the proceedings of the committee that the
risk of public disclosure is great.

The President, of course, is concerned that, in the event of a public
disclosure, the matter should be handled on this side in such a way as
to minimize its effects. He
will do what he can, and would appreciate having by a private channel,
if possible, any suggestions on this.

The President regrets that the Chancellor should be troubled by such
matters at a time when together the Chancellor and he are carrying such
a heavy burden of world problems.2

Ball

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/9–2562. Top Secret; Priority; No Other
Distribution. Drafted and approved by Kaysen. Repeated to Copenhagen eyes only for
Bundy, who was en route
from Berlin. The situation described in this telegram had been
discussed by Rusk and
Ball and Schroeder and Bundy on September 24 and by
Ball and Kaysen (twice) and Kaysen and Bundy on September 25 before
arriving at the decision to approach Globke on the problem. For a record of the Kaysen-Bundy telephone conversation, see Declassified
Documents, 1982, 1351; records of the other telephone conversations
are in Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192.

2 On
September 27 Dowling gave
Globke the President's
message, emphasizing that Kennedy was bringing
this unpleasant matter to the Chancellor's attention because of
their friendship. Globke
suggested that Adenauer might
wish to write to some of the Senators on the committee, and
Dowling told him this
might be helpful. (Telegram 917 from Bonn; ibid., Central Files,
762.00/9–2762) On receipt of Dowling's telegram, Kaysen called him to say that letters from the
Chancellor might cause further confusion. (Memorandum for the
record, September 27; Declassified Documents, 1982, 1352) On
September 28 Dowling passed
this on to Globke, who
reported that he too had been at a loss to devise an appropriate
basis for such letters. (Telegram 929 from Bonn, September 28;
Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–2862)

124. Editorial Note124. Editorial Note

On September 28 Secretary of Defense McNamara, who had just returned to Washington from a
2-day inspection trip in West Germany, stated at a press conference that
the Berlin situation, in military terms, was the most severe since
actual combat operations during the Korean war. McNamara then stated that Khrushchev's insistence on a peace
treaty with East Germany and the consequent restriction of U.S. rights
in Berlin made the situation critical. To be sure that there were no
illusions in the Soviet Union, McNamara noted the United States would “utilize whatever
weapons are needed to preserve our vital interests. Quite clearly, we
consider access to Berlin a vital interest.” For extracts from the press
conference, see The New York Times, September 29, 1962.

125. Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy125. Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy1

Moscow, undated.

[Here follow 7–1/2 pages on the cessation of nuclear testing.]

I believe that you, Mr. President, like me realize that until a
reasonable solution is reached on West Berlin this source will always
make our relations feverish. And under present circumstances we do not
see any other way out but to sign a German peace treaty. On this basis
it would be possible with no loss to the prestige of either side to
solve the problem of West Berlin too, to guarantee, as you say, the
freedom of the population of West Berlin by stationing there for some
not very long time a certain number of symbolic troops under the UN flag. It would seem, what can be more
reasonable, if there is a desire to actually reach an agreement and
eliminate the hot-beds that from time to time make our relations
feverish and sometimes bring them to the red-hot glow.

If there is somebody who is interested in preserving those hot-beds then
such interest stems from nothing else but a desire to prevent by all
means the normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and the
U.S. And I say straightforwardly that it is, of course, Adenauer who is interested in that in
the first place. By no means is he motivated by good intentions. The
Hitlerite Germany lost the war with all the ensuing consequences. Its
plans to expand “lebensraum” at the expense of other states ended in
failure. This should be recognized once and for all. In fact, that is
what the United States, Britain, France, the Soviet Union and other
countries fought for against the Hitlerite Germany. Why then should you
and we now reckon with the revanchist strivings of the FRG and even encourage them delaying
indefinitely the conclusion of a German peace treaty and preserving the
present indefinite situation, fraught with danger? After all it is the
absence of a peace treaty that feeds the hopes of aggressive revanchist
circles in West Germany for a possibility to revise the results of World
War II.

Now in all countries there are more and more people who think of and are
concerned with the destinies of the world and who seek not to let it
escalate to war. They more and more clearly understand that it is
impossible to postpone any further the conclusion of a German peace
treaty and to preserve the present dangerous situation.

During my conversations on all those questions with your Ambassador
Thompson I told him that we
are ready to take into consideration the circumstances that you are
finding yourself in in connection with preparation for congressional
elections. Such, evidently, are “traditions” in the United States that in the course of election
struggle they forget, carried away by passions, about common sense and
begin playing with fire, competing in saying more and louder absurd
things that sow danger of world war. In order not to play in such
conditions a role of some third force breaking from outside into this
struggle between the competing parties we decided to put the German
problem, so to say, on ice until the end of the elections. We had in
mind that after elections we would resume the dialogue. We were under
the impression that we would meet an understanding on the part of the
American side, all the more that on many questions relating to German
peace settlement a certain rapprochement of our positions has already
been achieved that gives hope for a possibility of an agreement.

The only question on which the difference between us still remains is, as
we believe, that of the presence of foreign troops in West Berlin. And
even not the question of the presence of troops as such because on that
we have already made a step in your direction, but only the question—the
troops of what countries will be stationed there. You insist that the
occupation troops of the U.S., Britain and France continue to stay in
West Berlin. But that would not normalize the situation even after the
signing of a peace treaty because the main source of friction between
our countries—the use of West Berlin under the cover of occupation
regime as a NATO base—would remain
unremoved. That is why we considered and continue to consider that the
best thing under the circumstances would be to station in West Berlin
the UN troops. To stabilize the situation
in Europe it would be also reasonable to have both German states—the
GDR and the FRG—admitted to the UN, so
that they normalize at last relations between each other and with other
states—members of the UN.

Such is our position. I stated it in detail to Ambassador Thompson who, evidently, informed you
about it.

[Here follow 6 pages on Cuba and a U-2
flight over Sakhalin.]

Therefore I would ask you to correctly understand our anxiety and not to
do anything that could further aggravate the atmosphere and even explode
the world. We on our part again say to you that we will do nothing with
regard to West Berlin until the elections in the U.S. After the
elections, apparently in the second half of November, it would be
necessary in our opinion to continue the dialogue. Of great importance
for finding the ways to solve both this problem and other pressing
international problems are personal contacts of statesmen on the highest
level. I think that if we, persons entrusted with great confidence and
bearing enormous responsibility, constantly feel this responsibility, we
will have to come to the realization of the necessity of reaching an
agreement on West Berlin to eliminate this dangerous hot-bed which
spoils our relations all the time.

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Khrushchev Correspondence. No
classification marking. The full text is printed in volume
VI.

126. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State126. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

New York, September 29, 1962, midnight.

Secto 58. Paris for USRO. Following
based on uncleared memcon.2
Secretary saw Brandt together with
Senat info officer Bahr evening
September 30 for one hour 15 minutes. Practically entire discussion
centered on Berlin.

In response to Sec's question Brandt expressed thought that morale was not too bad in
Berlin. Referring to Aug. riots and to criticism of Western powers
published by some newspapers, Mayor said this was partly due to
misunderstanding of what four-power status is, i.e. difference between
four-power status based on agreements in regard to all Berlin and
three-power commitments to West Berlin. This was not clear enough to
Berlin and German people. It was not clear to them that sector wall was
limit to guarantees.

In response Sec said in reality limit is what has come to be power to
act. Assertion four-power rights can become very important, for
instance, if Berlin question introduced into UN. We cannot accept talking solely about West Berlin and
this we have always emphasized in our talks with Gromyko. True, steps were taken in 1948
and 1955 which removed any effective Western voice in happenings in east
Berlin and east Germany.

Brandt said he would like to
discuss:

1. Morale in city, and

2. Plebiscite.

Morale in city would be immensely helped if it would be possible to reach
some arrangements with east Germans to counteract most inhumane aspects
of wall. He had had 4-hour talk last week with Adenauer and they had just had new
information from east Germans in discussing trade that perhaps they
would be willing to discuss “other things” though they denied any
connection or relation to trade. east Germans inferred they had approval
of “great ally”. This discussion on trade did not involve credits as
previously proposed but larger swing in existing trade. Brandt favors extension greater swing
and this will be discussed through Leopold-Behrendt channel.

Brandt expressed hope “other
things” which east Germans might concede would be permission unite or
bring closer divided families (a subject already being discussed through
the Red Cross), permission for older people to join families even though
not bound by closest blood relationship and finally permission West
Berliners visit their relatives in east Berlin. There was another idea
which West Berliners had discussed among themselves, namely proposal to
establish visiting centers where relatives might visit for two or three
hours at a time. Such centers might be established on sector border or
in exclaves. Brandt apparently
does not favor this idea referring to this as “prison conditions”. He
does not expect very much out of this but said possible church leaders
in east Germany could maintain some links with West.

Brandt said Leopold would be authorized discuss
greater swing balance by letter from erhard and “other things” such as
movement of people by letter from Brandt and perhaps letter from Globke authorizing talks on all
technical matters. Brandt said
this was delicate matter and would be skating on thin ice but Chancellor
knows about this. Sec commented that if by using this channel easements
of this sort could be worked out, it should be tried even though it will
not solve main problem.

Turning to plebiscite, Brandt said
when Adenauer had brought up this
idea in past, he had not favored it. expressed opinion it might be
useful rather soon have word from West Berliners. It would be good for
psychological reasons to have West Berliners expressing their own views
instead of others expressing views on their behalf. He had mentioned
this to Bundy3 and also to the three Deputy Commandants. Could
propose referendum for whole Berlin which, if refused, could be applied
in West Berlin requesting vote on (a) continued Allied presence and (b)
maintainance existing links with Bonn. Brandt thought plebiscite on these questions could play
important role politically and morally.

Secretary said he agreed in one respect, i.e., if Berlin question comes
before UN or if there is harsh
confrontation with Soviets, one of our strongest points would be to say
“ask the people involved.” When this idea had first been talked about
between the President and Adenauer, there had been newspaper leaks and it was deemed
not advisable to proceed. However, timing was important question.
Khrushchev may or may not
come in November. Question whether vote might be held before he comes or
later will need careful consideration. In short, the question was when
do you play this card. In response to Secretary's question, Brandt said they would need three
weeks after decision taken to hold plebiscite, actually to carry out
vote.

Brandt then said he would like to
touch on another idea. The Russians have been talking much about Berlin
as a NATO base and asserting that Bonn
cannot have any say in West Berlin. He wanted to ask whether we could go
back to the 1955 agreements on FRG
independence and examine again annexes how FRG relations with West Berlin could be defined.4 The Secretary remarked that
we would have to look into this in detail before he could comment. (Sec
suggests Dept. officers may wish discuss this point in more detail with
Brandt when he visits Washington toward end week.)

Secretary said he wanted to make one point in regard to Allied vs.
civilian access to West Berlin. While we do not see in existing
agreements clear rights for civilian access, we have insisted in all our
talks with Soviets that civilian access goes hand in hand with our own
rights for access. Although there is perhaps theoretical difference, we
have supposed that in certain circumstances we should have to
incorporate civilian traffic into ours as exercise of our full rights.
We cannot accept shut-off or close-down of civilian traffic.

Brandt observed difficulty was
people do not have clear definition of what is meant by three points
Western vital interests: Allied presence, access to Berlin and
viability. Asked whether we could not put down on paper clear definition
of what is meant by these three points. Cited difficulties arising if
east Germans suddenly introduced visa requirement and pointed out they
could do this in various ways by which many people in Germany or outside
would not really understand import. Brandt had impression four-power group in Washington had
been “going too fast” on ground access measures while relying more on
air access. Thought it perhaps not good to talk too much on
countermeasures.

Sec expressed thought that principal support for expanded civil access to
Berlin lies in self-interest of other side in trade agreements.
Brandt thought this was true
only to certain degree since if Khrushchev made a political decision to go ahead then he
would have already taken into account economic countermeasures. Sec
remarked Khrushchev had other
things to worry about too. Soviet bloc has annual trade of four and half
billion with OeCD countries. Khrushchev has said to recent visitors
that after signing peace treaty he would cut off military access. If he
does there would be “roaring crisis” but it is possible Soviets first
target will be military access.

Brandt raised question whether
West has given sufficient answer to Soviets at this session GA. He agreed we must not do anything to
bring UN into the question at this time.
But many friends from non-aligned countries had asked what they could do
for West Berlin, for instance, Malayans on recent visit asked what they
might do for Brandt in New York. Sec said he would like to state in
extreme confidence that UN relation to
Berlin problem was point of difference between US, French and FRG. When it was question involving US in
war, our policy was to give great deal of attention to UN. UN is one
reason why we are not isolationists. De
Gaulle and Adenauer
had allergy to UN and thus we have
reached no common view though under certain contingencies there was
general agreement we would go to UN. Sec
again emphasized confidential nature his comments.

Brandt stated Adenauer attitude toward America much
better than even month ago. Sec added our principal burden is
psychological. Some people seem think that unless we repeat every month
our assurances, they lose meaning. On the other hand, we believe
constant repetition inflates words and they become cheap. Sec
complimented Brandt on response to
press inquiry he had not come to obtain additional assurances, “we don't
need assurances.” This was best thing Brandt could have said.

Brandt asked whether in future
talks with Soviets we might consider proposing talks at Ambassadorial
level in Bonn between three Western Ambassadors and Soviet colleague.
Soviet officials on cocktail circuit in Berlin had inferred this might
be acceptable idea. Brandt added
that at some point experts from east and West Germany could join in
discussion technical matters. Sec said he would be glad to look into
this idea. If there were a meeting between President and Khrushchev this suggestion might help
save Khrushchev's prestige.

Brandt then referred to his
forthcoming lectures at Harvard which would be mainly concerned with
european integration. He would say something on Berlin and since one or
two things might be critical he would like to tell the Sec beforehand.
He would make point welfare Berlin was more important than wall and
hence in present circumstances they could not encourage disturbances or
revolt in east Germany. However, there was one exception, if there were
military attack against West Berlin he could not ask east Germans to
remain quiet. Sec agreed.

In subsequent discussion whether east German Armed Forces reliable and
would fight against Western forces or against FRG forces, question arose re contingency planning for
actions to be taken in east Germany if and when access was blocked. (Sec
asked Department consider possibility briefing Brandt more fully on contingency
planning this point.)

Info Officer Bahr remarked
difficult understand when access problem would arise, for instance,
would it be when passports or visas required. Sec said FRG must think more about this question of recognition.
When we had proposed international access authority, there was sharp
reaction from Bonn. We resented this reaction since we were least
involved when 11 NATO members have east
German trade missions in their countries. Brandt commented he did not know what de facto
recognition is though he knows there are certain de facto relations. Sec
said we would not extend de jure recognition to east Germany. But we do
not wish attempt define de facto recognition which means nothing in law.
Furthermore there are certain advantages in not trying to define this
point. Brandt referred back to his idea having Ambassadors meet in Bonn
and at certain point bring in German experts. Wondered whether Khrushchev might tell Ulbricht keep
quiet and consider this recognition. Sec said two things bear on this,
1) astonishing failure of east Germany, and 2) speaking entirely
frankly, free Germans have not yet developed proper confidence in
themselves. The great gravitational force is to the West. He was not
suggesting new policy but thought more channels could be opened up and
it would be possible to achieve more. Important that barriers do not
come from our side.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0221/9–2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated
to London, Paris, Bonn, and Berlin. According to another copy, this
telegram was drafted by Davis. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D
533, CF 2150)

2 SecDel/MC/82.
(Ibid., CF 2152) The conversation took place at 6 p.m.

3 See Document
122.

4 For text of these agreements, signed at Paris
October 23, 1954, and entered into effect in 1955, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol.
V, Part 2, pp. 1435 ff.

127. Editorial Note127. Editorial Note

On October 2 McGeorge Bundy
visited Chancellor Adenauer at
Cadenabbia. Reports on this meeting are fragmentary. [text not declassified] In a memorandum to the President, dated
October 4, Bundy stated that the
Chancellor had told him he was in favor of a plebiscite and of
bargaining with the east Germans to improve conditions for human
contacts across the wall in exchange for expanded trade. Adenauer believed the plebiscite would
help Berlin morale, but its wording must be considered carefully. The
Chancellor also reported that the east Germans had already made a
proposal on the question of contacts. (Memorandum for the President;
Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany)

On November 5 Dowling transmitted
a longer account, which included consideration of the relative strength
of the Soviet Union, China, and Europe and a discussion of French-U.S.
differences on nuclear weapons and the location of nuclear weapons in
Germany. This account also
included a summary of the conversation between Bundy and Adenauer on the plane trip back to Bonn. After dwelling
at length on European unity and the U.S. nuclear umbrella, Adenauer and Bundy briefly discussed Berlin. The Chancellor agreed
that mitigation of the situation must be sought, but there was no
evidence to indicate that the Soviet Union was prepared to pay a major
price for recognition of east Germany. (Ibid., Trips and Conferences
Series, McGeorge Bundy Trip to Europe)

128. Record of Meeting128. Record of Meeting1

Washington, October 5, 1962, noon.

The President met in his office with Mayor Willy Brandt of West Berlin. Also present were
Ambassador Knappstein, Mr.
Bahr, Mayor Brandt's press officer, Mr. Hillenbrand and Mr. Creel.

The President opened the discussion by asking Mayor Brandt how the situation in Berlin
appeared to him at the moment. Brandt responded that at present it was good. Morale had
recovered from the blow of the wall. The economy was in fairly good
shape although perhaps not as well as it could be. He expected that in
the near future some pressures would be exercised on access routes but
it was difficult to forecast how.

The President raised the question of what we were prepared to do to
maintain civilian access to West Berlin if the east Germans got control
of the access routes. Mr. Brandt
said he saw the problem in terms of how to respond in such a way as not
to interfere with the viability of Berlin. He thought that many of the
countermeasures we now contemplated were deficient on two counts. They
were ineffective as a means of pressure on the Soviet Union, and they
were bad for West Berlin's economy. While we had to defend the principle
of free access if possible, we had to pay some attention to the
realities of the situation. The President asked if Mayor Brandt thought it was wise for us to
blockade ourselves if the east Germans asked for visas. Mayor Brandt responded he would, of course,
prefer not to accept visas, but if the choice was presented he would prefer to maintain access
rather than resort to countermeasures. He suggested it would be possible
to get a German traffic agency which corresponded to the IZT and operated at the same practical
level. Perhaps the agency could in some way be combined with the Office
for Interzonal Trade. In response to the President's questions on how
IZT now functions, the Mayor
explained that the two negotiators were located in east and West Berlin
and visited each other regularly. Special papers provided for their free
access across the wall.

In response to the President's question of what papers were involved in
visits to the Leipzig Fair, Mayor Brandt answered that West Germans show a passport or
identity card, together with a letter from the east German authorities
giving permission to go to the Fair.

The President returned to the question of whether we could get an
arrangement on civilian access connected with and corresponding to the
arrangement on IZT. Mayor Brandt responded that this was a matter
which should be explored urgently now, rather than waiting for the
signature of a treaty. The President remarked that, of course, east
Germany will ask for the greatest degree of recognition in connection
with any such arrangement, and Mayor Brandt added that they will also ask for a larger volume
of trade. The President expressed his view that West Berlin and West
Germany should discuss this matter, come to an agreement, and take the
lead in developing concrete proposals. He recited the history of our
proposals on an international access authority and the German reaction
thereto. Mayor Brandt expressed
agreement with the President's view on the desirability of German
initiative in this matter.

Ambassador Knappstein remarked
that we, of course, could not predict what form pressure on access would
take; that it was obvious that the Soviets regarded military access as
more important—perhaps they would start with it. The President responded
by stating that military access was our problem; that we would move to
an airlift and if this were interfered with, it would mean war.

He then returned to the problem of civilian trade and asked for a German
initiative before the event. Mayor Brandt commented that speaking for himself and his
colleagues in the Berlin Senate, he would consider it deplorable if the
idea of an international access authority is dead. It is better to deal
with Ulbricht as one of thirteen than as one of two. The Mayor said it
was his own impression that something could be done on this basis and
yet we could still preserve the formal theory of Soviet-Allied
control.

The Mayor then raised the question of the desirability of 4-Power
discussions in Bonn among the ambassadors of the Soviet Union, U.S.,
U.K., and France. He thought this would be a useful channel now that the
Soviet commandant had disappeared from Berlin. Perhaps the 4 Powers in
Bonn could agree to instruct German experts to work out a trade and access agreement. The
President commented that this would be good if the Soviets in fact
wished to lessen tension. At present, unfortunately, there was no
evidence this was so. All our talks with Gromyko suggested just the opposite. The Soviets
continue to raise the issue of troops which we have stated repeatedly is
not negotiable.

The President returned again to the issue of civilian land traffic and
some degree of acceptance of east German presence. He repeated his
comments on the misunderstandings that had arisen in Bonn on our
previous proposals and the desirability, accordingly, of a German
initiative. He asked Mr. Hillenbrand to comment on this point. Mr. Hillenbrand distinguished between the
German and Allied views on this question and pointed out there were some
technical problems of German passport law which stood in the way of a
denial policy at the moment. Ambassador Knappstein observed that if the Federal Republic
accepted east German visas this would give the east Germans the
opportunity to practice selective exclusion against visitors to Berlin.
The President responded that they have that power now and they can
always do it. We, in turn, can counter by using the air route. The
really difficult problem was goods, and not people: people can fly;
goods must go by rail, truck or canal. The President reiterated his view
that it was much more advantageous for us to take the initiative
immediately, than to be put in the position of responding once the
Soviets had signed a peace treaty with east Germany. Ambassador
Knappstein remarked how
difficult it was to plan ahead on these matters.

The President then raised the question of a plebiscite in West Germany.
He said he favored a plebiscite and the important problem was one of
timing. Should we do it immediately or should we wait until Khrushchev appeared at the UN and then respond to his actions there in
this way? Mayor Brandt said that
he himself wanted it as soon as possible, which would be a minimum of
three weeks from the day the decision was taken. Unfortunately, a Berlin
paper (Tagesspiegel) had benefited from a leak on this story and it was
now a matter of public discussion. Mayor Brandt emphasized the advantages of a plebiscite for the
Berliners themselves as a morale builder and argued this as a ground for
rapid action. The President pointed out that the other side of the
argument was, of course, the desirability of being able to respond to
Khrushchev. Mayor Brandt said in that case, we might
propose an all-Berlin plebiscite to Khrushchev and after he rejected it, have one in West
Berlin. This course would have the difficulty that the questions raised
in West Berlin would be different than those asked in east Berlin. The
central questions are the presence of Allied troops and links to the
Federal Republic. Neither of these is exactly appropriate to ask in east
Berlin. The President said that this was a problem that required more
thought. He wanted both sides to think about the timing and come to a
conclusion as quickly as
possible. Mayor Brandt observed
that this would be difficult with the Quadripartite planning machinery.
The President thought that agreement should be reached between the
Federal Republic and West Berlin, there should then be a discussion
between them and the U.S. and on this basis a decision should be taken.
Mayor Brandt said that 15 December
was the last date on which it would be useful to hold a plebiscite this
year. It was hard to have it in the Christmas season. The President
agreed and called for an early decision.

The President asked Mayor Brandt
his evaluation of our contingency plans in relation to the difficulties
that he, Brandt, expected in the
near future. The Mayor responded that, while he expected some
interference, it was difficult to predict the kind of interference and
that he found it hard to respond to the President's question.

The President turned to east Germany and the state of its army and
economy. Mayor Brandt said he
thought the army was not too reliable, but that properly deployed with
Russian troops stiffening them, they would fight. They would probably
fight Americans better than West Germans. In response to a question by
the President, Mayor Brandt stated
east Germany would never be able to defend itself without support from
the Soviet Union no matter how the Soviets armed it, and the Soviets
would not rely on it to do so. He said the east German economy was not
significantly worse than it was last year but it certainly was no
better. There had been a serious psychological deterioration since the
building of the wall.

The President commented on two defects in our contingency plans. First,
they proved not to provide for important contingencies, e.g., the wall.
Second, there was a lack of political commitment. He was especially
critical of the lack of political commitment on the military contingency
plans. He then went on to remark that we had made our commitments to
Berlin clear in terms of our increase in military strength and
expenditures. The contrast with the French and even the Germans was
clear. Unless we built up our conventional strength, our nuclear power
would not really deter. It would be hard for the Russians to believe
that we would pause for 60 days of mobilization and then begin a nuclear
war. The geography of Berlin was such that the disadvantage lay with us
because it was we who would have to make the first military move. This
detracted from the credibility of our threat of nuclear war and made
necessary readiness to use our conventional forces.

The President then summarized the discussion as follows:

1. Berlin was a key American commitment. Our actions were our assurances.
If it were not for Berlin we could feel free to take action in Cuba. He
thanked Mayor Brandt for his
airport statement in which Brandt
had said that it was unnecessary for him to ask us for assurances.

2. It was important to make every attempt at a peaceful solution. If we
did not we would defeat our own aims because we would fail to maintain
the viability of Berlin. In this position we had had the support of West
Berlin, but opposition from the French and some opposition from Bonn. It
is clear that at the moment the Soviet Union is doing nothing but
repeating a clearly non-negotiable proposition on Allied troop
withdrawal.

3. We would probably be faced by a decision on access shortly, consequent
on Khrushchev's signing a peace
treaty. Therefore, it was vitally important that there be a German
initiative on this matter now.

4. The asymmetry of U.S. commitments to NATO and those of the other larger NATO powers was striking. If the other major NATO powers did what we have done,
Khrushchev would believe we
were serious. Their joint population and wealth was such that they could
do it.

After the summary the President repeated the importance of using our
heads now and not waiting until the crisis. He then expressed his
confidence in Mayor Brandt. Mayor
Brandt responded by remarking
that he, too, thought we were in a weak position when we feared to try
new ideas. Our attempt to stand on the status quo always leads to the
status quo minus. We had to act. The President agreed and repeated his
remarks on the geography of Berlin, the access issue, and the consequent
desirability of taking action on access now.

Mayor Brandt and the President then
conversed privately in the garden for about ten minutes. The whole
meeting lasted an hour.

C.K. 2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,
Germany. Secret. Drafted by Kaysen. The time of the meeting is taken from the
President's Appointment Book. (Ibid.) A similar record drafted by
Creel is ibid. A summary
of the meeting was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 925, October 6.
(Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/10–662) For Brandt's account of this meeting,
see Begegnungen und einsichten, pp. 94–95. Brandt had also discussed Berlin
with Tyler, Hillenbrand, and Creel at 10 a.m. (Memorandum of
conversation; Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/10–562)

2 Printed from a copy that
bears these typed initials.

129. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State129. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

New York, October 6, 1962, 10 p.m.

Secto 89. Paris pass USRO. entire three
hour post-luncheon Gromyko-Secretary conversation devoted to Berlin.
Following summary main points based on uncleared memcon which being
pouched.2

Gromyko opened by asking whether
Brandt had exerted much
pressure on US. Secretary denied Brandt put pressure on US, emphasizing US speaking for
itself since its vital interests involved. Referring to Khrushchev's remarks to foreign
visitors that everybody in West except Adenauer agreed with Moscow,
Secretary stressed if that impression really prevailing in Moscow it
totally incorrect. Secretary noted Brandt anxious find way ease situation in Berlin and
also referred to contacts between FRG,
Berlin and east-Germany directed at same objective, stating relaxation
tensions in Berlin in constructive manner would make difference in
situation.

Gromyko denied Soviet Government
under impression US speaking only for Adenauer and had no position of its own, but claimed
Adenauer's extremist position
influenced US position, which evidenced by chain of facts relevant to
substance US–USSR talks in Geneva and earlier in New York. Re FRG's efforts decrease tensions, claimed no
evidence to that effect so far. Reiterated standard Soviet argument re
existence two independent German states and that Soviet position based
on that fact. Stated US–USSR talks so far had produced narrowing of gap
on some points but there are still obstacles on road toward agreement.
Asserted US–USSR's first preference still to reach agreed solution and
said that if US doesn't wish sign peace treaty with GDR, then agreement could be reached on
status West Berlin, presence Western forces West Berlin, and access to
West Berlin. Gromyko thought that
if West unwilling reach agreement on these points, the time approaching
when one should take stock of situation to see where both sides stood.
emphasized question of peace settlement with Germany not one of prestige
but rather of peace in europe.

Secretary recalled Soviet statements that unification should be left to
Germans themselves, noted that difficulty was Soviets apparently meant
it was up to Ulbricht rather than German people as such, stressed
importance of not closing door on unification by what we say or do and
pointed to dangers that might emanate in time from divided Germany.
Secretary stated our first choice is peace treaty with one unified
Germany, but since there is no agreement as to how World War II should
be ended legally, we had to look at factual situation, which includes
two parts of Germany and Western presence in Berlin as third fact to be
fully taken into account. Provided this done arrangement could be
reached.

Re US–USSR exchanges so far, Secretary deplored lack of reciprocity on
Soviet part and noted that the more we tried to close gap the more USSR
backed away and attempted put pressure on us to move where we could not
do so.

After Secretary had reviewed US positions on such matters as status West
Berlin and presence Western forces West Berlin, he referred to Gromyko's remark re taking stock of
situation and emphasized US prepared sit down and analyze situation at
any time. Noted no need wait for US elections.

Gromyko then reiterated along
well-known lines Soviet position re revanchism in West Germany, and
respect for sovereignty GDR. Re stock-taking, stated he meant
no bookkeeping operation but rather political analysis respective
positions two sides and drawing appropriate conclusions. Stressed main
problem now, which would influence settlement of entire set of
questions, was presence Western forces West Berlin. Reiterated Soviet
position on that issue and Soviet argument re NATO bases West Berlin. Denied USSR had retreated from
points of rapprochement achieved so far.

Gromyko then summarized Soviet
analysis situation as follows. essential elements German peace
settlement are: (1) Recognition German borders; (2) NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression pact; (3)
Non-armament FRG and GDR with nuclear weapons; (4) Cessation
subversive activities West Berlin against GDR; and (5) Complete respect for GDR sovereignty. Asserted USSR would use all its prestige
and influence to ensure with Western powers or with UN free and uninterrupted access to West
Berlin by land, water and air and noted there were other, minor
questions to be resolved such as non-introduction nuclear weapons to
West Berlin, transit and customs arrangements, et cetera, but reiterated
main stumbling block is US insistence on perpetuation stationing Western
forces and occupation status West Berlin. Concluded by saying he had
expounded Soviet position again on behalf Soviet Government and
Khrushchev in hope it would
meet with understanding on part US Government and that both sides would
be able move forward on that basis. Said USSR would deeply regret if it
had to act without US or its allies. Noted Secretary's remark that there
is no need wait for US elections and stated USSR always prepared
exchange views if warranted by situation.

Gromyko then referred to
Home's remark re possibility
of creating international air access authority.3 While noting Home had spoken only in general terms, Gromyko wondered how such an authority
could be reconciled with respect GDR
sovereignty and recalled Soviet proposal for creation arbitration organ
to act in case of dispute re transit and communications. Suggested US
and UK might take another look at Soviet proposal since it could perhaps
accommodate Home's
suggestion.

Secretary pointed out Gromyko's
use of term revanchist appeared indicate all Germans who sought
unification their country were revanchists. Refuted claim Berlin NATO base, pointing out western troops
were there for political and not military purpose. Stressed fact all
Soviet proposals re composition forces West Berlin were aimed at
undermining Western presence West Berlin and changing character West
Berlin. Re Home's reference to access authority, Secretary stated it was
application of idea discussed sometime ago. Soviet suggestion for
arbitral body had not led to
detailed discussion because question very quickly arose to what kind of
city access would lead. If understanding were reached on that question,
then technical problems would be easier to resolve. Secretary wondered
how Soviets could expect West rely on fresh agreements at very time they
wished break existing agreements. Questioned value suggestion for
non-aggression pact between NATO and
Warsaw at very time when Soviets applying aggressive pressure with
respect West Berlin. Soviets asking for confidence at very time they
destroying confidence in existing arrangements. Secretary concluded he
would report conversation to President and we would study it very
carefully to see whether anything opened up. Stressed, however, we could
not leave West Berlin so on that point we were back to Vienna.

Gromyko reiterated Soviet
arguments re revanchism and NATO base
West Berlin and again referred to air access authority. Stated parallel
discussion latter question useful, but agreed it ran into main question
of to what access would lead. Reiterated suggestion US take another look
at Soviet proposal for arbitration organ and noted that proposal could
perhaps be discussed again at later date.

Secretary stated we would review carefully problem of access. Believed
access as such not impossible to resolve, but pointed out main question
would still remain.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0221/10–662. Secret; Limited Distribution.
Repeated to Bonn, Paris, Berlin, Moscow, and London.

2 SecDel/MC/92. (Ibid.,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153)

3 Home had advanced this
proposal at meetings with Gromyko in New York on September 28 and October 1.
Minister Hood briefed the
Washington Ambassadorial Group on the proposal and the meetings with
Gromyko on October 9.
(Topol 487 to Paris, October 9; ibid., Central Files,
762.00/10–962)

130. Memorandum of Conversation130. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 9, 1962, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

US

The President

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Bohlen

Mr. Tyler, Assistant
Secretary

France

Couve de Murville, Foreign
Minister

Ambassador Alphand

The President asked the Foreign Minister for his judgment on the
situation. He replied that the Soviets seemed not to have made up their
minds as to what they would do. The Wall had settled the physical
problem of the flow of refugees from east to West. What was now left was
largely a question of prestige. He thought the Russians would have to do
something one day. The question was how much risk they were prepared to
take. He thought they were prepared to take some risk but not a major
risk leading to war. He thought Khrushchev would want to pull off something like a
treaty with the GDR to show that he had
brought about a change in the situation from what had existed
previously. He thought it not unlikely that Khrushchev would come to New York under cover of the
General Assembly in order to talk over Berlin with the President.

The Secretary asked if Berlin had been discussed between De Gaulle and Adenauer during the recent German visit.
The Foreign Minister said the subject had been mentioned but not really
discussed.

The President said he was worried about the slowness of measures foreseen
under our contingency planning and the time needed for a military probe
to be carried out. According to present plans, four days would be
required to put our troops onto the Autobahn. He felt we should have
improved planning not only in the area of possible contingencies, but
with regard to the centralization of responsibilities in Berlin. He
thought that the idea of a 60-day pause for mobilization was
unacceptable.

The Foreign Minister agreed that the contingency planning was not very
realistic. He felt it had been in a direction contrary to what should
have been done. He said our present position was to probe the Soviets
although we knew what the result was going to be. Then we would get
stuck and we would then merely think the situation over. He felt that if
something were to be done at all, it should be immediate. He said that
in 1948 we had been able to carry out an airlift while accepting ground
blockade because the Soviets did not then have nuclear weapons. This
time if ground access were cut, we would run the risk of being dragged
into war. He thought that our present posture was ineffectual, and
potentially more dangerous than something more incisive would be.

The Secretary said our planning had been conducted on a basis of Allied
forces in being. If the West had had more forces under NATO, we would have had more choice.

The Foreign Minister referred to the reoccupation of the Rhineland by
Hitler in 1936, when France didn't move because of the restraining
influence of her military advisers. He felt that military advice does
not sufficiently take into account essential political factors. He felt
we should not wait and think things over while the Russians were
mobilizing. It may well be that the Russians feel we are putting on a
show to try to impress them,
but that they would not be persuaded by this that we mean what we say.
The President said we ought to have forces ready to go within one or two
hours on the Autobahn.

Commenting on the small number of French troops on German soil, the
Foreign Minister explained that he thought it was a little risky to have
such a large concentration of troops in Germany itself and that there
might be some advantage for them to be deployed in greater depth. At
this point the Foreign Minister sought to buttress this view by
referring vaguely to views which he claimed General Norstad had
expressed to him in the same sense. However when the President commented
that he thought he was familiar with General Norstad's views and that he had always
been in favor of forward strategy, the Foreign Minister did not comment
further.

The President read from and discussed a report by General Taylor on the time required to move
troops in the event of crisis.2 The Foreign Minister said it was evident that the
time envisaged was much too long and that we should react within 24
hours. He said if ground access was cut, the West needed to move
immediately on (1) economic and other measures in the field of blockade
and (2) sending a small unit onto the Autobahn within 24 hours. He said
it should not be difficult to keep a few hundred men on an alert basis.
They need not be massed on the Brunswick airfield but should be in a
position to be rapidly transported to the checkpoint. The President
commented that point 2 above was more important and urgent than point
1.

Ambassador Bohlen commented that
one trouble was that governments were unwilling to commit themselves and
to delegate authority for action ahead of events, except for matters
relating to air access which was a simpler problem. Thus governments had
to react and take decisions after the events with which they were
confronted.

The President said that Khrushchev
was probably counting on a slow reaction from the West. The President
thought he might write a letter to De
Gaulle setting down some of the things that were
bothering him with regard to our present contingency planning, and see
whether perhaps General De Gaulle
would favor the idea of trying to obtain certain advance commitments by
governments. The Foreign Minister said he thought this would be
useful.

The Foreign Minister reverted to the subject of the two French divisions
under NATO and said he could see that
the President was interested and even worried about this matter. He
exposed at some length the
political reasons why it was desirable to keep French troops on French
soil. Twenty years had passed since the French Army had been stationed
in France. It had lost contact with the people of the country and this
had caused serious trouble. It was necessary to readjust the
relationship between French forces and the French population. If they
were on German soil, they would still be in a foreign country and out of
touch with domestic sentiment (the Foreign Minister stressed the
sensitivity of what he had just said, adding that this was something
which General De Gaulle would
never tell the President himself).

The Secretary wondered what interpretation Khrushchev would place on the absence of French troops
from German soil.

The Foreign Minister said he didn't wish the President to believe that
France was relying on the US nuclear capability as an excuse for not
doing her conventional share. He said the problem was to try to prevent
misunderstanding on the part of Khrushchev.

The President said that Khrushchev
had not moved to seize Berlin militarily because he knew what this would
entail but we had a real problem with regard to ground access. He asked
for the Foreign Minister's view as to what we should do on the ground
after we found our access blocked.

The Foreign Minister said things would move fast. either we would begin
to talk right away or there would be war.

The Secretary asked the Foreign Minister whether he would favor talking
at this point. The Foreign Minister's reply was unclear and generally
evasive.

Ambassador Bohlen suggested that
consideration be given to a Four Power communication to the Soviet
Union, which would include the Germans.

The President referred to the points which Gromyko had made to the
Secretary in their conversation3 in relation to the
withdrawal of troops. He said Khrushchev would have to drop his insistence on this
point. This was not a matter which could be negotiated.

The Secretary said we were taking an urgent and searching look at the
whole access question. He thought there was a possibility of the Soviets
dropping the troops issue. He thought study should be given to the
possibility of some variant of the Soviet arbitral commission.

The Foreign Minister said that Khrushchev would not wage war over Berlin. What he was
doing was asking us to quit. The Foreign Minister thought that there
might be the danger of a new uprising in east Germany, as had happened
in 1953.

The Secretary said Brandt felt we had underestimated the potential role
of the east Germans.

The Foreign Minister said that a crisis would not last long, but would
come to a head rapidly.

The President said that as a result of the Soviet actions on Cuba, there
was much less prospect of reaching agreement on Berlin. Thus Khrushchev might try to force
something. He asked the Foreign Minister what the French would do if the
Soviets were to cut access on the ground. The Foreign Minister replied
that if this were to happen both in the air and on the ground, we should
begin by taking appropriate action in the air. He said that if they were
to cut both military and civilian traffic on the ground, we should use
force and go ahead with the probe. If only military traffic on the
ground were cut off, we should consider whether it was necessary to use
force ourselves by undertaking a probe, because air access could be used
for supplying the military garrisons.

The President pressed the Foreign Minister again and asked if his thought
was that if military traffic on the ground were cut off, we should not
have recourse to a military probe. The Foreign Minister's answer was
evasive.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, France, General. Secret; Limit Distribution.
Drafted and initialed by Tyler and approved in S on October 12 and in the White House on October 24.
The source text is labeled “Part 1 of 4 Parts.” Parts 2 and 3 dealt
with Laos and the Congo respectively; Part 4 also dealt with Berlin,
containing a 2-paragraph discussion between Rusk and Couve de Murville on contingency planning.
(Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–962) Couve de
Murville was in the United States to attend the 17th session of the
U.N. General Assembly.

2 The President
is referring to CM–7–62, October 6, which, inter alia, provided an
analysis of the actions necessary to put the West in position to
launch a battalion-sized probe on the Berlin Autobahn. (Washington
National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542, 091
Germany)

3 See Document 129.

131. Memorandum of Conversation131. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 10,
1962.

SUBJECT

West German Attitude Toward Proposal for International Access
Authority

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Karl Heinrich
Knappstein, German embassy

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler, EUR

Mr. Martin J. Hillenbrand,
Director, BTF

Mr. Robert C. Creel,
Director, GeR

Ambassador Knappstein called on
Mr. Tyler this afternoon at his
own request. He said he had not come to make a demarche but to consult
on a matter which “worries me a little”. In Mayor Brandt's talk with the President on October 5, 19622 the latter had made several statements which
“worried us” since it appeared that possibly they had been made on the
basis of incomplete information. These statements were that thus far all
United States proposals for a solution of the problem of civilian access
to Berlin had been rejected by either Moscow or Bonn, that the United
States would make no more proposals on this subject, and that it was now
up to the West Berliners and West Germans to get together and make their
own proposals for a solution.

Knappstein said he felt that some
of these statements were not entirely supported by the facts. He was
also bothered by recent newspaper articles reporting a shift in the West
German attitude toward the proposal for an International Access
Authority. These reports gave the wrong impression that the Germans have
been opposed to this proposal. In fact, however, Foreign Minister
Schroeder had told Secretary
Rusk last June in Bonn3 that the Federal Republic was in basic
agreement with the United States draft regarding the composition of the
Governing Board for an Access Authority. Knappstein said he considered it important to clear the
matter up before Minister Schroeder arrived in the United States. He was most
anxious to do away with “these little misunderstandings”. He, therefore,
wished to consult us on whether it would not be advisable for the German
embassy to issue a public statement to the press setting forth the
facts. He then read a proposed statement, which laid stress on the fact
that agreement to the International Access Authority proposal had been
given by Minister Schroeder last
June.

Mr. Tyler said his intial reaction
to this suggestion was to wonder whether such a statement might not
serve only to stir things up and blow them out of proportion. It would
tend to focus attention pointedly on the existence of an area of
misunderstanding and might well lead to all sorts of public speculation
which could be damaging to our relations. It would tend to revive in the
press the ghost of the previous misunderstandings of some months ago. It
was possible the current flurry might blow over quickly. He would,
therefore, advise against making any such statement to the press at this
time.

Mr. Hillenbrand commented that the
President's remarks had been limited to the question of civilian access.
It was correct to say that our proposals for an International Access
Authority had at one time publicly been shot down by the Germans.
Probably the impression which had remained strongest in our minds was
the great public hullabaloo which had resulted from the Chancellor's public denunciation
last Spring of the international access proposal.

Mr. Tyler commented that the basic
idea involved here was that we considered it appropriate for the Germans
to take a more active role in working for a solution of our mutual
problems.

Ambassador Knappstein said that
upon reflection he tended to agree with Mr. Tyler that the suggested press statement might only
serve to stir things up. At the same time he was anxious to get the
matter in proper focus before the arrival of Minister Schroeder and the latter's talk with the
President. He felt he should consult with Mr. Bundy on the problem right away. He
wished the President to be aware before his talk with Schroeder that the Germans had in fact
accepted last June the proposal for an access authority.

At two separate points during the conversation Ambassador Knappstein commented, rather
defensively, that he had felt it would have been inappropriate for him
to take any major part in the discussion between the President and Mayor
Brandt.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/10–1062. Secret. Drafted by Creel and initialed by Tyler.

2 See Document
128.

3 See footnote 2,
Document 68.

132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany132. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, October 15, 1962, 9 p.m.

997. Paris pass USRO. Following based on
full and uncleared memorandum of conversation which being pouched.2

In two and one-quarter hour discussion with Secretary this afternoon
Schroeder reviewed at some
length German estimate of Soviet intentions re Berlin and situation in
GDR.3 On balance, did not believe Khrushchev prepared to risk major
confrontation over Berlin if Western determination maintained. Re GDR concluded that despite allegiance 75 to
90 per cent of population to ideals of freedom, uprising unlikely in
view of anticipated harsh repressive measures. Population apparently
looking to long future rather than for any imminent improvements.

Secretary stressed that picture of Western determination as it appears to
Khrushchev must appear
somewhat confused. NATO force and
logistical inadequacies likely to operate against certainty that West
will fight for Berlin. Danger is that Western Powers so sure Khrushchev will not fight over Berlin
that they are not willing to take the concrete measures necessary to
evidence their firmness.

Schroeder observed that decisive
point to Khrushchev could not be
accretions to european forces but US determination and willingness use
nuclear deterrent. He (Schroeder)
therefore welcomed indications US prepared to go it alone in defense of
Berlin should that be necessary.

Secretary agreed US nuclear deterrent ultimately decisive but to be
persuasive to Soviets US people and their Government must have
conviction their european Allies are making comparable effort.

Schroeder noted his belief that
free and demilitarized city proposal had really been intended by
Khrushchev as compromise
proposal. He probably now working towards some sort of sliding scale of
Allied presence as further compromise with some possible UN role added.

In discussion of possible Soviet tactics in UN, Secretary made point we should not fear UN action on Berlin. We would have many
assets in such discussion. Should not, however, bring to UN prematurely and thus lose step which
might play important subsequent role. Secretary also recalled Gromyko's apparent interest in last
talk in New York in shifting discussion to access despite our having
made quite clear that Western presence in city is nonnegotiable.

Schroeder doubted that Soviets
were at this point actually prepared to accept Berlin as is and discuss
improvement of access, but emphasized FedRep support for concept of
International Access Authority. He reported on current discussions
within IZT framework of east German
credits, emphasizing that FedRep forthcomingness could only be expected
if there were compensating political improvements on part GDR. east Germans were now examining FedRep
proposal for 250 million DM increase in
IZT swing arrangement. (In aside Schroeder remarked that enthusiasm of
economics Ministry had apparently led to change of Leopold's
instructions to raise FedRep offer from 100 million DM to 250 million DM.)

Meeting concluded with Schroeder's
exposition and subsequent discussion of his doubts re present
contingency planning for possible GDR
demand for passports and visas to cover German civilian travel to and
from Berlin.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2175. Secret; Limit Distribution.
Drafted and approved by Hillenbrand. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow,
Berlin, and USUN.

2 A copy of this 9-page memorandum of
conversation is ibid., Central Files, 762.00/10–1562.

3 Schroeder visited Washington October 13–18. In his first meeting
with Rusk at noon on October
14, Schroeder raised the
question of the Adenauer
November 7–8 visit, the Secretary's meeting with Gromyko (see Document 129), transfer of nuclear weapons, India's
possible participation in a German peace treaty, the Federal
Republic's relations with satellite countries, New Guinea, and
Yugoslavia. Memoranda of these conversations are in Department of
State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2175. A copy of the
October 10 letter from the President to Chancellor Adenauer inviting Schroeder to visit the United States
is ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. At 11 a.m. on
October 15 Dowling, Tyler, and Hillenbrand, at the Foreign
Minister's request, briefed him on Berlin contingency planning. A
memorandum of this conversation is ibid., Central Files,
762.00/10–1562.

4 At the Secretary's dinner for
Schroeder at 8 p.m. on
October 15, the two discussed the idea of a Berlin plebiscite and
Berlin contingency planning. Memoranda of these conversations are
ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2175.

133. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State133. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, October
16, 1962, 9 p.m.

981. Policy. Khrushchev-Kohler—Part V.2
Berlin and Khrushchev trip to
UN. Khrushchev then said that perhaps after elections he
would meet President in New York and they would reach agreement on
nuclear test ban. Soviets sincerely wanted agreement. He had understood
in Vienna that President also wanted agreement and believes he has not
lost interest since then. Soviets, too, think this is one of matters
that is ripe for solution.

After this problem, he said, most important is question of
Germany-Berlin. President has been heating up atmosphere and has called
up 150,000 reserves.3
Soviets did not intend to follow US example in this. Some people say
that he has told foreign delegations that President did not dare to
start a war, but they interpret him wrongly. He does not want to say something offensive to
President and his remarks have been distorted. When he talks with
foreigners, he says Soviets will sign a peace treaty, with all the
consequences that would follow, and he also says that any war would
inevitably grow into nuclear war. Consequently, anyone who would start a
war would be either a lunatic or a coward. In the last couple of days,
he read a statement by some US military officer who said US would
unilaterally start a war if USSR signed separate peace treaty. This was
silly statement. This officer perhaps knows how to talk to his wife, but
he does not know how to talk to the press. “We will sign a peace treaty,
but no one who is sane will start a war.” Peace treaty does not threaten
anyone. People who lose their self-control and talk like that officer
are either cowards or lunatics. But if agreement is not reached with US,
Soviets cannot postpone signature of peace treaty indefinitely.

Adenauer says, Khrushchev continued, that if USSR
signs peace treaty, US must do its duty and start war. Adenauer is too old and is losing his
mind. He is stupid old man (glupy starik). But West Germany would be
first country to be burned up, within first hour of war. Adenauer is 86 and perhaps he doesn't
care. But German people want their children to live. However, Americans
listen very carefully to Adenauer
and he is leading Americans. Khrushchev said he would give his reply to Adenauer about time latter goes to US,
and it would be published then.

US elections will take place, he said, and then we'll try to renew
dialogue and reach agreement. Soviets won't sign peace treaty
immediately; they know unilateral signing would be aggravation.

He asked what problem still remained. Only stationing of troops; there is
no problem on access. Soviets believe access, both by land and by air,
should be guaranteed with or without treaty. They have made still
another concession by agreeing to presence of troops in West Berlin
under UN flag. So only problem is
composition of troops, which may include US troops, but must also
include others, so that not only NATO
military bloc would have troops there. If US doesn't agree, that would
force Soviets to sign peace treaty despite fact US is threatening to
start war. Must be recognized that, in our electronic age, when one
button is pressed, other button is pressed automatically. There is no
sense in dialogue of threats. This is silly policy. So US should take
position of reason.

Khrushchev asked why US needs
West Berlin. US, Britain and De
Gaulle are sticking to West Berlin because Adenauer interested in it. Adenauer's interest is natural. But why
is America interested? No one threatens West Berlin. US says it is for
freedom of West Berlin. Soviets are also for that freedom. But we must
liquidate state of war and military base in West Berlin, which is a
remnant of war.

If agreement can be reached on stopping tests and West Berlin, this would
help us to solve problem of disarmament. Khrushchev said he thought US not ready for disarmament
agreement; Congress is not ready and President's hands are tied, so let
us solve some other questions. Let's do away with bases and disband our
troops. US can send rockets from its own territory. These are not old
times when infantry was used, so he was surprised when President called
150,000 reserves. These are not times of Kutuzoy or Suvorov, when
battles were fought with bayonets.

He said probably he would travel to UNGA
at end November. early in November, he would be busy with domestic
problems. If situation were favorable then, he would be glad to meet
with President. He had good recollections meeting with President. Then
perhaps they could: (1) agree on test ban, which he would like to do;
(2) exchange views on disarmament; and (3) he would also alike to agree
on West Berlin and create a calmer atmosphere for disarmament. For time
being, Soviets would do nothing and make no statements until elections.
He had given his word on that.

I said I thought President would find his statement interesting and,
referring to President's press-conference comment on readiness to meet,
said I would hope meanwhile there would be no developments which would
make a meeting difficult. Perhaps progress could be made at a lower
level in preparation for such a meeting. Gromyko was to see President day after tomorrow and then
have working dinner with Secretary. Berlin would probably be discussed.
I should therefore withhold my own comment on his remarks on Berlin.

Khrushchev repeated that they
would not undertake anything to worsen relations. He regretted that
things had not worked out in accordance with his discussion with
Ambassador Thompson. It was
regrettable that Cuban question had blown up right in middle of election
campaign. He had read accounts of Gromyko's talks with Rusk and Home and
there was nothing new on West Berlin problem there. Home had raised question of control of
flights, but this was trifle. If, as result President's meeting with
Gromyko, Rusk and Gromyko could agree on something, that would be good,
but he doubted they could.

Khrushchev then noted he had not
known earlier that appointment was fixed for Gromyko with President. I said we had just learned this
today. Khrushchev said he was
glad and thanked President for finding time to receive Gromyko.

Khrushchev said he wanted to
review these questions today and had not raised any new problems since
we had to settle old ones. He wished me good health in Russian climate
and hoped political climate would also be good. He said great countries
like ours had special responsibilities. For themselves, they wanted
peace and peaceful competition. Great ships had to sail in high seas and he hoped they would sail
without interference. I said I took good note of what he had said and
would report to President his statements on Germany and Berlin. Perhaps
Secretary would be discussing this with Gromyko, but I thought I should add that we had gone as
far as we could, short of our vital interests, that is, stationing of
our forces. We are for co-existing in this situation. I was very glad to
hear Chairman say he wanted to talk further about it and was sure
President would, too.

Khrushchev asked me to convey
best wishes to President and hope that he would have success in election
campaign, as well as wishes for good health and success to his family,
his wife and mother.

Meeting ended at 1250 hours Moscow time.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
S/S Files, eyes Only Telegrams
Microfilm. Secret; Priority.

2 Parts I–IV summarized the introductory remarks and
discussion of harassment of shipping, Cuba, U-2 flights, the nuclear test ban, and U.S. elections.
Copies of all these telegrams, 973, 974, 978, and 979, are ibid.
Further documentation on this first meeting between Ambassador
Kohler and Khrushchev is in volume V.

3 Presumably Khrushchev is referring to
President Kennedy's approval on October 3 of
P.L. 87–736, authorizing mobilization of the Ready Reserve.

134. Memorandum of Conversation134. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 17, 1962, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin Access and Related Problems

PARTICIPANTS

Germans

Foreign Minister Gerhard
Schroeder

Ambassador Karl Heinrich
Knappstein, German embassy

Dr. Reinkemeyer, Chief,
Soviet Affairs, Foreign Office

Dr. Simon, Personal Aide to the Foreign Minister

Mr. Swidbert Schnippenkoetter, Counselor, German embassy

Mr. Kusterer, Interpreter

Americans

The President

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Special
Assistant to the President

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler, EUR

Ambassador Walter C.
Dowling, Bonn

Mr. Martin J. Hillenbrand,
Director, BTF

Mr. Robert C. Creel,
Director, GeR

The President said he was glad to see the Foreign Minister. He had come
at a helpful time, since there was a strong feeling there would be
difficulties over Berlin within the next two to three months. He would
appreciate hearing the Foreign Minister's thoughts as to the actions the
Soviets were likely to take and on our contingency plans to meet
them.

The Foreign Minister thanked the President for this opportunity to meet
with him and said he brought cordial greetings from the Chancellor. He
regarded his own visit as a useful preparation for the Chancellor's
visit next month.

Regarding Berlin, Schroeder said he
was not certain in his own mind whether the Soviets really intended to
sharpen the crisis by their own actions in late November or before the
end of the year. He felt it more likely that they would continue to
bring various psychological pressures to bear and meanwhile they would
wish to keep talking in the hope of achieving their objectives without
war. There were several factors to consider: First, the Soviets had thus
far received little support from other countries regarding their project
for a separate peace treaty with east Germany. From the standpoint of
their posture before world public opinion it would not be so attractive
to the Soviets to have only themselves and their “sub-contractors” in
the Bloc as signatories of the treaty. From our own viewpoint the
attitude taken thus far by the non-committed states had been a positive
factor. Second, with regard to what specific measures the Soviets might
take in Berlin, from their standpoint they did not have a great deal of
leeway and there were only a limited number of steps which they could
take if they were to avoid a real confrontation. There was also the
question of what actions might be taken by the Soviet Zone authorities.

One big problem in this area related to civilian access, where the other
side might introduce a passport and visa requirement. In such event we
would have to take care to avoid any deterioration in the access
situation. The difficulty was that most of the questions here related to
pieces of paper; at the outset the other side, instead of giving the
piece of paper now in use, would introduce a requirement for a visa. The
problem was that while the change from the standpoint of what met the
eye would not be very great, from the legal standpoint the change would
be a very subtantial one. To accept visas would mean subjecting land
access to the complete discretion of the east Zone authorities and would
increase recognition of the east Zone regime. (Schroeder referred in
passing to the difficulty created by the fact many foreigners traveling
to Berlin, including United
States civilians, had already accepted GDR visas, which he said was unfortunate.)

The Foreign Minister said he was convinced that if we should accept any
deterioration in civilian access, we would one day find ourselves on the
spot as concerned military access. If new paper formalities were
introduced for military access, it would be difficult from the
standpoint of international law to reject these if we had already
accepted them for civilian access. The Foreign Minister then outlined
the hypothetical situation under which on December 1 the Soviets would
sign a separate peace treaty with east Germany to take effect on January
1. They might specify that for a transitional period of six months
Western troops could stay in Berlin, but also that meanwhile a new piece
of paper would be required for travel to Berlin which could be obtained
either at Pankow or at the border checkpoint. What would the West do
between December 1 and January 1 and what would it do after January 1?
World opinion would have to be considered; there was the risk that if we
decided to keep access open by force, world opinion would say that there
had not been a sufficient change in procedures to justify this. He felt
we needed to make it perfectly clear to the Soviets that if they tried
this game they would not succeed and that any effort on their part to
proceed by installment would fail. The conclusion to be drawn was that
our contingency planning must consider realistically the matter of
reacting strongly to prevent any deterioration in the field of civilian
access to Berlin. In the political, diplomatic and psychological fields,
we must do everything possible to make clear to the Soviets that we have
no intention of accepting the visa requirement and would react strongly
if this were imposed. Furthermore, the relationship and interdependence
between civilian and military traffic must be taken realistically into
account in our contingency planning.

The President agreed there was a clear interrelationship between civilian
and military traffic, but said there was at the same time a substantial
difference in that our military forces could be supplied by air.
Furthermore, civilian traffic was now treated on a different basis from
military traffic and the east Zone authorities had for some time had
considerably greater authority over civilian than military traffic. Was
this not true?

The Foreign Minister agreed but said the danger nevertheless existed that
once we had accepted a deterioration in civilian traffic, changes in
military traffic which were optically minor in character would be
difficult to reject. The big question was whether or not we could accept
any deterioration in civilian traffic. If the answer was “no”, then what
specifically did we do about it? Theoretically, of course, we could
resort to an airlift for the transport of personnel, but given problems
about the weather, electronic countermeasures, etc., this would not solve the problem of access of
goods. One essential at stake here was the viability of Berlin, which
would be threatened by reliance on an airlift. If the airlift and
economic countermeasures did not prove effective, we might find that we
would have to retreat from our position, which would involve a great
loss of prestige. Therefore, the question of how we should react at the
outset was extremely important. He was not satisfied with the middle
solution being recommended up to now, which was to continue vital
traffic to Berlin, accept visas for this under protest, and apply
economic countermeasures. He said he felt it was necessary to re-think
our whole planning on this question.

One additional factor to take into account was the reaction of the
Berliners themselves. Their main concern was not the recognition problem
but unrestricted access. There was, therefore, some difference in
perspective between Berlin's and the Western position as a whole; it was
necessary to try to harmonize these interests.

The President inquired: Suppose they insist on visas and we do not accept
this and ground traffic to Berlin stops, then where are we?

The Foreign Minister said basically the question in such a case was
whether we will and can keep access open by force or whether we should
resort to an airlift and await the effect of our countermeasures. He
himself considered it a dangerous position to think we could solve the
problem of access by an airlift.

The President said our plans were clear on what to do in the event of a
blockage of traffic by force. The basic question was whether, if the
blockage was in fact only by paper, we would be justified in using
force.

The Foreign Minister commented that if we accept visas at this point,
even though viability is clearly involved, what are our chances in the
military field of refusing procedural changes and what chances do we
have to react by force to them if we have accepted the visa for civilian
traffic?

The President again said that civilian traffic was a different problem
since military traffic could be moved by air. If we did not accept visas
for civilian traffic then we would have a self-imposed blockade. We
might find ourselves in a slightly ridiculous position, and the
Berliners themselves might not be entirely sympathetic nor understand
why their viability was being threatened merely because of disagreements
and too legalistic arguments over whether or not to accept a piece of
paper.

The Foreign Minister said he was fully aware this was a difficult
problem. He considered that land access was very important to military
traffic and that the problem of military access could not now be solved
by an airlift. The situation was different from 1948–49. He did not
believe that we could now resort to an airlift without suffering a
severe diplomatic and political defeat. He stressed again we must get
our position worked out clearly
and in detail to cover every possible situation. He again expressed
concern over our solution up to now to let essential civilian traffic
continue by accepting visas under protest, while at the same time
applying economic countermeasures by reduction or termination of
interzonal trade and the employment of further measures by the Allies
and in NATO. If all these measures
remained without effect we were in a situation where we had reduced
access to Berlin dangerously and would still be faced with the decision
whether or not eventually to accept the visa requirement. We would be
operating on a declining scale.

The President said he was not sure we should make visas the great issue.
We did not want Berlin blockaded. Was the visa issue the one on which we
would employ force rather than countermeasures? Were we in a position to
fight our way up the Autobahn over the visa requirement when we had been
accepting for a long time a piece of paper for civilian traffic?

The Foreign Minister said that the problem was whether we should accept
the Soviets' salami tactics of piece-by-piece encroachment. He
recognized the great difficulty was in the political-psychological field
since people would ask why should we use force over this small matter.
The danger in this was that we could lose the game by installments
without any really major development having taken place. As for the
popular reaction in Germany, it is clear that people would be
discouraged over continued acceptance of minor encroachments. The people
in Pankow would regard it as a victory for them if the visa requirement
were accepted. Furthermore, the Soviets would look on this development
as a further success which would encourage them to take additional
steps.

The Foreign Minister said he wished to stress that Berlin could be held
only if the Soviets could be convinced there was some specific point
beyond which they could not go without encountering a strong reaction
from us. While Khrushchev might be convinced that at some point the West
would be prepared to fight a nuclear war over Berlin, he was likely
nevertheless to continue to try to reach his objectives piece by piece.
The problem for us to decide was how to deal with each move as it
occurs, whether it be a visa requirement or not. He felt that the
problem went much further than merely involving acceptance of a piece of
paper.

The President agreed it was important to reach a decision on this within
the next three or four weeks. He said we must be careful not to draw the
line at the wrong place. As concerned civilian traffic to Berlin, this
was now in fact controlled by the east Germans who issued papers,
stamps, etc. It was not clear that an introduction of a visa requirement
was a dramatic enough development to set in train all the major actions
involved in our contingency planning. If we made a big issue over a piece of paper and then had to
retreat, this would be a defeat for us. We wondered whether the actual
movement of civilian traffic in and out of Berlin was not the big issue
rather than the acceptance of visas.

The Foreign Minister said there was one big potential difference between
visas and the present documentation requirements. It was not excluded
that in issuing visas the east German authorities would eventually
require that they be obtained in east Berlin, or possibly in an effort
to appear reasonable, they might offer to open visa-issuing offices in
West Berlin or West Germany. They could also if they wished impose a
limit, such as 50,000 a month, on the number of visas to be issued for
travel to Berlin.

The President said he thought that our economic countermeasures would
prove sufficiently oppressive so that measures of this type would not be
useful to the other side.

The Foreign Minister said he was not convinced that economic
countermeasures would prove effective if the other side had already
decided it was prepared to run the full risk of their imposition.

At this point in the conversation, which had already lasted for an hour,
the President suggested we might turn to other matters. He referred to
the history of the discussions with Gromyko over Berlin, which had thus far been
unsuccessful. There now appeared at least a possibility that the Soviets
might withdraw their main condition regarding Western troop withdrawal
and shift their accent to the access problem. We had repeatedly made
clear that the issue of maintaining our troops in Berlin was not
negotiable. It was, therefore, not clear why Khrushchev was coming over. Did the Foreign Minister
have any thoughts on this?

Schroeder said it was not clear to
him whether Khrushchev would come
to the United Nations or not. He had in any event skillfully used this
possibility to get the West to indulge in a great deal of unproductive
speculation. If he did come it was not clear he would be prepared to
steer the hardest course. He would in any event expect that something
could be accomplished. In March and July at Geneva the Soviets had
stressed that the only crucial issue remaining unresolved was the
Western presence in Berlin. He felt that they were too optimistic over
other issues, such as nuclear weapons, non-diffusion, non-aggression
pact, etc., which they presented as practically agreed. He felt the
Soviets were still convinced some further compromise over Berlin was
possible. They had probably regarded their original proposal for a free
demilitarized city in November, 1958 as a compromise offer intended to
serve as a face-saver. At Geneva they had suggested the possibility of a
phased withdrawal of Western troops from Berlin concurrently with
reduction of troops from other countries which would be introduced over
a period of four years, at the end of which the problem would be
settled. They were probably
still thinking in terms of a compromise, and he thought that if
Khrushchev came to this
country he would be thinking in terms of some new compromise offer,
perhaps strengthening elengthening] the time period to ten, eight or six
years, rather than wishing to run the risk of a showdown over Berlin. He
said this was just his personal opinion and he could not prove he was
right.

The President stated that, returning briefly to the visa problem, it
seemed imperative to get this settled before the end of the month. It
should be discussed in the Ambassadorial Group with the British and
French. (Schroeder interjected that the agreement of the Berliners was
also important.)

Schroeder commented that while our
contingency planning had been going on for a year or so, there was still
not complete agreement at several points. The time had come where our
over-all planning must be brought up-to-date and possibly “streamlined”.
Secretary McNamara had made this
same point to him yesterday.2 Schroeder suggested it might be
advisable to conduct war games in which all contingencies would be
played through, with our most intelligent players acting in the role of
Soviets. (In a further brief discussion of this suggestion the President
stated that in fact geography was the greatest asset on the Soviet side
of the game.)

The President then turned to this morning's newspaper account of an
interview given in Germany by Defense Minister Strauss in which he had made two main
points: 1) the comradeship established between the French and Germans on
military matters, and 2) the role of German troops in the defense of
Berlin. On the latter point the President said that in case of a crunch
the issue would be decided by which side had the greater strength rather
than by legal considerations over our right to be in Berlin.

Schroeder replied that he did not
have the full text of Strauss' interview. As concerned the matter of
French-German comradeship in arms (he asked “did Strauss really say that”?), he would
make only one statement, viz., that on this point he had as realistic a
view as the President himself. He considered the second point to be more
important. As concerned the German commitment in NATO, it was the same as that of the
United States and there should be no question about this. The point
Strauss apparently was making
regarding the use of German troops over Berlin presumably reflected the
actual situation as concerned the relationship between Live Oak and
NATO. That related to the situation
on paper; in practical fact, however, in the event of military conflict
over Berlin the Germans would
be in there from the first moment because they were right up in
front.

The President referred to his recent talk with the French Foreign
Minister3 as indicating a sharp division
between us over Allied military strategy, particularly as concerned the
disposition of forces. We had not been able to convince the French to
move their troops forward, and if this could not be done it would be
difficult of make effective military plans. The President felt West
Germany had an important role to play in resolving these
differences.

Schroeder said the Germans
intended to try to make clear to De
Gaulle that the present situation was not satisfactory.
The French had claimed that their problem arose from the need to
maintain French forces coming from Algeria on French soil for the time
being. This point was not very convincing. Schroeder felt that the
French over-all military strategy was based on the premise that there
were two battles to consider: the one in Germany, which would be lost,
and the one in France, which would be won. This had in fact been the
premise of the most recent military maneuver conducted by the French.
This seemed to him to be thinking of another century, but also possibly
indicated that in such matters the French were great military
geniuses.

The President said he hoped that Messrs.4 Strauss and Messmer would be able
to settle this matter of troop dispositions. Schroeder commented it would be better to reach
agreement with De Gaulle than
with Messmer.

The President said he would have to leave shortly for Connecticut. He
much appreciated the efforts which had been made by Minister Schroeder to coordinate our joint
policy. We would consider carefully his views on the visa problem and
reach a decision. The basic problem was that we would either have to
decide that here is where we take our stand, or else we should prepare
the way for playing down the issue and making it unimportant. The
President commented that he did not regard the forthcoming Khrushchev visit as particularly
desirable in the absence of evidence, which we did not yet have, of any
change in his attitude over Berlin. He would not himself encourage
Khrushchev to come, but if he
wished to come the President would see him. Meanwhile we should improve
our planning. There should be more realistic discussions in the
Ambassadorial Group. In addition, he felt that Governments should be
more committed in advance to actions agreed on by the planners. He cited
as an example that until recently he had not realized that it would take three days before we
could mount our initiative probing on the Autobahn. We, for our part,
were ready to say what we would do, and he felt that all four
Governments should be prepared to give more in the way of firm
commitments. In conclusion, the President stated that Minister Schroeder's visit had been very
useful.

Minister Schroeder thanked the
President for this meeting and said he hoped that by their next meeting
on November 7 we would have our planning perfected and be ready for
definitive discussions.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and
initialed by Creel and
approved in the White House on October 26. The meeting was held at
the White House. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to
Bonn in telegram 1021, October 18. (Department of State, Central
Files, 762.0221/10–1862)

2 A memorandum of
McNamara's conversation
with Schroeder is in the
Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Germany/Security.

3 See Document 130.

4
Pierre A. Messmer, French Defense Minister.

135. Memorandum of Conversation135. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin; Possible Visit by Khrushchev

PARTICIPANTS

US

The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Hillenbrand

Mr. Akalovsky

USSR

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Mr. Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Sukhodrev

Mr. Gromyko opened the
conversation by stating that the Head of the Soviet Government, Mr.
Khrushchev, had asked him to
convey his greetings and best wishes to the President, to Mrs.
Kennedy, and to all of the President's family.
Mrs. Khrushchev joined in these
greetings.

The President thanked him for these wishes.

Mr. Gromyko continued that he
wished to thank the President for having found time to meet with him and
exchange views on certain matters. He said he wished to state the policy and the views of
the Soviet Government on a number of important questions. Subject to the
President's approval, he thought he might take those questions one by
one and listen to the comments the President might wish to make on each
of them individually.

The President said this was all right with him.

Mr. Gromyko then stated that Mr.
Khrushchev had instructed him
to take the opportunity of his trip to the United States and to convey
to the President that Mr. Khrushchev continued to hope that the President's
efforts, like his own, would be directed toward the elimination of
differences and of points at issue between our two countries. Such
elimination had been and continued to be the invariable desire of the
Soviet Government and of the Soviet people. The Soviet Government
regretted that no agreement had been reached in the course of the
exchanges of views between the US and the USSR on the question of a
German peace treaty and of normalizing the West Berlin situation on the
basis of such a treaty. Unfortunately, the latest meetings with the
Secretary had not changed the situation. No progress had been made in
spite of the fact that, as had been also stressed by US representatives,
West Berlin and its status did not present a major problem and was not a
vital issue for the United States or its Allies. Indeed, the West Berlin
situation was a legacy of the last war. The Soviet Government had stated
on a number of occasions that the Soviet Union had no direct vital
interests in West Berlin and did not need West Berlin. The Soviet
Government deemed it necessary to conclude a German peace treaty and
resolve the West Berlin problem on the basis of such a treaty by
declaring West Berlin a free and demilitarized city; such a solution
would meet the interests of world peace. Of course, the Soviet Union
could never agree to West Berlin's remaining a NATO base, to a continuation of the presence of occupation
troops of the three Western powers and to the maintenance of the
occupation regime in West Berlin; nor could it agree to West Berlin's
remaining a hotbed of aggressive explosion. The fact was that presence
of occupation forces of the three Western powers in West Berlin yielded
nothing to the West strategically, and this proved that there was no
reason for keeping those forces in West Berlin.

Mr. Gromyko then said that the
Soviet Government had already indicated that it would do nothing with
regard to West Berlin before the US elections, unless it was compelled
to do otherwise by the activities of the other side. However, the Soviet
Government proceeded from the fact that it was necessary to hold an
active dialogue in November to bring about concrete results with regard
to a German peace treaty and to the normalization of the West Berlin
situation on the basis of such a treaty. The Soviet Government would
like to hope that at that time an understanding concerning a German
peace treaty, including the question of the forces of the three Western powers and of the
status of West Berlin, would at last be reached. If there should be no
such understanding, the Soviet Government would be compelled, and Mr.
Gromyko wished to emphasize
the word “compelled”, to sign, together with a number of other states, a
peace treaty with the GDR without an
understanding with the Western Powers. The Soviet Union would also be
compelled to take such steps as were integrally linked with a peace
settlement, steps of which the United States Government and the
President personally had been informed on a number of occasions,
including by Mr. Khrushchev
personally. The Soviet Government proceeded from the assumption that the
United States Government would take such steps as being only inevitable
in this connection and would understand that they represented a peaceful
effort. As to the threats that could be heard in the United States in
connection with the possibility of the USSR's signing a peace treaty
with the GDR in the event that no
understanding with the West was reached, i.e., in the event that the
Soviet Union acted as the West had acted with respect to Japan, the
Soviet Government wished to emphasize once again that such threats could
not produce the effect desired by those who made them. Threats had no
effect on the USSR whatsoever; instead of indulging in them it would be
better to root out the remnants of World War II.

Mr. Gromyko said he was speaking
on behalf of the Soviet Government as sincerely as Mr. Khrushchev had spoken in Vienna when he
spoke in favor of an agreed solution of the problem of the German peace
settlement. Mr. Gromyko recalled
that the President had said that he appreciated frankness. The Soviet
Government also appreciated frankness, because frank conversations were
the shortest way to understanding and clarification of respective
positions. As Mr. Khrushchev had
said, the NATO military base and the
occupation regime in West Berlin represented a rotten tooth which must
be pulled out, and no one would be harmed by that. One could not take
seriously assertions that it was necessary to maintain a NATO base in West Berlin in order to
protect the West Berlin population. As a matter of fact, the Soviet
Government was in favor of respecting the freedom of the West Berlin
population, but no NATO base was needed
for that purpose.

Mr. Gromyko continued that the
Soviet Government had some specific points concerning what had been
discussed in the course of the US/USSR exchanges of views. Recently, in
conversations with Lord Home and
the Secretary, it had been suggested that an international air access
authority be established. It had also been stated that such an
arrangement would involve respect for the sovereignty of the GDR. The Soviet Union was prepared to take
account of this suggestion and proposed the following two alternatives:
(a) creation of an international arbitration authority to be concerned
with all types of access; the Soviet views on such an authority had been stated in
detail to the Secretary in earlier conversations; or (b) creation of
such an authority to deal solely with air access. The latter was a new
proposal, and it could be discussed in greater detail later tonight with
the Secretary. In making this step forward toward the position of the
United States and the United Kingdom, the Soviet Government proceeded on
the assumption that at the same time a solution to all other problems
relating to a German peace settlement and West Berlin would be
found.

Mr. Gromyko then recalled the
Secretary's remarks during the last meeting to the effect that United
States favored the development of contacts between West and East
Germans. The Soviet Union, he said, was also in favor of such contacts
because they would promote alleviation of the situation in Germany and
Europe as a whole. However, it went without saying that the development
of such contacts did not mean solution of the main problem. Mr.
Gromyko went on to say that
the Soviet Union was also prepared to take into account US views
regarding unification and it was prepared to include in a German peace
settlement and a German peace treaty provision concerning the
possibility of German unification. This could be done either in the form
of an agreed joint statement of the powers concerned, or such a
provision could be included in a peace treaty with the GDR. As to the Soviet position on
unification, it was well known to the United States; the Soviet Union
believed that reunification was a matter for the two German states to
resolve.

Mr. Gromyko then said he wished to
stress that when a solution of the West Berlin problem was found on a
basis corresponding to the interests of peace and the interests of the
GDR sovereignty, and when other
related problems, on which there had been some rapprochement between the
US and the USSR, were also resolved, then actually there would remain no
problem on which the two countries were in direct confrontation. Under
those circumstances disarmament would also be easier to solve,
particularly in view of the invigorated international situation which
would then prevail, and particularly in Europe. Mr. Gromyko said that those were the views
of the Soviet Government concerning a German peace settlement and the
question of West Berlin.

The President said he knew that the Secretary and Mr. Gromyko had discussed the Berlin
problem for many months; thus the USSR was familiar with our position.
Also, he, the President, had discussed this problem with Mr. Gromyko here at the White House in
September of last year. The US, the President emphasized, was anxious to
work out mutually satisfactory procedures on access. The US had made
several proposals on this point, and the USSR had made some too.
However, the matter which was of greatest concern to us was that of the
withdrawal of Western forces. West Berlin was not a NATO base and the Western forces there had
no offensive capabilities. The United States desired that West Berlin not be used as a base for
subversion. However, we were unable to withdraw our forces and thus
endanger the freedom of West Berlin. We were prepared to engage in a
dialogue in November, but this of course involved our friends, including
the French. However on the question of withdrawing the Western forces
from West Berlin we were in disagreement. As to other matters, the
President said he thought they should continue to be explored; those
matters included access, both air and ground, the role and the juridical
status of forces in West Berlin, etc. All of these matters could be
discussed. However there could be no discussion of the presence of
Western forces, which was a matter of survival; thus we disagreed on
that point. If the US were to accept what the Soviet Union had
suggested, i.e., if we were to withdraw our forces, the city and access
to it would be under complete control of East Germany, and East Germany
could also control movement of persons and goods. Under such conditions
the city could no longer remain free; our commitments would become
invalid, and we would have withdrawn from the positions the US and the
West had taken for many years. The President said he did not believe
that the Soviet proposal would guarantee the security of West Berlin,
and its freedom could not be maintained under such conditions.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to
comment on one particular remark by the President. He said that the
Soviet Union had tried to dispel the apprehensions and suspicions voiced
by the US Government concerning the creation of a free and demilitarized
city of West Berlin. The President had said that if the Soviet proposal
were to be accepted West Berlin would come under the control of the
GDR and that the social order of
West Berlin would be threatened by this. Mr. Gromyko asserted that there was no reason for such
fears, or doubts, or suspicions, because the USSR was prepared to
undertake solemn guarantees, together with the US and the other Western
Powers and also with the UN, insuring
respect for the status of West Berlin. He professed not to be able to
understand why the President believed that the collective weight and
prestige of those nations or the weight and prestige of the UN would not constitute sufficient
guarantees of what the President called the freedom of West Berlin. As
to access, Mr. Gromyko said that
there was no problem here. The Soviet Union favored unrestricted access
to West Berlin as a free and demilitarized city; it was in favor of
unrestricted ties between that city and the outer world, and it was in
favor of the development of trade and cultural relations with the city.
In the course of the US/USSR exchanges of views, the Soviet Government
had tried to convince the United States that it was in favor of the
strictest possible guarantees in this respect.

The President said that he appreciated this, but emphasized that if the
Soviet Union desired to continue to permit the people of West Berlin to choose their fate, he did
not see why withdrawal of Western forces was of any importance. Contrary
to Soviet assertions, West Berlin was not a NATO base and our troops there were symbolic. Since we had
said that this point was vital to us, we failed to see why it should not
be possible to work out access with our troops remaining in West Berlin.
The President reiterated that those troops were a symbolic guarantee of
the freedom of the city, and that of course was of great significance.
If the Soviet Union desired to let the West Berlin population choose its
own government, then presence of those troops should not create any
problem. Those troops were not endangering the security of the Soviet
Union or any other country in East Europe.

Mr. Gromyko said that it was well
known, and the President would not deny this, that presence of Western
forces in West Berlin was a result of World War II. Both Western and
Soviet troops had come to Germany and West Berlin as occupation troops
as a result of the defeat of Nazi Germany. However, he wished to point
out with the President's permission that the most dangerous slice of the
last war had remained in West Berlin in the form of Western forces. The
President was of course right in saying—and Mr. Khrushchev had agreed on this point
with the President at Vienna—that the Western forces in West Berlin
could play nonmilitary role. However this made the Soviet Union wonder
all the more why, despite this fact, the West still insisted on
maintaining those forces. Moreover, it should be noted that even a small
number of troops can represent a danger of war.

Mr. Gromyko continued that he
wished to emphasize once again—and this was also Mr. Khrushchev's view—that if the question
of West Berlin were to be resolved on a mutually satisfactory basis,
there would remain no other questions on which our two states were at
loggerheads, with the possible exception of disarmament. If such a
solution were found, the peoples of our two countries and of the world
at large would sigh in relief and would thank the President and Mr.
Khrushchev for their efforts
in bringing about such a success.

After some discussion of certain other matters, Mr. Gromyko said that in conclusion he
wished to state that Mr. Khrushchev had instructed him to convey to the President
Mr. Khrushchev's belief that it
would be useful if the Heads of the Government of the United States and
the USSR met to discuss the problems which were dividing the two Powers,
and first and foremost the question of a German peace treaty and of West
Berlin. If Mr. Khrushchev should
have an opportunity of doing so, he would come to New York in the latter
part of November in connection with the General Assembly. Thus, what was
meant was the possibility of Khrushchev's coming after the U.S. elections.

The President said that if Mr. Khrushchev should come to the United States he would be
glad to meet with him again. However, the President thought that it would be a mistake to
describe such a meeting as dealing with a peace treaty and West Berlin,
since others were involved in these matters and more formal discussions
would be required. Thus if the Chairman should come, he would be glad to
meet with him and discuss any questions, without however attempting to
organize an agenda.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/10–1862. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky on October 21 and approved
in the White House on October 23. The meeting was held in the White
House. The source text is labeled “Part I.” Part II, which dealt
with Cuba, is scheduled for publication in volume XI; Part III,
which dealt with nuclear testing, is printed in vol. VII, Document—;
and Part IV, which dealt with U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations, is
printed in vol. V, Document 151. A summary of this conversation was
transmitted to Moscow in telegram 958, October 20. (Department of
State, Central Files, 762.0221/10–2062) Gromyko was in the United States to attend the 17th
session of the U.N. General Assembly.

136. Memorandum of Conversation136. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 18,
1962.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The Secretary

Mr. Akalovsky

U.S.S.R.

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Mr. Sukhodrev

After dinner, the Secretary and Mr. Gromyko conversed alone.

Mr. Gromyko said that since he was
going to leave soon, he wished to make some clarifications with respect
to the points which he had discussed with the President earlier
today,2 and particularly on the question of a German
peace treaty and of the normalization of the West Berlin situation on
the basis of such a treaty. Reading from a prepared text, he said that
the major obstacle to agreement between the two sides was the question
of the withdrawal of Western forces from West Berlin. If agreement were
to be reached on this question, the Soviet Union believed that the path
to agreement would be cleared. The Soviet Union could not accept the
present situation, no matter what arguments the U.S. adduced in
contending that West Berlin was not a NATO military base, because objective reality was objective
reality. The Soviet Union did not underestimate, or to put it in a
positive way, it appreciated the significance of the rapprochement on a number of questions relating to
a German peace settlement, which had resulted from the USSR exchanges of
views. The Secretary, of course, knew what those questions were. This
rapprochement was a definite and substantial step forward, but it did
not resolve the main issue. Mr. Gromyko went on to say that during his last conversation
with the Secretary, certain important points relating to a German peace
settlement had been touched upon. The Soviet Union was prepared and
believed it to be useful to clarify the respective positions and to set
forth in more specific terms its own attitude on certain points raised
by the Secretary. He said that he now wished to discuss certain points
in greater detail than he had discussed them with the President.

Mr. Gromyko continued that the
Secretary, as well as Lord Home,
had touched upon the question of an international access authority and
of an international air access authority. The Western side had
emphasized that this proposal was based on respect for the sovereignty
of the GDR and on the existing
international practices. If such were indeed the intentions of the U.S.,
then, as he had said to the President, the USSR could take account of
the Western position. The USSR was prepared to agree to the creation of
an international arbitration authority to deal with air access to West
Berlin and to act in settling frictions if they were to arise in the
course of the actual implementation of an agreement on access. He said
he wished to stress that such an authority would be an arbitration body
and not a body that would be incompatible with the sovereignty of the
GDR. The Soviet Union proceeded from
the premise that technical services related to air traffic to and from
West Berlin would be handled with the participation of GDR authorities. Alternatively, and this
would represent a broader arrangement, the USSR could also agree to West
Berlin's being a party to the proposed international arbitration body;
the Soviet Union was willing to agree to such an arrangement in order to
facilitate agreement. Basically, the Soviet Union proposed a choice
between (a) an international arbitration body to deal with all types of
access, i.e., land, water, and air access, and the US was familiar with
the Soviet proposals for such a body; or (b) an international
arbitration body to deal only with air access. Thus, as the Secretary
could see, the Soviet Government was guided by the desire of satisfying
the wishes of the Western Powers and of meeting the Western Powers half
way. The USSR believed that these proposals by the Soviet Union offered
a basis for understanding, assuming that a solution of other problems,
and primarily that of the withdrawal of Western forces, was found.

Referring to the Secretary's remarks at the last meeting regarding the
desirability of contacts between West and East Germans, Mr. Gromyko noted that he had already said
to the President that the Soviet Union appreciated the Secretary's statement to the effect that the
U.S. Government favored such contacts. He wished to reiterate that such
a position of the U.S. could further the alleviation of tensions in
Germany and Europe, particularly if measures were taken to stop
provocations against the GDR and to guard the Western side of the GDR
border. Of course, the U.S. Government was aware of the fact that the
Soviet Union had always been in favor of the development of cultural and
trade relations between the GDR and the FRG and between West Berlin and the GDR. Development of such contacts and relations would
contribute to a more tranquil situation and to more normal relations
between the GDR and West Germany.
However, it could not be overlooked that the development of such
contacts would not mean a solution of the main problems facing the U.S.
and the USSR in connection with a German peace settlement and the
normalization of the West Berlin situation, and above all the question
of the forces of the three Western Powers in West Berlin.

As to the question of German unification, Mr. Gromyko said that he had already indicated to the
President what could be said about German unification in the process of
concluding a German peace treaty, together with agreed solution of other
questions linked with such a treaty. He wished to emphasize that the
Soviet Union desired an agreed solution of the questions relating to a
German peace settlement, including a peace treaty with the GDR; if such a solution were reached then a
provision might be included concerning the possibility of German
reunification. In this connection, he wished to state that such a
provision would not be contrary to the position of the Soviet Union,
because the Soviet Union had never believed that the door to unification
should be shut tight. The Soviet Union had always expressed the view
that if the Germans were to agree on a platform for unification, the
Soviet Union would accept it as a fact. As was well known, the Soviet
Union considered that the question of German unification was a matter
for the two sovereign German states to resolve. As to the provision
concerning German unification, such a provision could be incorporated
either in an agreed joint statement of the Powers concerned or in a
peace treaty with the GDR. In any event,
the Soviet Union believed that if agreement were reached with the West
on the questions which must be resolved in connection with a German
peace settlement, including the major issue of the withdrawal of the
occupation forces of the three Western Powers from West Berlin and the
elimination of the NATO military base
in West Berlin, a mutual understanding on this point would not be a
problem. Mr. Gromyko said that he
deemed it necessary to make these remarks in the hope that they would
find due understanding on the part of U.S. and the other Western Powers
and would facilitate agreement on other questions which must be resolved
in connection with a German peace settlement.

The Secretary thanked Mr. Gromyko
for this further elaboration of the remarks he had made to the
President. Referring to access, the Secretary said he believed that
agreement on this problem should be possible. Basically, if the
Four-Power arrangements contained in the Jessup-Malik agreement on
access were to be adhered to, there should be no problem. In other
words, access would not intrude in the activities of the East German
authorities, nor would those authorities intrude in access. For
instance, when planes flew from Vienna to Athens over Yugoslav
territory, they did so with the permission of Yugoslav authorities and
thus they did not intrude in Yugoslav sovereignty; on the other hand,
Yugoslav authorities did not interfere in that traffic. If the Four
Powers could agree on a type of arrangement similar to that contained in
the Jessup-Malik agreement, there should be no difficulty. We had no
intention of intruding in the activities of GDR authorities. It was standard practice for aircraft to
fly over the territory of a country without that country interfering in
such flights.

The Secretary then stressed that the major problem was that of the
presence of Western forces in West Berlin and stated that in all
seriousness there was no agreement on that question. On that question,
the Soviet Union must decide whether it wanted to go to war to remove
those forces. This point was fundamental to the West, but it appeared
that the more we explained our point of view, the greater the appetite
became on the part of the Soviet Union to accomplish its objective.
There was certainly no agreement on this question. We had sought to meet
the Soviet Union on such questions as boundaries and nuclear matters,
but on this point there was no understanding. No one could speak in
terms of eternity, but at present this was an utterly fundamental
question. The Secretary said that the U.S., and the President
personally, would study most carefully what Mr. Gromyko had said to see
whether anything could be done.

The Secretary pointed out that when Lord
Home had spoken about air access, he had not been
speaking for the U.S. or the Western group as a whole. As far as we were
concerned, we supposed that all types of access, and not only air
access, should be considered. Since Mr. Gromyko had put forward two alternatives, we wished to
indicate our belief that the general problem should be treated as a
whole.

The Secretary then emphasized that he did believe that there was
considerable advantage in contacts between West Germany and East Germany
and between West Berlin and East Berlin, because such contacts could
promote the interests of both sides and decrease tensions. Thus, we were
entirely in agreement that steps should be taken in that direction.

The Secretary continued that the U.S. had tried to take certain steps in
the direction of narrowing the gap between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.,
although this has created
certain tensions between the U.S. and some of its allies. However, there
was a point where vital interests were involved, and with reasonable
effort on both sides a solution to such problems should be found. The
Secretary recalled that we had interposed with regard to the provision
in the West German Constitution declaring West Berlin a Land of the
FRG. Likewise, we had pursued a
policy in the nuclear field which eased the problem the Soviet Union
appeared to have with regard to nuclear matter in Central Europe. The
Secretary also recalled that he had indicated privately to Mr. Gromyko that the Eastern boundaries
were not a problem in a de facto and practical sense. However, there
were some points where we just could not agree. He hoped that the Soviet
Union would introduce some evidence of reciprocity in those questions so
that vital interests of both sides would be taken into account.

The Secretary then observed that the President was leaving town tomorrow
and that he was to call on him tonight. He said we would discuss access
with Ambassador Dobrynin. We were
already engaged in discussions with our allies and hoped that we could
bring the positions of the two sides close together. However, he wished
to stress once again that the basic problem was that of the Western
forces in West Berlin.

Mr. Gromyko said that as far as
the sovereignty of the GDR was
concerned, the Soviet Union could never agree to dividing the GDR sovereignty in two parts or to any
arrangement encroaching on that sovereignty. The Soviet Union could
never sign any agreement providing for such an arrangement. What the
U.S. appeared to have in mind was respect for the sovereignty of the
GDR in form, with actions which
would contradict the principle of observance of that sovereignty. Such
plans should be cast aside. What the Soviet Union had in mind was that
standing international practices must be applied in full.

Mr. Gromyko continued that the
Soviet Union was negotiating with the U.S. on a German peace settlement
in the hope that a solution could be reached on an agreed basis. If
there were no such hope, the Soviet Union would not have negotiated with
the U.S. and would not have wasted its time. However, if it were to be
impossible to reach an understanding, there should be no doubt in
anybody's mind that the Soviet Union would sign a peace treaty with the
GDR and that all measures would be
taken which must be implemented in connection with a peace treaty and
which would safeguard the GDR
sovereignty, including measures related to access. It depended on the
Western Powers what would follow then. The Soviet Union wished to sign a
peace treaty and proposed peace. The Soviet Union was in favor of
reducing tensions in the world. If there was to be war, the West would
have to make it, but the Soviet Union would be able to stand up for
itself, and this also went for
a number of other states which wished to sign a peace treaty. This was
the Soviet position, which he wished to emphasize once again.

Mr. Gromyko went on to say that
the U.S.S.R. could not agree to the West's maintaining a military NATO base in the center of the GDR. The West had come to Germany and West
Berlin as a result of the defeat of Nazi Germany, and so had the Soviet
Union. He wondered why the West wished to stay there indefinitely. He
said he wished to reiterate and reemphasize that the Soviet Union was
proposing a peaceful act.

The Secretary stressed that the presence of the Soviet Union in East
Germany was also a result of Nazi Germany's defeat; there was no
difference between Soviet presence in East Germany and our presence in
West Berlin. He suggested that the possibility of a few survivors
deciding who was right on this question be set aside and that both he
and Mr. Gromyko as Foreign
Ministers were in duty bound to avoid such disastrous results. If the
Soviet Union meant by GDR sovereignty
that the GDR would control access, that
was totally unacceptable. Our view was that there should be no
interference by the GDR in access, in
accordance with standard practice of international law. If the GDR would not interfere, there would be no
problem. However, if the GDR wanted to
supervise a restricted access there was no prospect for agreement. We
agreed that the Soviet Union was a great power; however, the Soviet
Union must accept that the U.S. was also a great power.

Mr. Gromyko asserted there was no
analogy between Western presence in West Berlin and Soviet presence in
East Germany. The U.S.S.R. was in the GDR on an entirely different basis, on the basis of
contractual commitments, just as the U.S. was in West Germany on the
basis of some contractual commitments with West Germany. The Soviet
Union had proposed that all foreign troops be withdrawn from foreign
territories, but unfortunately the U.S. had refused. As to West Berlin,
that was an entirely different matter and there was no analogy
whatsoever here, because the troops in West Berlin were occupation
troops and the occupation regime still prevailed in that city. As to
sovereignty, it was easy for the Secretary to rationalize. The Secretary
apparently meant if the GDR should
intervene in access that would be unacceptable and would not correspond
to the U.S. concept of sovereignty, whereas things would be all right if
the GDR refrained from such acts. Mr.
Gromyko said he wished to
stress that there were no two types of sovereignty; there was only one
notion of sovereignty and only one norm of international practice, and
such practice must be applied to the GDR
as to any other country. International norms which were standard
practice must fully apply to the GDR.
Access could not be a barrier here, because the GDR had stated its willingness to assume obligations to
ensure unrestricted access. The Soviet Union had stated that it was
prepared to underwrite those obligations together with the Western
Powers or with the UN. The Soviet Union had always stressed
its belief that it should be possible to make unrestricted access
compatible with the GDR sovereignty; in
fact, the Secretary himself had said this. Thus, he could not understand
why the Secretary was taking such liberties in treating sovereignty;
little could remain of sovereignty as a result of such treatment, and
the Soviet Union could not agree to that. Mr. Gromyko said he wished to make these
clarifications because there was perhaps some lack of understanding of
the Soviet position on the part of the U.S. Both sides were negotiating
and their respective positions must be understood correctly. He had been
patiently clarifying the Soviet position because perhaps there was some
misunderstanding which should be eliminated.

The Secretary then said he wished to ask a direct question. He wished Mr.
Gromyko would tell him
whether today, as of this day, he considered that the Soviet Union had
obligations to the U.S., the U.K, and France, with respect to the
presence of Western forces in and access to West Berlin. He wondered
whether Mr. Gromyko regarded this
as existing obligations.

Mr. Gromyko said that, speaking
briefly, the Soviet view was that the occupation regime in West Berlin
had outlived itself and that it could not live forever. The U.S.
Government appeared to believe, in spite of the fact that 17 years had
passed since World War II, that the occupation regime and the occupation
forces in West Berlin represented a normal situation. Yet the Soviet
Union believed that this was not a normal situation; indeed it was an
absolutely abnormal situation. It was impossible to conceive that the
Western Powers could really believe they could tear up such allied
obligations as were not agreeable to the West, while insisting on those
obligations which were to its liking. The U.S.S.R. could not accept such
an approach, which was tantamount to an arbitrary interpretation of the
situation. Moreover, a free and demilitarized city of West Berlin would
not harm anyone; a German peace settlement and normalization of the West
Berlin situation on the basis of such a settlement could not injure
anyone. Everybody would gain from a solution of this problem on that
basis, and particularly the cause of peace. Whatever concessions, if the
term concession could be used at all, that the West would make would be
not to the U.S.S.R. but to the cause of world peace, and that would be a
significant concession indeed.

The Secretary pointed out that Mr. Gromyko had failed to answer his question. He asked
again whether the Soviet Union believed it had formal obligations to the
Western Powers with regard to the presence of Western forces in Berlin
and with regard to access.

Mr. Gromyko asserted that he had
answered the question.

The Secretary said that leaving aside whether the Soviet Union wanted to
change the situation, he wanted a yes or no answer to his question.

Mr. Gromyko replied that, briefly
speaking, the Soviet Union believed that the occupation regime in West
Berlin with all of its attributes had outlived itself. Seventeen years
had passed since World War II and that regime must be ended. This was
required by the U.S.S.R., it was needed by the U.S. and it was needed by
all countries. The U.S. should not look for any devious motives behind
this position. The Soviet Union was against basing foreign policy on
such motives and if anybody did so it was not the U.S.S.R. Mr. Gromyko then said he wanted to ask the
Secretary a question of his own. He wondered why the West believed it
needed a NATO military base in West
Berlin and where were U.S. vital interests in that connection. After
all, the U.S. was here and West Berlin was there. As to what the
Secretary called freedom of West Berlin, the Soviet Union had suggested
that a joint agreement be signed to guarantee West Berlin's way of life.
But the U.S. did not want to do this; it seemed not to trust its
prestige and might which would underlie such an agreement. Gromyko
wondered what was wrong with this suggestion; after all, all of the
great powers and, if necessary, the UN
would back up such guarantee.

The Secretary suggested to take the peels off the banana and to look at
the heart of the matter. The Soviet Union was a great power and so was
the United States. We were in West Berlin, although one could not talk
in terms of eternity, which was a fiction in the Soviet mind. At
pres-ent we were in West Berlin and we would not be driven out. We were
a great power and we would not accept defeat unless the U.S.S.R. fought
a war and attempted to defeat us. This was not a threat, it was a fact,
since we were committed to the people of West Berlin. The Soviet
Government and the Central Committee must consider this. The U.S. wanted
to resolve this problem peacefully, but it could not be resolved
peacefully on the basis of U.S. defeat. Solution to this problem must be
sought on the basis of a mutual recognition of the vital interests of
both sides and on the basis of mutual respect. We had gone a long way to
recognize the vital interests of the U.S.S.R., and the U.S.S.R. must
recognize ours. There was a point beyond which lay surrender and we
could not go beyond that point. The Soviet people were courageous, but
so were the American people. What we asked for was mutual respect, and
without that there could be no peace.

Mr. Gromyko said he agreed with
the Secretary's remark about mutual respect. He thought this was a good
formula; agreement must be sought on the basis of mutual respect.
However, the Soviet Union could not find such respect on the part of the
U.S. The Secretary's remark indicated that the U.S. wished to adhere to
a one-sided position. It wished to preserve the NATO
military base in West Berlin and to preserve Western forces in West
Berlin, although U.S. interests in this connection were not guided by
the interests of maintaining the freedom of West Berlin or of
safeguarding U.S. security. What the U.S. wanted was to maintain the
hotbed of fever which was shaking all of Europe. He wondered where was
mutual respect here. The Soviet Union had no desire of placing the U.S.
in a position of capitulation, and the Secretary had incorrectly
described the Soviet position. Quite the contrary, the Soviet Union
believed that the U.S. was a great power. The U.S.S.R. was also a great
power and had considerable strength. The President and Mr. Khru-shchev had had a frank exchange of
views on this point. However, the U.S. position on West Berlin did not
indicate that the U.S. recognized this fact and that it based its policy
on it. The U.S. had consistently been shying away from any proposal
based on the interests of peace and respect for the sovereignty of the
GDR. Thus, the Secretary's reproach
that the U.S.S.R. wanted to place the U.S. in a position of surrender
was inaccurate. The U.S. position only strengthened the Soviet Union's
view that a solution of this problem was required by the security of the
U.S.S.R. and many other states, by the security interests of all of
Europe, and indeed of the U.S. itself. The U.S.S.R. was convinced that
this was so. The U.S.S.R. and many other states wanted to draw a line
under World War II. The Central Committee and other leading bodies in
the U.S.S.R. had discussed the probable motives by which the U.S. was
guided in clinging to West Berlin as a military base. United States
security interests were certainly not among those motives. Thus, the
conclusion had been drawn that the U.S. wished to retain West Berlin as
a hotbed of tensions.

The Secretary replied that Mr. Gromyko had greatly distorted this question. The fact
was that on one side the U.S.S.R. wanted to raise its flag in East
Berlin and East Germany and on the other side it wanted to lower our
flag in West Berlin. That was totally unacceptable. The U.S.S.R. was in
East Germany only because of the Nazi surrender. We had voluntarily
abandoned Thuringia and Saxony to abide by the arrangements concluded
during the war. We would not allow a situation where the Soviet Union
would abandon its responsibilities and obligations in Germany. The
Soviet Union must reckon with our vital interests. After all, we were
not children, we were adults.

Mr. Gromyko replied that the
Soviet Union did not place this problem in the plane of the U.S.
allowing or not allowing something. The U.S.S.R. proceeded from
objective realities, which were not contingent upon U.S. actions. The
U.S.S.R. did not intend to raise its flag, it only wished to raise the
flag of peace. The Soviet Union had never signed any obligation
providing for the West's eternally staying in West Berlin and
maintaining a NATO base there. Nobody
in his right mind could have assumed such an obligation. In fact, there
was no such obligation. It was the U.S. and its allies who had torn up their obligation and wished to
keep only those obligations which were advantageous to them while
discarding those which were not to their liking.

Mr. Gromyko then expressed regret
that no agreement was discernible on the main question. This was clear
from the present exchange of views, and he agreed with the Secretary on
this point. This was a regrettable and sad situation.

The Secretary said that the basic problem remained where it had been
since 1945, namely, whether the Soviet Union was willing to conduct its
foreign policy on the basis of its solemn obligations and agreements or
wanted to resort to the law of jungle. The U.S. wished a peaceful
settlement, and there was no question about that. If such a settlement
should prove impossible, the U.S. would not shirk its responsibilities.
The Secretary then reiterated that we had gone a long way to resolve
this question and all other questions relating to a German settlement,
although our efforts to bring the positions of the two sides closer
together had caused tensions with some of our allies. He wished to
stress that the heart of the matter was whether the U.S.S.R. would
recognize that the U.S. was a great power and could not be pushed
around. He could assure Mr. Gromyko that the U.S. public would not be pushed around.
Surely, agreement could be reached on the basis of reciprocity, but
without reciprocity there was no possibility of agreement. So long as
Mr. Kennedy was President and he, Mr. Rusk, Secretary of State, there would be
no possibility of agreement without reciprocity.

Mr. Gromyko contended the
Secretary's reproach regarding Soviet policy since World War II was
unjustified. The Soviet Union had carried the main burden in that war,
and many U.S. statesmen, including President Roosevelt, had correctly
and objectively appreciated the Soviet Union's role and its burden in
defeating the Nazis.

The Secretary interjected that the Soviet-Hitler agreement had opened the
door to World War II, so that not too many tears should be shed over
that.

Mr. Gromyko responded that this
was an old story resorted to by people when they lost their equilibrium,
and suggested that no time be wasted on this point.

The Secretary pointed out that the U.S. had never been an ally of Hitler,
whereas the U.S.S.R. had in 1939–1940.

Mr. Gromyko continued that the
aspersions the Secretary attempted to cast on Soviet policy were
unjustified. It was not the U.S.S.R. but the West that had built bases
surrounding the territories of other states, it was not the U.S.S.R. but
the West that had started raising tensions, and it was not the USSR but
the West that had torn up agreements. Thus, if the term law of jungle
could be applied, it was the U.S. that had resorted to it in many instances since World War II.
The Secretary was incorrect in saying that the U.S.S.R. was not dealing
on the basis of reciprocity. The Secretary's assertion could not be
proven in one single instance. The Soviet Union had emphasized and
suggested that solutions should be sought on the basis of mutual
acceptability and complete equality of both sides. The U.S. was for the
observance of this principle only in words, whereas in fact it had a
narrow view of problems and looked at them from the standpoint of NATO and the Western Powers. The U.S.
rejected almost automatically and out of hand Soviet proposals so long
as it was able to retain West Berlin as a NATO military base.

Mr. Gromyko said that in general
he wanted to tell the Secretary that solution to the various problems
could not be found on the basis of strong language; one must be more
reasonable and cooler, because much was behind words and much depended
on what one said. If the Secretary and the President sought common
ground with the Soviet Union, they would find no lack of similar desire
on the part of the Soviet Union. However, unfortunately as of now the
Secretary's remarks did not indicate that the U.S. wished to pursue this
course. Mr. Gromyko recalled that
he stressed to the President today the Soviet view that it would be good
if common language could be found between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. on
questions dividing them, including the question of a German peace treaty
and of normalizing the West Berlin situation on the basis of such a
treaty. He observed that apparently this conversation was drawing to an
end.

The Secretary noted that Mr. Gromyko's last formulation was the same as the one used
in Vienna in 1961, i.e., “German peace treaty and normalization of the
West Berlin situation on the basis of such a treaty.” He regretted that
not more progress had been achieved, pointing out that the U.S. had
tried to meet the U.S.S.R. on many questions involved in this problem.
As to the main question, Mr. Gromyko and Mr. Khru-shchev must decide on what basis they were prepared
to reach agreement. We knew on what basis we were prepared to reach
agreement. The Soviet Union must decide whether there would be peace or
not. We believed that all nations must live on the basis of peace, and
if the U.S.S.R. joined UN members and
lived in peace, that would revolutionize the world and there would be no
problem with the U.S.

The Secretary continued that we would follow up on the points Mr.
Gromyko had mentioned and try
to narrow the differences. We had tried to narrow the differences in the
past and would continue to do so in the future, in the hope that common
language could be found. The Secretary then recalled Mr. Khrushchev's remark to one of his
visitors that the Rusk-Gromyko talks would produce no progress
and that the situation would remain more or less as it was. The
Secretary regretted that no particular progress on this problem had been
made during Mr. Gromyko's stay in the U.S., and stated
that both sides must see whether they could bring these matters closer
to agreement.

Mr. Gromyko expressed doubt that
the Secretary had any reason to equate U.S. policy with the sentiments
of UN members. He thought that the
Secretary had attempted to place such a sign of equation. The Soviet
Union was familiar with the sentiments in the UN and believed that the overwhelming majority of UN members favored a peaceful and just
solution of acute international problems. Those feelings were not in
accord with U.S. policy on most acute problems. Thus, the Secretary's
attempt to equate U.S. policy with those feelings was unjustified. Mr.
Gromyko then thanked the
Secretary for the dinner and his hospitality.

The Secretary pointed out that, to his recollection, not a single
proposal or resolution advanced in the UN
by the U.S.S.R. against opposition by the U.S. had succeeded or been
adopted.

Mr. Gromyko agreed and said that
the Soviet Union was also familiar with the weaknesses and the darker
aspects of UN activities. However, he was
speaking of the general feeling of UN
members, who were in favor of peaceful solution of international
problems, of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states,
and of peaceful coexistence. This fact was as unquestionable as the fact
that the sun would rise tomorrow. Mr. Gromyko concluded the conversation by saying that he
merely wished to point out that no sign of equation could be placed
between U.S. policy and the sentiments of UN members. Any attempt to do so was a little too much.

The conversation ended at 12:20 a.m.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/10–1862. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on October 23. The meeting, which was
held at the Department of State, took place during Rusk's dinner for Gromyko. A summary was transmitted
to Moscow in telegram 953, October 19. (Ibid.)

2 See Document
135.

137. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)137. Memorandum From David
Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the
President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 18,
1962.

SUBJECT

Review of Berlin Contingency Planning and Reorganization of the
Planning Machinery

The Secretary has approved the Task Force's proposal to have the
Ambassadorial Group reexamine Berlin contingency plans and take a careful look at the machinery
for handling the Berlin operation with a view to tightening the plans
and assuring that the machinery can provide the most effective responses
to Soviet moves in Berlin. (The approved Task force paper is
attached.)

Despite last week's loud cries and complaints about our paper2 describing the state
of contingency planning, a good part of the contents of that paper are
reproduced in the approved Task Force document.

This exercise could produce useful results. I am not sure about the
recommendations dealing with the single Commander in Berlin and a single
Ambassador in Bonn. Something more positive and specific is needed in
Berlin. The problem of a single Ambassador is far more complicated than
the paper indicates. But we will deal with these as we go along in the
exercise.

An important question, however, is how this set of proposals fits into
the broader scenario which you had in mind. On this we need a reading
from you on how this Ambassadorial exercise can be dovetailed with other
contemplated actions. One exercise need not exclude the other, but it is
important that they reinforce each other. Can we get a reading from you
on this?

DK

Attachment3

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
European Affairs (Tyler) to
Secretary of State Rusk

SUBJECT

Review of Berlin Contingency Planning

This memorandum is in response to your request that the Berlin Task Force
undertake a review of Berlin contingency planning, in order to identify
all elements of the planning which have been left for further
determination. You asked that this problem be discussed quadripartitely,
with a view to obtaining agreement to recommend to governments advance
commitments as much as possible.

In addition, the President has recently discussed a basic review of
Berlin planning with the French and German Foreign Ministers.4

This paper examines three key aspects of planning: (1) organization, (2)
planning, and (3) delegation of authority. Organization is the key to
the preparation of plans and their application to specific situations by
the person to whom authority is delegated. Planning is the key to the
delegation of authority. Delegation of authority (advance commitments by
government) is the key to rapid response to specific situations.

Organization

The present organization for the Berlin problem is illustrated by the
attached chart (Tab A).5
This, however, over-simplifies the problem, since it implies that
Berlin, Bonn, and Washington are organized on the same basis as Live
Oak. This is, however, not the case.

Live Oak is an integrated, full-time staff, with one man in charge.

Berlin is run by three Commandants, with the help of a Governing Mayor.
Although there is a Chairman Commandant, he has no authority to deal
with most of the problems which arise in Berlin or on the access routes.
Although there is provision for a single commander in event of “any
grave emergency,” the staff that is supposed to assist him—the Allied
(Military) Staff—would be competent to handle only certain problems,
such as civil unrest and an armed attack.

Berlin problems are handled in Bonn by the Foreign Office and three
Ambassadors, assisted by a part-time quadripartite committee.

Although the Washington Ambassadorial Group is led by the US Chairman, it
has no full-time quadripartite staff. The sub-groups are staffed by very
few officers, particularly as far as the Embassies are concerned, who
often have other duties and are invariably over-worked. Furthermore, the
Ambassadorial Group (State Department) is not tied in with the Live Oak
communications system.

If maximum improvements were desired in this organization, the following
steps should be taken:

1. Leadership. Make provision for the President to designate a Single
Commander in Berlin and Single Ambassador in Bonn whenever “any grave
emergency” arises in Berlin or on the access routes.

2. Staff. Establish full-time quadripartite staffs with military advisers
in Washington and Bonn and an integrated (political and military)
full-time tripartite staff in Berlin.

3. Facilities. Make available in the State Department, the American
Embassy in Bonn, and the British Headquarters in Berlin adequate space
and facilities for these staffs.

4. Communications. Tie the Ambassadorial Group (State Department) in with
the Live Oak on-line telegraph communications system.

It should be understood that these steps are closely related and none can
be fully effective without the other; on the other hand, we believe that
some improvements should be possible at this time.

Planning and delegation of authority

The present state of Allied planning and delegation of authority is
indicated by Tab B.6 This
indicates that the planning now underway relates to:

1. Military

a. Quadripartite naval counter-measures: Seaspray

b. NATO alerts/military build-up

c. NATOBERCON/MARCON
plans/Tripartite-NATO
relationship/preferred sequence paper

2. Political

a. Civilian ground access: Passports, visas, and customs and possible
Allied aegis

b. Peace treaty

c. United Nations

3. Counter-measures

a. Military (tripartite autobahn patrols, autobahn convoys for individual
Allied travelers, etc.)

b. Non-military (selective economic and other non-military
counter-measures)

The chart also indicates that delegations of authority are primarily
related to military plans (Jack Pine and autobahn convoy rules of
conduct). Very little authority has been delegated in the non-military
areas, primarily because governments are unwilling.

Both planning and the delegation of authority could be facilitated if the
organizational suggestions made above were carried out. If there were
agreement for the President to appoint a Single Commander in Berlin and
a Single Ambassador in Bonn, plans could be prepared on the basis of the
assumption that they would exercise certain delegated authority. This
would require, however, that the Single Commander and Single Ambassador
have full-time staffs, supported by adequate facilities and
communications.

Conclusions

1. Organization. Although we should direct our efforts toward the goal of
ultimately obtaining quadripartite agreement to the President having
authority to appoint a Single Commander in Berlin and Single Ambassador in Bonn, we should not
introduce this into the quadripartite forum at this time. We should
concentrate rather on the development of an integrated full-time
tripartite staff in Berlin and a full-time quadripartite staff with
military advisers in Bonn. In order to facilitate communication between
the Ambassadorial Group and Berlin, Bonn, and Live Oak, we should
arrange for the Ambassadorial Group (State Department) to be linked to
the Live Oak communications net. We should also prepare space and
facilities for a quadripartite staff in Washington.

2. Planning. The Ambassadorial Group should double its efforts, in order
to accomplish the following no later than November 15:

a. Establishment of Seaspray, for the coordination of naval
counter-measures.

b. Submission to NAC of quadripartite
plans for a Phase II military build-up.

c. Submission to NAC of quadripartite
plans regarding a possible peace treaty.

d. A basic review of plans to meet a possible GDR demand for passports, visas, and customs.

In addition, as suggested by Foreign Minister Schroeder, the Ambassadorial Group could review existing
plans to be sure they are current and consistent with each other.

3. Delegation of authority. The Ambassadorial Group should also review
present plans, to determine if there are any further areas in which
authority could be delegated to Berlin, Bonn, or Live Oak. It should
examine in particular:

a. Free Style and related Allied ground access plans.

b. Jack Pine and related air access plans.

c. Plans related to civilian access.

Recommendation

That you authorize us to initiate a review of Berlin contingency in the
Ambassadorial Group along the lines indicated in the conclusions
above.7

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National
Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

2 Not further identified.

3 Secret. Drafted by Ausland. On October 19 Thompson distributed a shorter
version of this paper, BQD-99, to
the Washington Ambassadorial Group, calling for a review of
contingency planning with special attention to organization,
planning, and delegation of authority. (Telegram 1039 to Bonn,
October 20; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–2862) 1
2

4 See Documents 130 and
134.

5 Not found.

6 Not found.

7 There is no indication on the
source text of Rusk's action
on the recommendation.

138. Record of Meeting of the Military Sub-Group of the Washington Ambassadorial Group138. Record of Meeting of the Military Sub-Group of the Washington
Ambassadorial Group1

Washington, October 22, 1962, 6 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

United States

Mr. Nitze, ISA, Chairman

General Gray, JCS

Dr. Mountain, ISA

Col. Meacham, ISA

Col. Armstrong, ISA

Capt. Cotten, ISA

Col. Preer, SG

Mr. Hillenbrand,
State

Mr. Ausland, State

Mr. Blitgen, State

Mr. Smyser, State

Mr. Klein, White
House

United Kingdom

Lord Hood

General West

Mr. Brooke

Mr. Greenhill

Colonel Coke

Captain Fanshawe

France

M. Winckler

Admiral Douget

Colonel Hounau

M. Pelen

Germany

Mr. Schnippenkoetter

Dr. Wieck

General Steinhoff

General Huekelheim

Sub BQD-Military 35

[Here follows discussion of Cuba.]

M. Winckler: What is your assumption on possible reaction in Berlin?

Mr. Hillenbrand: One of the
possible ways in which the Soviets might choose to react would be
through measures in Berlin, as for example by harassment, possibly just
against the U.S., possibly of a wider scope. However, Berlin isn't the
only place in which they might choose to react.

Mr. Nitze: They have several
alternatives. One of the reasons for the use of “quarantine” and not
“blockade” is to avoid the connection which Khrushchev is trying to make between Cuba and
Berlin.

M. Winckler: Is your assumption now, considering the present balance of
forces, that Khrushchev will not
move in Berlin?

Mr. Nitze: I think it is wholly
accurate to say that Gromyko
stated more forcefully than has been done before the Soviet intention to
proceed in Berlin.

Lord Hood: Regarding the Soviet promise not to act on Berlin before the
U.S. elections, they said, “unless the U.S. acts”. This is the
“unless”.

Mr. Nitze: It has become clear
what they meant by holding off until the U.S. elections. Would it not be
useful for us to explore in this group what we judge Soviet intentions
are in the steps they have taken?

Lord Hood: Any statements I could make would be off the top of my
head.

M. Winckler: I think it would be a profitable thing to do.

Mr. Nitze: I can give only my
personal feelings, but from a long range point of view the Soviet
intention could be to secure the removal of U.S. forces from overseas
bases, which would include Western forces in Berlin. As an intermediate
goal, the Soviets may be seeking to put pressure on the Alliance
structure in the hope of producing fissures in it. The U.S., of course,
has been under ICBM's for some time,
but this Soviet move in Cuba is a very extreme one. It changes the
balance of power.

M. Winckler: This is a pretty big gamble.

Mr. Nitze: Yes, it is a quantum
jump on Khrushchev's part. This
suggests to me, personally, if the crisis has been stepped up by this
quantum jump, that the perspective in which to view some of the issues
before this group has changed and some of the issues have become minor
to the extent that we ought to settle them quickly or forget about them,
and also that we have got to deal with some of the major issues. A
failure to act is dangerous, and we might proceed on the basis that (a)
we must have unity in the Alliance, (b) minor issues must be disposed
of, and (c) we must deal with the major issues with both caution and
resolution.

As to the tactical reasons behind this Soviet move, some have suggested
that it was necessary to keep the momentum of Soviet leadership. This I
regard as questionable, although you may remember the report of a Soviet
Ambassador stating to someone that he had seen the Soviet plans for
Berlin and they now meet the Chinese criteria. It is possible that
Khrushchev's interests in
Latin America are behind this move, and that this is a major ploy in
this direction. He may be thinking of setting up a negotiating position.
Again, he might have contingent objectives, and depending on our
reaction, may pursue one or another.

[Here follows additional discussion of Cuba.]

Mr. Schnippenkoetter: I have two points. First, are the number of topics
to be discussed between Washington and Moscow now wider than before:
What does this mean for Berlin? Is Berlin being put aside, or does it
come into sharper focus in this situation?

Mr. Nitze: We can't tell until we
see what the Soviets say.

Lord Hood: Or, even more important, what they do.

Mr. Nitze: I would say that high
on the list of probabilities, is some move in Berlin.

Lord Hood: I agree.

M. Winckler: I think this means that we must move on such matters as
alerts, etc.

Mr. Nitze: I think it is fair to
expect that our business here will boom.

Mr. Schnippenkoetter: My second point is that Berlin contingency plans
have been made in a context which was principally limited to Berlin.
Does the new picture which emerges from these actions taken by your
government alter the general nature of our plans? Does this place new
restraints on these plans or will this situation speed them up and
strengthen them?

Mr. Nitze: Our planning has been
based on the development of a crisis, and although the initiation of the
crisis could be in Berlin, our planning has proceeded beyond that
immediate area. I would therefore say that the basis for our planning
has been sound and is not overturned by these recent events. (Discussion
then halted so that the group could listen to the President's speech. At
the end of the speech, there was no further group discussion and the
meeting adjourned at 7:20 P.M.)

1 Source:
Washington National Records Center, RG 330, ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, 092 Germany. Top Secret.
Prepared in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs.

139. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency (Smith) to Director of Central Intelligence McCone139. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Office of National
Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency (Smith) to Director of Central Intelligence
McCone1

Washington, October 23,
1962.

SUBJECT

Survivability of West Berlin2

ASSUMPTION: SOVIET BLOCKADE OF WEST BERLIN IN RETALIATION
FOR US ACTIONS IN CUBA

1. West Berlin is economically prepared for a total blockade. We estimate
that existing stocks of critical items are sufficient to maintain the physical well-being of the
West Berlin population for at least six months. With respect to
particular categories of critical supplies, we estimate:

Food: At least six months (with selective rationing)

Fuel (Coal): About 1 year

Medicines: Six months

Industrial material: Sufficient to maintain employment for 4–5
months.

2. The critical factor, however, is not physical or economic but
psychological. Everything would depend on the context of the Soviet
move, and how quickly and forcefully the US reacted. A total and
uncontested blockade would cause the West Berliners to lose all hope in
a matter of weeks. A blockade contested by a successful airlift would
probably relieve initial apprehension and sustain morale for a few
months. Over a longer period, however, morale would deteriorate rapidly
in the absence of a reasonable expectation that the US would break the
blockade. The West Berliners would become extraordinarily sensitive to,
and suspicious of any indication from either side that the Cuban crisis
might produce an accommodation at their expense.

Abbott Smith 3

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Cuba, Intelligence
Materials. Top Secret. At the 10 a.m. meeting of the Executive
Committee of the NSC on October 23 President
Kennedy had asked McCone for an analysis of the
effect of a blockade on Berlin. (Minutes of the Executive Committee;
Department of State, Central Files, 611.3722/10–2362)

2 This
memorandum has been coordinated with the representative of the
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, and
the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. [Footnote in the
source text.]

3 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

140. Record of Meeting No. 1 of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee140. Record of Meeting No. 1 of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee1

Washington, October 24, 1962, 11 a.m.

NSC/Excom/BER-NATO

1. Provision of Information to Allies.

[Here follow paragraphs a-f on Cuba.]

g. With regard to a possible political problem in Europe (some elements
may blame the US for the Berlin crisis), the US should emphasize that
the Soviet actions in Cuba led to a heightened Berlin crisis, and that
if we had not acted toward the current Cuban situation the Berlin crisis
would have been much worse. Consensus was to conduct a background
briefing on a broad basis to include the possibility of releasing
additional Gromyko talk material.
(Action: Ambassador Thompson will
discuss with Secretary Rusk)

2. Functions of the Sub-Committee.

The President desires this group of officials to focus on the combined
crises of Berlin and Cuba. The Sub-Committee may not act on a day-to-day
basis, but it must tie together long range policies and day-to-day
operations. In addition, there may be items from the NSC meetings which
this Sub-Committee may need to address urgently.

3. Evacuation of Dependents from Moscow.

This proposal was discussed briefly. (Action: Ambassador Thompson to have paper prepared for
agenda)

4. Nuclear Cooperation with France.

An OSD paper was tabled for subsequent consideration.2 (Action in State: Mr. Schaetzel)

5. Soviet Inspection of US Traffic to Berlin.

Considerable discussion on inspection included: question of linking Cuba
and Berlin, need to include both East Berlin and West Berlin,
requirement to coordinate with FRG,
problem of possible blockage or inspection of traffic of all three
Powers versus that of the US alone, the tail-gate problem in that the
current UK and US practices are different, the possibility of Soviet
demands to inspect rail traffic, and the question of “elbow room” or
facesaver for the Soviets.

Consensus was that the US should not initiate this subject, but should be
prepared for it if it comes up in the UN
or elsewhere. A new paper will be prepared. (Action: Mr. Hillenbrand, State)

6. Dramatic Berlin Action to Surprise Soviets.

The need for this type of action was noted.

7. Nuclear Weapons in Berlin.

Consensus was that this would not be a useful undertaking.

8. US Build-up in the Berlin Crisis.

An OSD paper was tabled.3 A short paper should
be prepared to answer the President's question concerning the
possibility of build-up in Europe if forces are frozen for Cuban
contingency plans. This paper will request authority to initiate
exploratory discussions with our quadripartite Allies. (Action: Mr.
Nitze)

9. Economic Countermeasures.

The readiness of governments, US and Allied, to implement economic
countermeasures was reviewed. State will prepare a paper on status of
readiness of Allied governments. (Action: Mr. Schaetzel, State)

10. Breaking of Diplomatic Relations.

The possibility that the Soviets may break relations with the US was
briefly discussed. Two questions arise: a. Would the US want its Allies
to break relations with the USSR?; b. Would the US want to break
relations with the satellites? These questions require study to include
the implications upon intelligence. (Action: Ambassador Thompson; and General Twitchell and Mr.
Murphy)

1 Source: Department of State, S/S
Files: Lot 65 D 438, Cuban Missile Crisis. Top Secret. The source
text bears no drafting information. At the second meeting of the
Executive Committee of the NSC, October 23, at 6 p.m., President
Kennedy confirmed Nitze as the chairman of the
subcommittee on Berlin-NATO
preparations and invited him to meet regularly with the Executive
Committee in this capacity. (Kennedy Library, National Security
Files, Executive Committee Meetings, Record of Action for Meeting
No. 2) In an attachment to his record of the Daily White House Staff
Meeting on October 24, Legere indicated that, in addition to
representatives of the JCS, CIA,
USIA, Treasury, and OSD,
Nitze, Thompson, Hillenbrand, Schaetzel, Klein, and he were members of the
subcommittee. Legere and
Klein sent their joint
account of the meeting to Bundy on October 24. (Ibid., Countries Series,
Germany, Berlin)

2 Not found.

3 The preliminary
draft of this paper has not been found; for the final text, see Document 143.

141. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions141. Circular Telegram From the Department of
State to Certain Diplomatic
Missions1

Washington,October 24, 1962, 11:59 p.m.

744. Policy. Unless you perceive objection, you should seek early
occasion to complain to Foreign Minister or other appropriate official
how this Government has viewed Soviet policy with respect to Cuban
crisis.

Beginning in middle of summer, there were a number of indications that
Khrushchev and Soviet
Government had concluded there was no possibility Soviet Union could obtain its objectives
with respect to Berlin through negotiation. There were also indications
that Khrushchev felt too
personally committed to achievement of his objectives in Berlin to
retreat, as well as indications that factors which were pushing Soviet
Government to a resolution of this problem were increasing (situation in
East Germany, Communist Chinese pressure, etc.) and that Soviet Union
had decided showdown on Berlin problem was inevitable within some
months. There were also indications that Soviet Government and Khrushchev personally had developed
doubts as to whether they could win in a showdown and that alternatives
might be either an ignominious retreat or nuclear war.

Soviet Government privately and later publicly stated that while it would
insist upon conclusive discussion of Berlin problem in relatively short
period, it would not do so until after American Congressional elections.
It maintained this position even though it was made clear to them that
so far as US Government concerned, elections had no bearing on the
problem.

A number of assurances were given by Soviet Government both privately and
publicly that it would not arm Cuba with offensive weapons. This was not
merely dialectical discussion but specific assurances against weapons
that could reach the US. Tass statement of September 11 said that Soviet
Union had no need to take such action. This statement, which was largely
concerned with Cuban situation, related it to question of German peace
treaty and other international problems.

When Gromyko saw President October
18,2 he made standard but strong statement about
Berlin and German peace treaty issues and then made following statements
about Cuba: Soviet assistance to Cuba “pursued solely the purpose of
contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba”; that “training by
Soviet specialists of Cuban nationals in handling defensive armaments
was by no means offensive” and that “if it were otherwise, the Soviet
Government would have never become involved in rendering such
assistance.”

Khrushchev indicated to
Ambassador Kohler3 that he had virtually decided to come to UN meeting in New York latter part of
November and Gromyko in his
conversation with President confirmed this, although no specific date
was set.

When Soviet action in arming Cuba with offensive nuclear missiles became
evident, it was because of developments set forth above that this
Government tended believe Soviet action was probably primarily geared to showdown on Berlin,
intended to be timed with Khrushchev's arrival in US and completion of
installation of these missiles in Cuba.

Addressees may discreetly use general line foregoing and particularly
substance Gromyko's statement to
President on Berlin on October 18, in background talks with foreign
correspondents.

FYI. Purpose of this message is to
improve understanding that any Berlin crisis will be due to Soviet
action. In point of fact, Cuban crisis may well have effect of improving
overall position of West in Berlin through clear-cut evidence of our
resolution.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 611.3722/10–2462. Secret; Priority. Drafted by
Thompson, cleared by
Tyler, and approved by
Rusk. Sent to the NATO capitals, Bern, Stockholm,
Vienna, and Berlin.

2 See Document
135.

3 See Document
133.

142. Paper Agreed by the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee142. Paper Agreed by the Berlin-NATO
Subcommittee1

Washington, October 24,
1962.

NSC/ExCom/Sub-Com BER-NATO #1

SOVIET/GDR INSPECTION OF ALLIED TRAFFIC INTO BERLIN

1. Problem:

Suppose the Soviets demanded they be allowed to examine all Allied cargo
entering Berlin, as a quarantine against offensive weapons there.
Suppose further that they suggested this might be the extent of their
reply to our quarantine of Cuba. What should the US position be?

2. Background:

a. Allied air traffic entering Berlin has never been subjected to any
form of Soviet examination.

b. Cargo being moved by autobahn or rail aboard properly documented
Allied vehicles has never been subjected to Soviet examination.

c. The Soviets have repeatedly tried over the years to extend their
control over Allied traffic to Berlin, but Allied insistence on the two
points above has been adamant.

d. The Allies have brought neither nuclear weapons nor missiles (bazookas
and recoilless rifles are not regarded as missiles, nor are they
remotely comparable to MRBMs) into
Berlin.

3. Discussion:

To concede to the Soviets a right on which we have continuously and
strenuously insisted during nearly two decades would constitute a marked
softening of the Allied position concerning Berlin. Implicit in the
right to examine cargo, the Soviets would argue, is the right to
determine what sort of cargo may enter. Soviet efforts to assert such
rights would infringe upon vital Allied interests regarding the presence
and security of Allied forces in Berlin.

The Berlin population would be seriously upset if the Allies were to
allow examination of land cargoes, but they would be deprived of the
foundation of their sense of freedom if the Soviets were permitted to
examine Allied air traffic. It is the West Berliner's ability to fly in
and out of West Berlin completely free of any Soviet or GDR inspection that sustains him
psychologically.

Turning to the relationship with the Cuba quarantine, it would be a good
thing indeed to know that the Soviets would have no other reaction than
a demand to inspect Berlin traffic. But how could one count on it? What
justification would there be for believing, and for assuring Allied
populations and the West Berliners, that this represented the final
slice of salami rather than one more slice among many?

If the Soviets were allowed to inspect the cargoes, they could later turn
this “right” over to the GDR, thus
extending in a major way the de facto sovereignty of the GDR.

The quadripartite Allies have quite recently reconfirmed the
long-standing Allied position on refusing Soviet examination of
cargo.

As the US has forcefully and publicly proclaimed, no logical connection
exists between a free West Berlin whose people want Allied troops on
hand and a Cuba whose subjugated people want Soviet forces and weapons
to leave. To make such a trade-off as is suggested would corrupt this
main element of the US political case.

4. Conclusion:

a. It would be against the security interests of the US and its Allies to
permit such inspection.

b. Since we would not only suffer Soviet intrusion onto our long-standing
rights in Berlin, but also lack assurance that intrusion would go no
farther, such a demand would be unacceptable.

Paul H. Nitze

1 Source:
Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany,
Berlin. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information,
but is attached to a memorandum from Nitze to the Executive
Committee of the NSC, October 26, which states that the paper was
agreed by the subcommittee at its meeting on October 25. A 2-page
record of the second meeting of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee is in Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 65 D 438, Cuban Missile
Crisis.

143. Memorandum for the President143. Memorandum for the President1

Washington, October 27,
1962.

SUBJECT

Buildup and Deployment in Phase II of a Berlin Contingency

NSC/ExCom/BER-NATO #7 (Final)

The Department of Defense has prepared in broad outline a plan for the
buildup and deployment of forces which is contemplated, if and as
required, in Phase II of a Berlin contingency as described in NSAM-109.2 It is based on
the projection of information provided by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
has been coordinated informally with the Department of State. It does
not yet, however, constitute a governmental position.

The purpose of the plan is to make available on call varying levels of
augmentation of forces, and to make possible rapid deployments, which
will be appropriate to the degree of threat posed by Soviet action, and
to provide alternatives to piecemeal expediency or premature general
mobilization. It is intended to provide necessary forces, and their
support, to meet a developing situation, and to deny to the Soviets the
advantage of the accordion tactic of forcing us to oscillate between the
extremes of normal readiness and all-out mobilization, with the severe
national disruption this would entail.

The plan is divided into four increments, each of which, if ordered
directly into effect, would encompass all the provisions of the
preceding increment(s). There is no built-in automaticity, however,
which would require implementation of a later increment if the previous
one has proved sufficient to the need.

Each increment includes appropriate reserve alert and call-up and
logistic measures. The first increment provides the heaviest force
increase (a Corps force of 3 Army divisions, 1 Marine Division/Wing Team
with amphibious task force, 10 Air Force Fighter Squadrons and naval
units), the second a lesser ground force but more naval and air force (2
Army divisions, 1 Marine Division/Wing Team with amphibious task force,
the US 2nd Fleet, and up to 25 TAC fighter squadrons with necessary
combat and logistic support forces), the third includes 1 Army division
force, and the fourth calls for general mobilization. No increment is directly dependent on any
pre-set date or event for its execution but can be implemented when
required. Each increment requires approximately 30 days for execution of
the measures which it contains; execution of the increments in
succession, if so ordered, is on a cumulative time scale.

Although the buildup and deployment plan is primarily oriented toward
Berlin, it is adaptable in appreciable measure to a crisis anywhere and
at any time. For instance, in the present Cuban context there remain
substantial US strategic reserves to reinforce Europe on schedule by
utilizing expanded commercial air and sea lift. Without regard to the
timing of Cuban contingency plans, a modified first increment would
include two Army Divisions forces slated to “marry up” with the
equipment already positioned for them in Europe, a third Army division
without support elements and 10 TAC Fighter Squadrons released from the
Cuban contingency or mobilized from the reserves.

It would be useful if the corresponding plans of our Berlin partners
could be generally built on the same incremental framework as our own.
This would ensure that our mutual plans dovetail as closely as possible
so as to present a united deterrent if the necessity to implement them
should arise. It would, in addition, facilitate development of similar
plans by the remaining NATO Allies, and
lend added emphasis to the message conveyed to the Soviets.

In order to undertake discussions in the Quadripartite Military Sub-Group
directed toward this end, authority is therefore requested to discuss on
a no-commitment basis with the representatives of France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, and the United Kingdom this general outline plan as
discussed above, and to solicit from them their plans, in turn, for
discussion ad referendum. Plans will be referred to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff for comment and concurrence prior to progressing beyond the
informal discussion stage in the Quadripartite Military Sub-Group.

A supporting study is being prepared which assesses the implications for
the budget and the Balance of Payments.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. The source text bears
no drafting information, but is attached to a memorandum from Nitze
to the Executive Committee of the NSC, October 27, stating that it
had been agreed by the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee at its meeting that
day. A record of the fourth meeting of the subcommittee, held at 11
a.m. on October 27, is in Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 65 D
438, Miscellaneous.

2 Vol.
XIV, Document 185.

144. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)144. Memorandum From David
Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the
President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 28,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin—Some Random Thoughts—Late Sunday Night

1. The Soviets might now—conceivably—push hard on Berlin to offset their
Cuban losses.

2. On balance, however, this seems doubtful. A move against Berlin would
ultimately end in negotiations (unless the Soviets wanted to resort to
the use of force, which hardly seems likely, at least under current
Kremlin management). And this is not the most propitious time for the
Soviets to enter into negotiations on Berlin. Therefore, if all other
things remain equal, admittedly a large assumption, we should not have
an early major push on Berlin.

3. The question then is whether we should not try to take the initiative
and do something about Berlin at this time.

4. In many ways this is a good time for us, particularly if Cuba is
settled on the terms that now seem likely. Our bargaining position is
incomparably better than it was several weeks back. And since we would
be negotiating from greater strength, we would have a greater degree of
maneuverability than we have had at any time since 1953.

5. Also, if we could put together an interesting package, Nikita (assuming he remains at the
helm) might find it useful to give it serious consideration, if only as
a means to recover some of the substantial ground he lost by his Cuban
adventure.

6. If all this is so, might we not try to see what kind of an arrangement
we would want in Berlin—an arrangement that was also saleable to the
Soviets—and let the Soviets know what was possible. In this connection,
a reexamination of the 10-point declaration might be a useful starting
point for an internal U.S. exercise which should be fully completed
before it is discussed anywhere else.

7. For the negotiations themselves, Thompson/Dobrynin
might be the best channel. I doubt that Nikita would now be eager for an early confrontation
with the President. Gromyko is
also an unlikely discussion partner since he is a discredited figure at
this juncture and should be
treated as such. And even though the New York channel has some
possibilities, it has several clearly built-in disadvantages.

8. As for timing, if my working assumptions are correct (and all of them
are clearly debatable) an early approach to the Soviets on Berlin would
seem to make considerable political sense.

David Klein2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National
Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Regional Organizations145. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the European Regional Organizations1

Washington, October 28, 1962, 1:47 a.m.

Topol 581. Subject: Relationship Cuba Crisis to Berlin. In Quadripartite
meeting UK representatives, supported by those of France and FRG, have strongly urged US to elaborate
during NAC meeting October 30 on its
assessment of relationship of Soviet action in Cuba to possible showdown
on Berlin. In this connection German Embassy provided us with short and
useful paper (which has been sent separately as airgram)2 indicating FRG expectation that Soviets may shortly take action in
context Berlin. They foresee possible barring of Allied, mainly US,
access to East Berlin as well as harassment of Allied military traffic
to Berlin.

Circular 7443 sets forth in general
terms assessment Soviet policy with respect to Cuban crisis, concluding
that in general terms US tends to believe Soviet action was probably
primarily geared to showdown on Berlin, intended to be timed with
Khrushchev's arrival in US and completion of installation of nuclear
missiles in Cuba. Following comments are designed to expand somewhat on
this general concept as well as to assess possible Soviet resort to
“adjustments” in plans for Berlin stemming from US action to eliminate
Soviet missile bases. You should draw on Cirtel 744 and this message as guidance for comments
in October 30 meeting.

General credibility. You should emphasize that in view of previous clear
statements that US could not tolerate Soviet offensive-type missile
deployment in Cuba, these missiles must obviously be eliminated if US
determination to honor commitments, including those concerning Berlin,
is to remain credible throughout world. Allies appreciate US firmness is
cornerstone their defense against Soviet aggression. Equally important,
however, USSR must fully realize there exists no basis for
miscalculation of US intentions. Otherwise, gravest possible risk of war
might arise from Soviet underestimation US resolve to maintain vital
interests of Alliance in Berlin.

Military significance. You should also emphasize that Soviet nuclear
missile bases in Cuba are not just another complex of overseas bases.
These bases have special significance since missiles based in USSR and
targeted on US nuclear forces are still relatively few in number. In
addition, we have radar systems which pick up missiles coming over
ice-cap from Soviet Union. The limitations on Soviet intercontinental
ballistic missile capability provides West with margin of nuclear
superiority which is heart of Western deterrent. If Soviets had been
permitted to complete substantial missile program in Cuba, balance of
nuclear power could have been significantly shifted. IRBM's in Cuba
would be free of radar detection and with zero alert time both ICBM sites and SAC bases could come under attack without warning and with
greater accuracy due to short range. This could seriously prejudice US
nuclear posture and with first strike from Cuba Soviets could seriously
impair US capability to cover all necessary targets.

Timing. Obviously Soviet timetable for Berlin showdown upset by US
action. Now remains to be seen whether Soviets will attempt to move
against Allied interests in Berlin, as expected by FRG. If Soviets now reduced from what we
estimated to be larger objectives to level of harassments they may
choose to engage in harassment before Cuban missile sites are
liquidated. Should Soviet Berlin action be directed mainly at US we
would expect full Alliance support. In this respect FRG has indicated it would consider Soviet
action against US traffic as an action against Allied traffic as a
whole.

FYI. At quadripartite meeting October
27, it was agreed four Perm Reps should concert on handling discussion
in NAC, on basis this message, UK
assessment of effect of Cuban crisis on Berlin, and German paper
referred to above. In view Limitel, request you obtain UK assessment
from UK delegation.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/10–2862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.
Drafted by Ausland and
Kranich; cleared by
Kitchen, Hillenbrand, Tyler, R/PM, and the Department of Defense (ISA); and approved by
Johnson. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London,
Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live
Oak, CINCEUR, USAFE, and USAREUR.

2  CA–4547, October 26. (Ibid.,
762.00/10–2662)

3 Document 141.

146. Memorandum From David Klein and Colonel Lawrence J. Legere to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)146. Memorandum From David
Klein and Colonel Lawrence J. Legere to the President's Special
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 29,
1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting of the Nitze Subcommittee (October 29)

The principal item on the agenda was maintaining the momentum of the
Cuban development, with specific attention to the question of
strengthening NATO and the next steps
in Berlin.

At the end of the meeting Paul
Nitze suggested, and it was agreed, that insofar as
Berlin was concerned, the next step was to examine possible arrangements
which would stabilize the Berlin situation for a substantial period, and
the tactical means for bringing this about. A primary consideration is
to reach such arrangement without, if possible, forcing a direct
U.S.-USSR military confrontation.

Although Ambassador Thompson went
along with the proposed course of action on the understanding that the
strictest security would be maintained, he clearly was out of sympathy
with the project as proposed. He said that he was reluctant to touch
Berlin at this time lest the Soviets become concerned that we were
intent upon pushing them—and this time on a very vital issue for the
Kremlin. In this context Ambassador Thompson dwelled at length on the differences between
Cuba and Berlin in the Soviet view. Therefore he felt the immediate
point of departure and concentration on talks with the Soviets should be
disarmament or nuclear testing or non-aggression arrangements between
NATO and the Warsaw Pact, all of
which he believes would ultimately facilitate discussions on Berlin.
Moreover, he is concerned that if Berlin is brought under consideration
in the present climate, the Germans would push for a substantially
harder position than we would want to take.2

Nevertheless, the consensus was that Berlin ought to be looked at
now—first substantively and then tactically and the discussions kept
under wraps until there was a decision to bring it to the fore.

This led to the question of NATO—consultation and maintaining the present momentum.3 Nitze indicated he was prepared,
if necessary, to go to Paris this week—Thursday perhaps—to describe for
NAC the Cuban developments—in
historical terms—avoiding any attempt at a prognosis of future moves. He
felt that this was necessary and if done properly could provide us with
a lever for pressing NAC to take a hard
look at issues it has thus far been reluctant to act upon.

David Klein
L.J. Legere4

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top Secret. Initialed by
Klein.

2 In a memorandum to Secretary Rusk on October 29, Thompson reported that Nitze had told him after the Executive Committee
meeting that morning that the President wanted Nitze's group “to work out urgently
some alternative solutions to the Berlin problem.” Thompson informed Rusk that he had raised the
objections described in this memorandum. In a subsequent meeting
among Thompson, Bundy and Nitze, it was agreed that this work
would be done by Nitze,
Hillenbrand, Thompson, Rostow, and such staffers as were
needed. Thompson added that
it appeared that the President believed the United States could push
its Allies harder following the Cuban crisis. (Department of State,
S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2, Thompson Memos)

3 At the meeting on October 29 the subcommittee
also approved NSC/ExCom/BER-NATO
#9, a 1-page memorandum for the President on consultation with the
Allies, which stated that the Cuban crisis had highlighted the need
for constant and systematic consultation and recommended that the
Ambassadorial Group and both the civilian and military branches of
NATO be regularly briefed on
the situation. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries
Series, Germany, Berlin.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these
typed signatures.

147. Editorial Note147. Editorial Note

On October 30 Chairman Khrushchev
sent a 16-page letter to President Kennedy
discussing Cuba, nuclear testing, Berlin, and China. On Berlin he
repeated the arguments that he had made to Ambassador Kohler (see Document 133) and stated that it was time to eliminate this
“hotbed of international tension in the center of Europe.” (Department
of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163) The full text of
the letter is printed in volume VI.

148. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State148. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, November
5, 1962, noon.

598. Sovs must be convinced by this time we really mean that Allied
presence in Berlin is non-negotiable. If there to be further talks with
Sovs on Berlin, they may come round to recognize this fact, implicitly
if not explicitly. While we no doubt prefer press consistent Allied
position based on preserving Four-Power status and working out new
access arrangements, might be good idea be prepared with alternative
package if Sovs show interest in face-saving compromise. Sovs might well
refuse discuss any such proposal but suggested approach and reasoning
that follows is designed give Sovs chance claim progress toward their
goals and at same time maintain our vital interests.

Our insistence on Allied presence does not stem from obsolete desire
maintain wartime military government in Berlin. We too interested in
drawing line under World War II, without abandoning objective of
reunited Germany or obligation protect freedom West Berlin. In order
narrow difference between us, might find way to end occupation regime
and put Allied troops in West Berlin on contractual basis following
example Sov troops East Germany. Our troops must remain in order fulfill
commitment to defend West Berlin but Sov abandonment responsibilities
over East Berlin suggests need for adjustments in West Berlin. Allies
accordingly might give up wartime powers and sovereignty in West Berlin
except obligation to defend city.

Question arises as to where sovereignty would then rest. It could not be
given up to GDR nor to free city, i.e.
third division of Germany. Only logical place for West Berlin, pending
reunification of Germany, would be for it to join that part of Germany
which has same political, economic and social system, i.e. FedRep. Allies therefore should withdraw
reservation to full association of West Berlin with FedRep. This reservation was made on
assumption Sov Government was committed to reunification of Germany on
basis of free elections, an assumption which since 1958 has lost its
validity through unilateral actions by USSR. At same time Allies would
make contractual arrangement with FedRep by which they would retain task of continuing to
ensure freedom and defense of West Berlin. In short, Allies would give
up sovereignty and all functions of military government except defense
which would include ultimate control over West Berlin police forces.

A new status for Allied presence in West Berlin and for West Berlin
itself must meet squarely the problem of relations with East Berlin
regime and access to Berlin. Admitting that there are many contacts with
GDR at present especially among
Germans and that such relations are bound to increase over the years,
Allies might well accept same controls in traveling to and from Berlin
that Germans accept, provided free access for both Allied and German
traffic is guaranteed. This could be done through a quadipartite
commitment and international access and control authority which would
also have to be underwritten by FedRep and GDR.

To make this proposal more acceptable to Soviets it is assumed we would
be willing to go quite a distance to meet their demands for recognition
of Oder-Neisse line, NATO-Warsaw
non-aggression pact, and non-diffusion of nuclear weapons. In addition
we might, pending reunification of Germany, give de facto recognition to
incorporation of East Berlin into East German state. Might also consider
willingness have Federal Republic modify Hallstein doctrine.

In suggesting foregoing, part of which inspired by Senator Schiller's
proposal in connection with plebiscite (conversation with Franklin
Roosevelt), assumption is made that Allies would reaffirm in clearest
way possible their guarantee to defend Berlin. There might be some
difficulty in defining responsibilities of Allies and those of German
authorities under contractual arrangement, but it should be possible to
assure overriding authority of Allies in all defense matters both in
planning and in emergencies. This might even require closer working
relations with German authorities than exist at present in military and
police field. Allies would cease to deal with practically all activities
that come under Kommandatura. Reorganization on Allied side might even
contemplate integrated command.

If at any stage in discussions it would seem useful to suggest that
Allied forces under contract to protect Berlin might be constabulary
rather than army forces, I assume this would make very little difference
to us. We could probably only agree to do this in name as in fact they
would remain military units.

It is recognized that this proposal means giving up Four-Power status
which is legal basis for our presence in Berlin. The question is whether
gains outweigh this legal disadvantage.

This proposal would undoubtedly be hailed as step toward recognition of
GDR. However, many people including
Schroeder, Brandt and I hope Adenauer himself recognize that we must
take certain chances in this direction and be willing to make certain de
facto arrangements. Modification Hallstein doctrine might permit FedRep to establish diplomatic relations with Poland,
Czechoslavakia, etc., without affecting policies three Allies and NATO toward de jure recognition.

Proposal may be interpreted as attempt by Allies to pave way for ultimate
withdrawing from their Berlin commitments. It cannot disguise fact
Germans would be taking on powers formerly held by Allies. Berlin Senat
might welcome greater autonomy but there probably would be real problem
overcoming widespread German anxieties. Major effort would be required
to show that contractual agreement to defend city affords adequate
protection.

Sovs might of course refuse to discuss any plan that incorporated West
Berlin in FedRep. In that case we
would at least have shown our reasonableness and fact we not wedded to
status quo. It would appear as serious offer to end what must seem to
many people, particularly in uncommitted countries, to be anachronistic
prolongation of military occupation.

Mission's earlier suggestions to make Berlin eleventh Land were conceived
of as unilateral actions to improve Western bargaining position or as
retaliation against some major Sov harassment or against a separate
peace treaty. Senator Schiller's recent suggestion which included
contractual basis for Allied forces was proposed as question to be put
to West Berlin people in plebiscite. New suggestion is based on thought
it might be put up as part of package to the Russians for negotiation,
since it goes considerable distance in meeting many of their demands. At
appropriate time some kind of plebiscite in West Berlin with reference
to this package might be desirable.

Before any such package could be mentioned to Sovs even as trial balloon
it would presumably have to be discussed with Brit, French and Germans.
This in itself could be delicate matter. Discussion among Germans would
reveal certain differences in outlook between SPD-influenced Berlin and CDU-influenced Bonn govt recognition, ties, access, etc.
(We submitting separate analysis this trend.) Hence believe somewhat
futile to expect much in way of new initiatives from Germans. As in past
new proposals unlikely to be made unless they originate from American
side.

Lightner

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0221/11–562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Also
sent to Bonn and repeated to Paris and Moscow.

149. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee (Nitze) to President Kennedy149. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Berlin-NATO Subcommittee
(Nitze) to
President Kennedy1

Washington, undated.

I–26257/62

The attached paper, “Berlin in Light of Cuba”, arises from the work of
the NSC Subcommittee on Berlin but is not an agreed paper. It represents
my views after discussion with the group.

I believe that we should make every effort in good time to find a
long-term solution to the Berlin question and, if possible, the German
question. Otherwise we may find ourselves someday in a Berlin crisis,
where we all will wish we had taken more radical measures to lance the
boil despite the recognized risks, costs and difficulties. The view of
others of the group is that the attached paper underestimates the
difficulties in arriving at long-term solutions and that there are
unwarranted dangers in considering what they believe to be impracticable
ideas.

The key to practicability may well be in areas beyond Germany and Berlin,
the area assigned to the Rostow
group.2 I have passed on to Walt some of my ideas in this broader
area. They include the following:

A. Disarmament

A radical proposal, but one which I believe could be to our interest on
its own feet, would be Warsaw Pact-NATO
nuclear forces, limited on each side to the minimum necessary to cover
the problem of the inherent impossibility of being sure all warheads
have been destroyed. This might involve no more than 500 delivery
vehicles of our choice, with warheads of a yield aggregating no more
than 50 megatons, on our side, and an equal number and yield on their
side, with a complete prohibition on all other nuclear weapons, AICBM's
etc., on both sides. The agreement to be contingent on their proposing
inspection procedures satisfactory to us and vice-versa.

These agreements would be coupled with appropriate test ban,
non-diffusion, and conventional force limitations.

B. Reduction of Far Eastern Tensions

1. The Republic of China to become the Republic of Taiwan.

2. Quemoy and Matsu to be evacuated.

3. The Chinese People's Republic to recognize the Republic of Taiwan.

4. The MacMahon line to be agreed.

5. The Korean 38th parallel line to be given permanent status.

6. North Vietnam to pull out its support of the Viet Cong.

7. The CPR to agree to the counterpart of the non-diffusion
agreement.

8. Admission of the CPR to the United Nations.

C. Reduction of Middle East Tensions

1. Agreement that no bloc or Western arms be sent to Middle East.

2. Mutual assurances with respect to frontiers in the area.

D. Latin American Tensions

1. Agreement by the USSR and CPR to eschew any military connection with
this Hemisphere.

Such arrangements have been unthinkable in the past context. I believe
they could be to the interest of both the USSR and the U.S. If both
sides agreed that this was so, I do not think it impossible we could
bring them about. The competition between the Communist system and ours
would continue but on quite different terms than otherwise
foreseeable.

The above ideas ignore all the tactical problems. The tactical problems
are immense and undoubtedly would greatly modify even the substance of
any program of action. But one can't start putting a program together
without some idea of the direction one wishes to go.

The relation of all this to Berlin is that Berlin has been a focal point
in the over-all Western confrontation with the Bloc. The long-term
solution of Berlin can hardly take place except as part of a general
readjustment of the terms of that confrontation.

Paul H. Nitze

Attachment3

BERLIN IN THE LIGHT OF CUBA

I. The Problem

If the Cuba settlement goes forward as outlined in the President's letter
of October 27th4
and accepted by Mr. Khrushchev, a
Summit meeting may be necessary
within a reasonable period, and may be desirable. At a Summit, Berlin
would undoubtedly be an important item of discussion. Such Berlin
discussions would take place against a variety of proposals from the
U.S. and the Soviets on other items of importance to one or both
sides.

It follows that we need a theory of our Berlin interest from which a
variety of positions can be developed, depending upon the actual setting
which emerges and which is not now accurately predictable.

It would be useful to have the broad lines of this theory tentatively
agreed before Mr. Adenauer's
visit, so that questions put to him can be appropriately aimed. Any
indication to Mr. Adenauer that
the U.S. is even studying drastic solutions should be carefully
handled,5 however, to prevent extreme German
reaction during exploratory phases.

II. New Elements of the Situation

A. The United States. The country has gone through
a traumatic exposure to the imminence of war, the relationship of the
military situation to the political outcome, and the necessity for firm
but moderate diplomacy. Its confidence in itself and its leadership has
been enhanced. It does not, however, wish to live indefinitely with a
series of Cubas, one of which might be in a less favorable geographic
position, or might be handled, by one side or the other, with less care
and restraint, or might be the occasion for some accidental aberration.
Both this enhanced confidence and enhanced concern dispose the U.S. to
take a firmer line with our Allies, where this is required to further
our aims, as well as affecting our attitude to the USSR.

B. The Soviet Union. A central question is whether
the Soviets will have emerged from the Cuban experience with the feeling
that avoidance of a comparable crisis over Berlin is paramount and that
they must therefore be prepared to give on Berlin in light of
demonstrated U.S. determination, or whether they will feel they must
counter our Cuban success with gains of their own in Berlin or
elsewhere. While there is great uncertainty as to the Soviet reaction,
it probably combines a new wariness about U.S. response with a
compulsion to recover lost prestige.

At a minimum, the Soviets can probably be expected to take political and
diplomatic steps to counter the effects of the Cuban back-down on the
Soviet power image, and to disabuse the U.S. of any notion that tactics
like those applied in the Cuban crisis can be used to force concessions
from the Soviet Union on long-standing issues under dispute, including
Berlin. We cannot exclude the possibility that they may feel driven to
exert strong pressures in the reasonably near future.

The Soviets may estimate that the Cuban crisis will open up room for
maneuver. By making the danger of nuclear confrontation real and
visceral for all the world, the crisis may seem to them to provide the
catalyst needed to put new flexibility into the stalemated Berlin
situation. It could create an environment where radical solutions are
possible.

The Soviet judgment of this possibility will probably be conditioned by
their assessment of the U.S. temper. If the U.S. appears firm and sober
after the crisis, and if Khrushchev feels impelled to do something about Berlin
in the near future, he may feel that serious negotiation at the Summit
would be preferable to unilateral Soviet action.

The Soviets may well be motivated toward a serious attempt to stabilize
the situation, not only by the prospect of nuclear confrontation in a
disadvantageous balance, but also by a real desire to focus on economic
competition.

The Soviets probably also face reappraisal of their strategic posture. It
was an inadequate deterrent in Cuba; they may consider the alternatives
of even more energetic efforts to redress the imbalance, or measures to
reduce instabilities.

Finally, having apparently misread our reactions in the Cuban case, the
Soviets may confine themselves to highly tentative moves until they
reassess the situation.

C. Allies. Our NATO Allies now have greater confidence in the U.S. They
have seen success result from our firmness and moderation. The U.K., in
particular, was reassured by our restraint; France and Germany by our
determination, under the risk of major conflict. U.S. prestige is
higher; its capacity and maturity more respected; its freedom to lead
enhanced.

We should be able to brush aside trivial Allied objections and
reservations, and insist on concentrating on major issues.

At the same time, while the Allies supported our Cuban actions with
minimum consultation, we can expect increased sensitivity about
consultation in the future, both because the issues will be closer to
them and more within their responsibility and because they naturally
oppose any U.S. disposition to act unilaterally. Further, our Allies
will be unsettled until they can explore the changed situation resulting
from Cuba and can know through consultation our reading of it.

On balance, it appears that while our scope for unilateral action may be
restricted, we have increased our capacity, with consultation, to bring
our Allies along with us.

European suspicion that a sudden, secret, Berlin deal underlay the Soviet
withdrawal from Cuba is a possible side effect of U.S. initiatives.

A variety of Allied interpretations of the Cuban outcome is possible
(e.g., as to Soviet motivations, Soviet future intentions, the
effectiveness of various elements of U.S. power, and the validity of the
proposed sequence of actions in Berlin). It will be important to present
and support U.S. conclusions.

III. Possible Approaches

The basic source of instability is obviously the division of Germany.
Even if East Germany were prosperous, under a more liberal regime, and
without the problem of Berlin, it is doubtful that the underlying
sentiment for reunification would die out either in East Germany or West
Germany.

Other important sources of instability are the division of Berlin
symbolized by the Wall, the uncertain access to Berlin, the unsettled
boundaries, and the absence of a definitive German peace treaty. The
interaction of military threat and defense, viewed differently from each
side, adds to the seriousness of the other instabilities.

Any long-term solution should cut as deeply as possible into these
instabilities. The Soviet Union has in the past had a clear and
unambiguous policy with respect to Berlin and Germany: a solution of all
the above instabilities, perhaps over an extended time frame, in a
manner acceptable to it. It has rejected all Western proposals not
consistent with eventual progress toward the Soviet objectives. The
Western powers, not having the means, diplomatic or otherwise, to
reverse this position, have attempted to stand firm against further
encroachments.

The question cannot now be answered whether Soviet policy on Berlin will
have hardened or relaxed as a result of Cuba. Undoubtedly, however, it
will be different. It is possible that they too will see the danger of
another Cuban crisis over Berlin. If so, it is possible they will want a
prompt solution of the important German and Berlin instabilities in a
manner mutually agreeable to them and the U.S. Only on this hypothesis,
which will be substantially affected by the possibilities of U.S.-Soviet
agreement on other important areas of instability apart from Germany,
can one see the possibility of a long-run solution of the Berlin
situation satisfactory to the West.

In this situation, the U.S. interest is:

—at the maximum, for a long-term solution of the Berlin situation, one
apt to last for twenty or more years;

—at the middle, for an agreed modus vivendi to carry us along with
reduced friction, at least for some years;

—at the minimum, for measures in other areas which will hold off serious
Berlin discussions or pressures until a more propitious time for
negotiation.

IV. Long-Term Approaches

Possible long-term approaches toward stability include All-German,
All-Berlin, and removal of West Berlin, solutions.

A. All-German

Objectively, and certainly from the U.S. interest, the best end would be
an all-German solution in which, ultimately, the GDR would in effect be absorbed by The Federal Republic. It
would remove all the instabilities listed in III (above).

Such a solution, running directly counter to central Soviet objectives,
would probably be considered by Khrushchev only in the context of broad
European security arrangements. To achieve it, we should be prepared to
make substantial concessions on our side, short of removing Germany from
the Atlantic and European political and economic communities.

Some form of merger of the existing two states would seem called for
initially, and a wide variety of sequences and phasings of the various
steps toward eventual unification would be possible. The nature of the
arrangements, and the duration of the process would have to be designed
to reduce Soviet resistance. Among the steps toward, or elements of, an
all-German solution would be:

—Increased economic intercourse between the two Germanies, with
substantial economic aid from West to East designed to equalize the
economies.

—Arms control measures in the Germanies: a surprise attack inspection and
warning system, progressive limitations on external forces, perhaps a
phased reduction of GDR and FRG forces.

—Evolutionary integration of political institutions, beginning with a
central administrative organ, progressing toward ultimate common
government.

B. All-Berlin

If the unity of Germany cannot be achieved, the other major sources of
instability could be removed or mitigated through an all-Berlin
solution. It would eliminate the wall dividing Berlin, though it would
probably require, from the Soviet viewpoint, maintenance of a barrier
surrounding all Berlin.

The instability of access could be greatly reduced by the cession, or
perhaps long-term lease, of an autobahn corridor to the city. Were this
not obtained, access instability would remain high. An access authority
with clear non-bloc control would mitigate but not eliminate the
instability.

Under an All-Berlin solution with a corridor, we might be able to force
through a definite peace treaty signed by both East and West (or perhaps
parallel treaties), a settlement of German boundaries, and the
recognition of the GDR. It would then be
possible to remove occupation forces and rely on a UN presence and
guarantee of the unified city. Other instabilities could be mitigated
through liberalization of the GDR regime
and increased trade with and credit to the GDR.

This solution, which would in essence accept the permanent division of
Germany, would find strong resistance in the FRG. It would be
politically difficult for any West German government to give it more
than de facto acceptance. The German objective of reunification would
remain a serious source of instability.

C. Removal of West Berlin

It is possible to conceive of solutions in which a substantial part of
GDR territory, say all that part
lying south and west of the Elbe, from Magdeburg to the Czech border, is
transferred to the FRG in return for
removal of the West Berlin populace out of West Berlin. The populace of
Berlin, and all of the GDR, would be
given a free choice of staying in the GDR or moving to the enlarged FRG.

The area south and west of the Elbe is the industrial heart of the GDR. The political wrench to both sides
would be immense. Boundaries, access, etc. would, however, be definitely
settled. It is conceivable that as a part of a serious effort to resolve
the whole East-West tensions problem, the USSR would prefer some such
long-term solution to those suggested under IV. A and B (above).

V. Modus Vivendi

If a long-term settlement is not feasible, a modus vivendi may not now be
impossible.

Intermittently since Geneva in 1959, and steadily over the past year, we
have been seeking without success to establish such an agreed modus
vivendi, but it may be that the Cuban crisis will increase elasticity to
some degree on both sides. The Soviets have had an example of U.S.
firmness. They could now feel that rather than test us again, closer to
the jugular, it would be preferable either to continue the debate, in
the vicinity of the status quo, or to agree on a workable modus vivendi.
On the Western side, the Cuban success has made less compelling the need
to avoid any appearance of elasticity in order to preserve Allied
confidence in our guarantees.

On the other hand, if the Soviets feel their recent losses strongly, they
may find it even less possible to make concessions on long-debated
issues.

Components of a modus vivendi have been combed over many times,
especially in the last year. Aside from significantly reduced tension in
Berlin and prospects for reasonable stability there, several other
general criteria would have to be met. Allied vital interests would have
to be safeguarded; these appear to be unchanged by the Cuban outcome, so
that the presence and security of Allied troops, unhindered access, and economic viability cannot
be adversely affected. On the Soviet side, assured control over East
Germany and some enhancement, possibly nominal, of GDR status appear to be minima. Having
these in hand, and depending on how one assesses the likely tone of
Soviet policies toward Berlin, micrometer adjustments could be made in
the following general schemes:

1. A series of interlocking declarations by the USSR, GDR, FRG,
and tripartite powers about guaranteed access, troop presence, the name
“Free City”, and a separate treaty.

2. Some form of international access authority, accompanied by a separate
treaty and unilateral declarations about Berlin (troops remain, no
nuclear weapons, etc.).

3. Some new form of purely local arrangement involving the removal or
amelioration of the Wall, guarantee of access, addition of UN administrative presence without changing
the occupation powers' troop strengths or responsibilities, and a
separate treaty.

VI. Hold-Off Serious Berlin Discussions; Improve
Climate in Other Areas

A third broad line of approach is to refrain at this time from further
initiatives on Berlin, on the assumption that the Soviets will also be
willing to let the atmosphere cool before making new moves in the
hyper-sensitive Berlin area.

This approach aims at allowing both sides to reassess the situation
without altering the outstanding issues which underlie instability in
Berlin. It attempts to create a more favorable environment for a Berlin
solution by progress toward agreement and easing of tensions
elsewhere.

Since the status quo is the essence of the existing Western Berlin
position, this approach might seem to appeal more to us than to the
Soviets, but it leaves us still exposed to the basic dangers of the
situation.

Soviet receptivity to a hold-off approach on Berlin is uncertain. It
might appeal to them as a way to dissipate U.S. momentum from Cuba, and
to allow time for strengthening the Soviet posture against a future
confrontation. Apart from possible repercussions of the Cuban crisis
upon the Soviet attitude toward Berlin, a Soviet hold-off position is
supported by some evidence that GDR and
Soviet propaganda is stressing that further delay must be expected
before the signing of a peace treaty. It would also be consistent with
the trend noted in current discussions between West and East German
representatives on the inter-zonal trade.

Measures for a hold-off approach might include:

—Progress in arms control: a test-ban agreement, a non-diffusion
agreement, surprise attack measures, perhaps a Latin-American
nuclear-free zone.

—A NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression
Agreement.

—Satisfactory carrying through of Laos neutrality measures; reduction of
external pressures on South Vietnam.

—Progress toward space cooperation.

VII. General

The effects of the Cuban crisis cannot yet be accurately seen. In any
event, many elements of any solution are not under our control. In this
situation, we must clearly analyze and be prepared to work toward a full
spectrum of outcomes.

Insofar as we do control the movement of events, it would seem desirable
to aim at a long-range solution. Long-range solutions face much the
greatest obstacles; they may well, in the event, prove impossible to
achieve. Lesser measures, however, and in particular the hold-off
approach, leave us with the possibility of a Cuba-type crisis over
Berlin only postponed. Even if there is a Soviet disposition to avoid
Berlin initiatives for the time being, an extended moratorium is
unlikely, and we could be faced with a challenge under no better
conditions, perhaps with some of our bargaining counters expended on
peripheral issues. It would therefore appear improvident to overlook any
chance to get an enduring solution.

(Ambassador Thompson, on the other
hand, holds in general that in the present tensions, and in the face of
the present obstacles, acceptable movement in the Berlin problem is
unlikely to be possible, and attempts in this line could do damage by
arousing Allies and USSR alike. He would therefore support a hold-off
approach, seeking to get useful agreements in other areas, improving the
climate generally, and approaching the complex of Berlin issues
later.)

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Top
Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Ret'd from
Mrs. Lincoln 11/5/62.”

2 At the second meeting of the
Executive Committee of the NSC on October 23, Rostow had been confirmed as the
chairman of a subcommittee on advance planning. (Ibid., Meetings and
Memoranda Series, Excom Vol. 1)

3 Top Secret. The
source text bears some handwritten revisions, all but one (see
footnote 4 below) of an
editorial nature.

4 Printed in volume VI.

5 The original language was
“scrupulously avoided.”

150. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations150. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and European Regional Organizations1

Washington, November 7, 1962, 15:42 p.m.

Topol 618. Following is promised
material re Soviet intentions for discussion in connection with “Plan
for Western Response to Peace Treaty.”

Begin Text.

ASSESSMENT OF CURRENT SOVIET INTENTIONS

While Soviets themselves first suggested a relationship between Berlin
and Cuba in September 11 TASS statement
Moscow has, since outbreak of Cuban crisis, carefully avoided any hint
of a direct link between events in Cuba and Berlin situation.1
Various Soviet officials abroad evidently reflecting instructions have
also indicated that USSR would not move against Berlin should it
retaliate because of Cuban developments.

Moscow appears to be anxious that tension generated by Cuba not spill
over into Berlin; whether because of fear of possible US reactions or to
avoid prejudicing post-election negotiations (to which Moscow remains
committed) or a combination of both factors remains to be seen. In any
event Soviets continue reaffirm publicly their commitment to a “German
peace treaty and resolution of Berlin situation on that basis” (Brezhnev
October 30), and now avoid any public reference to a separate GDR treaty. Vigorous Polish support of
GDR aims and interests up to and
including separate treaty is thus all more striking in view of recent
Soviet reticence.

We had previously thought Soviets were likely to set stage for coming
round of talks with some gesture directed toward improving atmosphere in
Berlin, most probably some minor alleviation of border traffic situation
within Berlin. Arrangements toward this end now appear to be well
underway. Desirability of a gesture of this nature would from Soviet
standpoint appear to be even greater now than it was previously if USSR
actually does desire to keep Berlin situation calm for time being.

And since Soviet moves to ease pressure on Berlin are usually accompanied
by overtures to West Germans, some relaxation of travel restrictions of
persons between East and West Germany similar to that in Berlin is also
conceivable under present circumstances if it can be engineered in
manner which does not endanger GDR
security.

As a further element in Soviet calculations on Berlin, seeming Soviet
retreat in Cuba will almost inevitably have repercussions in East German
party organization and complicate its already almost insurmountable
tasks. And uncertainty already evident in functionary corps will in turn
feed and stimulate existing popular dissatisfaction with regime. If past
experience is any guide, SED would
perforce be compelled to
maintain a semblance of closed ranks to protect its position and
preserve Ulbricht dominance.

Whether in long run position of SED can
be maintained with such methods in view of changing political climate
and anti-Stalinist campaign in bloc is questionable however. It may be
that after initial shock of Cuban events has been overcome Soviets may
seriously consider liberalization of GDR
regime.

If this actually were Kremlin's plan of action, radical change in
circumstances now underway will require revision of Soviet planning on
Berlin and probably cause at least considerable postponement of
scheduled denouement outlined above. At this point however indications
are that Soviets have been caught up short by US reaction in Cuba and
are as yet undecided on specific courses of action with respect to
Berlin other than avoiding tension in that area for time being.

Soviets have with foresight been careful to tie themselves to no
timetable on Berlin and thus are free to procrastinate by a variety of
means without serious loss of face.

In any event further US-Soviet exchanges on Berlin following US elections
still seem almost certain and there is still a possibility that this new
round will be initiated by a Khrushchev visit to UN.
(Current Soviet propaganda line attributing preservation of world peace
in Cuban context to Khrushchev's
personal statesmanship may well be intended in part as buildup for
UN appearance.) Present substance of
Soviet and bloc commentaries does not however suggest USSR intends—in
event of Khrushchev visit to
UN—to raise Berlin issue per se
before General Assembly. Emphasis appears instead to be tending toward
matters of disarmament, ban on nuclear arms, and possible NATO-Warsaw Pact negotiations. Khrushchev will probably wish reserve
any serious discussion of Berlin for personal meeting with President
Kennedy, should he come to America. End
text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 737.56361/11–762. Secret; Priority; Verbatim Text.
Drafted by Cash and Mautner,
cleared by Thompson and
Kranich, and approved by
Hillenbrand. Repeated to
Bonn and London.

1 In an earlier telegram on November 7 the Department
of State had informed the Mission at Berlin that it had consistently
sought to discourage press speculation about links between Cuba and
Berlin. The telegram continued that the Department of State was
taking the line that it had no indication of Soviet intentions to
resume harassment of the Allied position in Berlin in the immediate
future. (Telegram 440 to Berlin; ibid., 862B.181/11–662)

151. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Advance Planning Subcommittee (Rostow) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)151. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Advance Planning Subcommittee
(Rostow) to the
President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 9,
1962.

SUBJECT

Negotiations

Herewith a supplement to our negotiating paper,2 which the President and you may wish to
read. (I attach a copy of our paper. You'll be getting five copies
officially before noon Saturday.)

The supplement is Tommy Thompson's concept of a West Berlin solution. It
is virtually the same as our expanded Berlin/Germany proposal in Track
B, except that it does not provide for the 7–10 year stretch-out of the
Western Peace Plan.

In addition, we shall be giving some thought to the possibility of a
bolder diplomatic initiative which the U.S. might take beyond the quite
radical proposals in Track B. Their weakness, as pure initiatives, is
that (except for the radical disarmament proposal) they could not be
surfaced with our allies until there is clear evidence that Mr.
Khrushchev is ready for very
serious business indeed.

There is, within our group, a desire to explore whether there exists some
course of action or initiative we might take which would:

a. Not be a phony psywar exercise;

b. Not appear to Moscow to be an effort to force their hand on issues
where, in fact, we don't have any serious military leverage; and

c. Not appear to be the result of over-anxiety about other issues, having
just had a dangerous confrontation.

None of us is sure whether a bold initiative which meets these complex
specifications actually exists; nevertheless, we shall try.

Attachment3

POSSIBLE BERLIN SOLUTIONS

West Berlin Solution

The following is a possible package deal on West Berlin, which attempts
to take account of Soviet and East German interests as well as United
States and West German interests. The general idea would be to make a
number of changes which would have the possibility of removing the
Berlin problem from the area of contention for a considerable period of
time. The general approach would be that of a scale balance in which the
weights on both sides could be changed without upsetting the overall
balance. The following are only suggestive and in actual negotiation, if
a concession on one side proved impractical, the offsetting concession
on the other side would have to be dropped.

Western concessions:

1. Agree to some change in the status of our forces in West Berlin,
putting them on a contractual basis, perhaps setting up some sort of
trusteeship arrangement, or suspending exercise of occupation rights for
duration of the agreement.

2. We would go a considerable distance toward de facto ac-knowledgement
of East German sovereignty, for example by making them signatories, or
at least participants, in access arrangements.

3. We would agree with Soviets to measures to take West Berlin out of the
cold war along the lines of our 1959 Geneva proposals. There might be a
limitation on power of radio and TV transmitters, elimination of certain
espionage and subversive operations, prohibition on introduction of
atomic weapons into West Berlin, and then possibly some representative
of UN Secretary General to be stationed
in West Berlin to observe implementation these provisions.

Ceiling on number of Western forces to be stationed in West Berlin and
possibly change of designation to call them military police, but without
any major change in their military equipment.

4. Statement that existing economic and political ties with West Germany
would be maintained but there would be a prohibition for duration of the
agreement against incorporation West Berlin into Federal Republic.

5. Western forces would accept the position that by the change of status
of their forces in West Berlin they would not attempt to exercise their
rights in East Berlin.

Communist concessions:

1. Accept the continued presence of Western forces in West Berlin without
acquiring any substantial Soviet rights there.

2. Agree to some relatively secure access authority either along the
lines which we have put to them, or an arrangement for West Berlin to
lease the autobahn from the GDR for a
specified period of time. (L has pointed
out that arrangements similar to Soviet lease of canal to Finns would be
good precedent and strong argument that this did not impair
sovereignty.) Air access would be difficult problem.

3. Soviets and East Germans would agree to measures to take East Berlin
out of cold war such as limitation on power of radio and TV
transmitters, prohibition on stationing of atomic weapons in East
Berlin, generalized prohibition against espionage and subversive
activities, similar to Western declaration. Their unwillingness to have
any such measures applied to East Berlin might be overcome if it were
clear we were giving up our rights in East Berlin.

4. Declaration that these measures are instituted pending
reunification.

Mixed German and/or mixed Berlin commissions might be set up in
connection with the foregoing.

Along with these arrangements, might be package of measures in broader
field of European security, such as NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression declaration, recognition by
Britain, France, and United States of Oder-Neisse line, or at least
declarations on the non-use of force to exchange [change] existing
frontiers or demarcation lines, measures against surprise attack,
possibly atomic testing and non-diffusion nuclear weapons and, if
feasible, some immediately applicable disarmament measures.

It will be noted that such a package would enable the Soviet Union to
proceed with signature of separate Peace Treaty unless we had a
provision or understanding to the contrary. Such signature would do much
to get Khrushchev off the hook he
is on, but it may well be that if agreement reached along lines set
forth above that Khrushchev may
not attach so much importance to a separate treaty which has some
disadvantages for him.

For the West, the chief advantage would be acquiring secure access
arrangements, particularly for the West Germans.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National
Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin. Secret. Initialed
by Rostow.

2 The negotiating paper, entitled “Negotiations,”
November 9, is not attached to the source text, but is printed in
vol. V, Document 160. The paper described
a series of topics (bilateral, arms control, and Germany and
Berlin), which had already been staffed and which were generally
familiar to the U.S. Allies, that might be the subject of
negotiations with the Soviet Union (Track A) and a more radical
series of proposals on Germany and Berlin (Track B) that might be
the subject of informal U.S.-Soviet discussions to see if progress
might be made leading to a summit. (Department of State, Central
Files, 611.61/11–962)

3 Secret. Drafted
by Thompson.

November 1962–January 1963: Allied Consideration of Resuming Talks With the Soviet UnionNovember 1962–January 1963: Allied Consideration of Resuming Talks With the Soviet Union: Document List

Document 152: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/11–1362. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand.

Document 153: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 14, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2181. Secret. Drafted by Lejins and approved in the White House on November 29. On October 10 the President had invited the Chancellor to visit Washington November 7–8. (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204) On October 12 Adenauer accepted the invitation, but on October 22 Kennedy sent the Chancellor a second letter, outlining the speech he would make that night about the Soviet introduction of offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba. (Ibid.) On October 25 the Chancellor thanked the President for the presentation that Dowling had made on the Cuban situation and offered to postpone his visit. (Ibid.) The visit was subsequently scheduled for November 14–15. A summary of the visit was transmitted to Paris in circular telegram 929, November 17. (Ibid., Central Files, 033.62A11/11–1762)

Document 154: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 14, 1962, 16:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.62A11/11–2062. Secret. Drafted by Lejins and Tyler and approved in S on November 20 and in the White House on November 29. The meeting was held at the White House.

Document 155: Letter From President Kennedy to Governing Mayor Brandt

Washington, November 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 156: Memorandum From President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer

Washington, November 15, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 157: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, November 28, 1962, 19:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.13/11–2362. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hillenbrand and revised in the White House, cleared in draft by Rusk and in substance by the President and Bundy, and approved by Davis.

Document 158: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 30, 1962, 1–3:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/11–3062. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Davis and approved in S on December 5. The source text is labeled “Memo No. 5.” Mikoyan had stopped in Washington after visiting Havana. A summary of this conversation and one with the President on November 29, at which Berlin was not discussed, was transmitted to Paris in Topol 757, December 4. (Ibid., 611.61/12–462) Rusk and Mikoyan also discussed a non-aggression pact between NATO and the Warsaw Pact. A memorandum of this conversation is ibid., 611.61/11–3062.

Document 159: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, December 3, 1962, 23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/12–362. Secret; Limited Distribution.

Document 160: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, December 6, 1962, 15:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.54/11–2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Ausland; cleared by Hillenbrand, Bundy (in substance), Nitze, Thompson, Davis, and Weiss (all in draft); and approved and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

Document 161: Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (LeMay) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 10, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542, 091 Germany. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. On January 17, 1963, McNamara sent a copy of this paper to Rusk. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/1–763)

Document 162: Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy

Moscow, December 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. The full text of the letter is printed in volume VI.

Document 163: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Paris, December 12, 1962, 20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/12–1262. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, and Berlin. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Hillenbrand. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2197) Rusk and the other Foreign Ministers were in Paris for the NATO Ministerial Meeting December 13–15.

Document 164: Memorandum of Conversation

Nassau, December 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Thompson and approved by the White House on January 28. For further documentation on the talks between President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan at Nassau December 18–21, see volume XIII.

Document 165: Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, December 19, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 505 Berlin Contingency Planning. Top Secret.

Document 166: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, January 9, 1963, 20:19p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/1–963. Secret. Drafted by Holloway, cleared by Hillenbrand and Guthrie, and approved and initialed by Thompson. Also sent to Bonn, London, Moscow, Berlin, and U.S. Element Live Oak.

Document 167: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 10, 1963, noon.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Kuznets-ov Talks. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Guthrie and approved in S on January 16. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office. Since Kuznetsov had worked effectively with U.S. officials at the United Nations during the Cuban crisis, the U.S. Government extended an invitation to visit Washington. On January 11 Thompson briefed Knappstein and Rusk briefed Alphand on the talks with Kuznetsov, stressing that there had been nothing new in the conversations. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/1–1163 and 661.00/1–1163)

Document 168: Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Missions

Washington, January 15, 1963, 13:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 700.5611/1–1563. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Thompson and Tyler; cleared by Davis, Manning, NEA, and S; and approved by Tyler. Sent to the NATO capitals, Madrid, Warsaw, and Berlin and repeated to Moscow.

Document 169: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, January 17, 1963, 16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 661.62A/1–1763. Secret; Niact. Also sent to Bonn and repeated to Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, and CINCEUR.

152. Memorandum of Conversation152. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 13,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Martin J. Hillenbrand,
Director, Berlin Task Force

At his request Mr. Kornienko
called on Mr. Hillenbrand to
deliver a book which Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov had said he would send to Mr. Hillenbrand during a conversation at
the Secretary of State's dinner for Foreign Minister Gromyko.2 (The book turned
out to be “West Berlin—The Facts”, issued in English by the Foreign
Language Publishing House in Moscow in 1962. It apparently has been
distributed fairly widely in New York in connection with the General
Assembly Session.)

Mr. Kornienko observed that it now
seemed appropriate that the dialogue on Berlin should be resumed between
the Soviet Union and the United States. It appeared to him that each
side was waiting for the other to take the initiative to resume contacts
on this subject. Speaking personally, he did not believe that Chairman
Khrushchev would be coming to
the General Assembly Session. Purely from a timing point of view, this
would be very difficult. The Central Committee would be meeting in
Moscow for a week or so starting on the 19th of November and the GA Session was supposed to end around
December 10.

Mr. Hillenbrand commented that we
seemed to be at a somewhat interdeterminate stage as far as Berlin
discussions were concerned. It was not clear precisely how these should
or would be resumed. After all, the leaders of both countries had been
concentrating on other problems during the past month, and as he was
aware, the Cuban question had to date not been satisfactorily
settled.

As to summitry, Mr. Kornienko said
that the positions of the United States and the Soviet Union now
appeared to be the same in considering that a summit meeting might be useful under two sets of
circumstances: during a crisis in order to avert conflict, and after
substantial agreement had been reached at a lower level in order to
confirm this agreement. Mr. Hillenbrand observed that, in the past, we had sometimes
had the impression that summit meetings were thought of in terms of
their propaganda effect or as useful in creating a mood which was not
necessarily in harmony with the nature of the issues under dispute.

Mr. Kornienko referred to press
reports this morning of Chancellor Adenauer's views, and noted that he was quoted as being
opposed to any negotiations on Berlin and Germany at this time. Mr.
Hillenbrand said we would, of
course, be hearing directly with the Chancellor on these matters. This
would be a more authoritative version of his views than those in press
reports as to the accuracy of which we had no guarantee.

Referring to a recent Flora Lewis article in the Washington Post,3 Kornienko noted that, apart from
the Chancellor's opposition to discussions now, he appeared to have
accepted the four points mentioned by Miss Lewis. Mr. Hillenbrand observed that the points
mentioned in the article had been contained in one form or another in
the informal working paper which the Secretary had handed Foreign
Minister Gromyko at Geneva last
March on a personal basis. Kornienko said this was true, but these matters had not
really been discussed in subsequent meetings between the Secretary and
Gromyko. Mr. Hillenbrand commented that this was
true, but as the Soviets were aware, the issue of Western troop presence
in Berlin had been singled out by mutual agreement as the crucial
one.

After a further exchange as to why the previous discussions on Berlin had
not seemed to make any headway, Mr. Kornienko noted that a few points seemed to have emerged
which might provide a basis for further discussion. Apart from the idea
of an Arbitration Commission, to which Foreign Minister Gromyko had called attention, the
President had made a remark during his October 18 conversation with
Gromyko4 about the possibility of discussing the status of
the Western troops in Berlin which had been noted with interest.

The conversation concluded with Kornienko's remark that it now remained to be seen how
the discussion between the Soviet Union and the United States on Berlin
would be resumed.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/11–1362. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand.

2 See Document 136.

3 The Washington Post, November 11,
1962.

4 See Document
135.

153. Memorandum of Conversation153. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 14, 1962, 11 a.m.

In addition to the November 14 meetings (see also Document 154), on November 15 the President and the
Chancellor discussed European regional questions; a memorandum of this
conversation is printed in vol. XIII, Document 52. The Chancellor also
met with Secretary Rusk to discuss
China, India, NATO, and European
regional issues. A memorandum of their conversation is in Department of
State, Central Files, 611.62A/11–1562.

SUBJECT

Conversation between President and Chancellor Adenauer

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mrs. Lejins, L/S, Dept. of State

Chancellor Adenauer

Mr. Weber, Interpreter

The private talks were held at the request of Chancellor Adenauer while he was walking with the
President to his office.

Mr. Adenauer congratulated the
President on the success achieved in the Cuban situation and indicated
that this was the beginning of a new epoch for the West. He also stated
that the President could rest assured that he would always find Germany
firmly on his side in situations like this.

The President stated that he was very appreciative of this stand
expressed by the Chancellor. He also appreciated the Chancellor's
remarks to Ambassador Dowling
when the Cuban affair first got started. It was obvious, of course, that
the Cuban situation could have resulted in serious repercussions on
Berlin, and everyone was aware of that at the time.

The Chancellor replied that he is well familiar with the world situation
and realizes that the President had to make his decision on Cuba not
with reference to any one single problem but in the light of the overall
world situation. Thus, he could not be concerned only with the German
question at the time. The latter is just one of the big problems which
Providence has placed on the shoulders of Mr.
Kennedy. With reference to today's reception,
Mr. Adenauer recalled his visit to
Paris a few months ago and a
parade held in his honor on that occasion, showing French tanks and
other military equipment. Chancellor Adenauer had stood side by side with President De Gaulle, and he termed the occasion
an historical event. Today's ceremony at the White House, too, he did
not consider just a colorful show, but a truly historical event.

The President expressed his appreciation for this sentiment.

Mr. Adenauer then made the request
that he be given the opportunity to discuss his ideas on Berlin in only
the smallest of circles.

President Kennedy indicated that he would honor this
request. He stated that he wished to get the Chancellor's ideas on what
Western procedures should be from this point on with regard to Berlin.
He asked for the Chancellor's comments and what he considered the best
timing with regard to arrangements which might give us hope to achieve
some kind of a permanent settlement of that problem.

The Chancellor replied that he would like to express himself very
cautiously on this point. He himself had no knowledge to what extent the
Cuban situation could actually be considered solved. For that reason the
decision as to what to do vis-a-vis the Russians, even on possible
German initiatives, was up to the President. If the President were of
the opinion that all his demands with regard to Cuba had been fulfilled
by the Soviets, then he might try to proceed on the question of Berlin.
If, however, he did not feel that his demands there had been fully met
by the Soviets, then Mr. Adenauer
felt it was better to wait.

The President indicated that he had been interested in a statement made
to the press by Mr. Adenauer not
long ago in which he expressed the opinion that not all missiles had
been removed from Cuba. The President stated that no one knew of course
with complete certainty whether all missiles had been removed. For all
we knew some might have been hidden in caves or other spots on the
island. It was our judgment, however, that the missiles had, for the
most part, been removed. We had counted thirty-three of them from the
air and supporting equipment for forty-eight, in other words two
regiments. We had now counted forty-two missiles being taken out. The
President did not believe that there was much advantage to the Soviet
Union in keeping a few missiles in Cuba. If another missile attempt were
to be made in Cuba at a later time, it would be better to take
everything out now and start anew some other time. He was pretty sure,
however, that the Cuban missile episode was ended. The Soviets knew now
that the next time they started something of this sort we would invade
Cuba. While we were pretty sure that the missiles had been removed, we
had not achieved any agreement as yet on the bombers, which we
definitely wanted removed. We were also insisting on inspection. At the
same time we felt that our own system of air inspection is much better
and surer than having UN observers on the
spot for inspection purposes. We felt that we could rely better on our own cameras. The second problem,
however, at present really the chief one, was that Khrushchev had grossly lied on the
Cuban situation and the President therefore had no confidence in
Khrushchev at all. For this
reason also he was not interested in the West taking the initiative
vis-a-vis the Russians in the Berlin question, but rather favored
waiting for their moves.

The Chancellor fully agreed with this opinion. He felt that it was not
very important whether any remnants of equipment had been left in Cuba
to salve Castro's feelings. He also considered that the chief thing was
that Khrushchev had lied dismally
to the President. He had tried to launch as criminal and as dangerous an
attack on the United States as anyone had ever undertaken, and the
President had been successful in warding it off. If the President were
to resume talks with the Soviets at once after all these happenings,
Khrushchev would think that
the President was willing to let bygones be bygones. He would therefore
be encouraged to start trouble somewhere else. In this connection the
Chancellor pointed out something he had learned from Nazi times. A
dictatorship completely changes the moral fiber and manner of thinking
of the person involved, for example Khrushchev, completely warping the personality so that
his way of thinking will be entirely different from that of the
President or Mr. Adenauer for
instance.

The President stated that there is ample evidence that the aim of
Khrushchev is the same as the
aim of the Chinese Communists, only his methods are somewhat different.
His long range ambitions remain the same but his tactics have been
somewhat complicated by the setback he has suffered in Cuba. Three
factors in the world situation are different from what they were about
two months ago: One was the failure of Khrushchev's designs in Cuba; the second was his
difficulties with the Communist Chinese; and the third was the
complications arising out of the Chinese-Indian conflict. The importance
of these was how they would affect Khrushchev's further actions. One thing was clear, of
course, he wants to get both the United States and Germany.

The Chancellor concurred and went on to say that a slow revolution was
taking place in Russia. No one knew how far this revolution had
progressed. Of one thing Mr. Adenauer felt sure, however, namely that Khrushchev would not risk all his
achievements by starting a war. He will try to achieve further successes
by intrigue and through cold war. This needs to be watched very
carefully. He, too, was of the opinion that we should take our time and
carefully observe developments but not act as though nothing had
happened. As an outsider, Mr. Adenauer wished to say that the United States had been
in very grave danger indeed and the President had averted this danger.
This constituted a tremendous victory for the President himself and for
the American people. On the other side, however, there was a real
criminal, Khrushchev, who needed
careful watching.
Therefore, the Chancellor advised observing developments carefully
before having any further dealings with Khrushchev. The Chancellor was speaking as a German, of
course. His opinion, however, differed from that of his own Foreign
Minister, Dr. Schroeder, who would
act differently in this matter. The latter might be inclined to draw up
a new memorandum on German-Soviet relations. Germany had done this in
1958 and still had had no reply from Moscow. Now, however, the
Chancellor felt that the decision on whether to proceed with regard to
the Soviets was up to President Kennedy. At the
same time the Chancellor felt that Cuba from Khrushchev's standpoint should be chalked up as a
failure. Likewise, the Chinese situation presented grave difficulties to
him as did the Chinese-Indian conflict. Perhaps it would be well for us
to sit back and wait and let Khrushchev think matters over a bit and see what
happens.

The President then stated that no one seems to be able really to read the
Soviets; certainly no one in the United States. None of the Soviet
experts in the United States would ever have imagined that Khrushchev would undertake to station
missiles in Cuba. On the other hand the Soviets would never have thought
that we would react the way we did or else they would not have placed
the missiles in Cuba. Thus, neither side appears very adept at
interpreting the other, and both sides are to some extent blind.
Nevertheless, within the limitations of our judgment, we must try to
evaluate what effect the previously mentioned factors will have on
Khrushchev's reactions, and
then decide on the basis thereof whether it might be advantageous to
talk with Khrushchev on the
Berlin question now, or whether it might be better to wait say six
months or even longer. Mr. Kennedy doubted that we
would be able to tell anything certain until the bomber question had
been settled. The Chancellor replied that most people do not judge
Khrushchev correctly, since
they generally talk in terms of what he has not achieved or wants to
achieve and rarely speak in terms of what he has achieved. The
Chancellor believes that Khrushchev has achieved a great deal during the past ten
years for instance. In 1953 Russia had no atom weapons, but in 1962 she
was sending nuclear missiles to Cuba. The Chancellor is convinced that
Khrushchev values very highly
what he has achieved so far. Mr. Adenauer recalled that he had previously told the
President about his meetings with Khrushchev in 1955, when for a period of six days he met
with Mr. Khrushchev as many as
three times a day, experiencing all of Mr. Khrushchev's moods. Khrushchev is smart, completely ruthless and has no
conscience whatsoever, but he is a Soviet patriot at heart and he will
not risk his achievements in a war. Only now he has understood the
determination of the United States and US strength and he will have to
digest this for awhile before he can adapt his actions to this in the
future. The Chancellor considers it definitely a mistake to resume
dealings with Khrushchev at once because, he
repeated, then Khrushchev would
feel that everyone is willing to forget what happened and he will act
accordingly. The Chancellor agreed that perhaps his reactions with
reference to the bomber removal might indicate what conclusions
Khrushchev is drawing. Also
the Chinese situation should make him think. Mr. Adenauer recalled that in 1955 Khrushchev had actually asked Germany
to help him against Red China and Adenauer was convinced that Khrushchev lives in real fear of China. Therefore, the
Chancellor advises dragging our feet vis-a-vis the Soviets. If Khrushchev swallows all of Cuba
including the bomber question then the President will have time to think
matters over. If then he decides the time is ripe to take further steps,
he may count on Germany to live up to its obligations. But the time is
not ripe now.

The President reiterated that he felt it was important to decide whether
the happenings of the last two months might have made Khrushchev more vulnerable to pressure
and therefore more ready to enter into an agreement on Berlin than he
might be six months hence or in a year. The President realized that we
could never be really sure that the right moment was at hand, but he was
certain that he would not be able to tell anything for at least three
more weeks.

The Chancellor thought the idea was very simple. Khrushchev had disgraced himself before
the world and his people. If there were to be any talks with him at the
present time, he would try to do everything in his power to prove that
he was not getting soft or too old in order to wipe out his disgrace.
Therefore, we could expect that in any talks now on any but the Cuban
question Mr. Khrushchev would
take a very unyielding stand.

The President agreed that this might be the case. On the other hand, he
felt that Khrushchev had talked
about Berlin for so long that he might be willing to accept some kind of
a settlement precisely in view of the difficulties he had had in Cuba,
with the Chinese, etc. Perhaps, he would value getting some kind of an
agreement on paper which might strengthen him domestically and which he
needed vis-a-vis China. Thus, perhaps, he might be willing to accept
something now that he would not be willing to accept later. Therefore
the President felt that we should watch Cuban developments carefully and
be ready for any indication from Moscow that might give us a clue
whether it would be better to act now or later. Not that the President
felt we should start; we should wait to see what they might be intending
to do.

The Chancellor agreed that if Khrushchev felt the need for domestic reasons to achieve
a settlement of some question he would come and seek the agreement on
his own. If, however, the United States and Germany would approach him
as partners, as it were, then Khrushchev would become very hard and unyielding.
Therefore the Chancellor fully
agreed that it was necessary to wait and to watch for Khrushchev's reactions.

The Chancellor then indicated that there was another matter that he
wished to raise privately. He said that Germany, historically, has good
relations with some of the Latin American countries. These are based on
human rather than political considerations. Thus a Minister from Brazil,
whose name the Chancellor could not at the moment recall, visited the
Chancellor recently. This Minister had started a Christian Democratic
Union in Brazil and was getting the German party's publications in that
connection. In his talk with the Chancellor he discussed some of the
Latin American attitudes toward the United States, and the Chancellor
wished to propose an idea for the President to examine. It was not
necessarily his own idea. His proposal envisaged establishing vis-a-vis
the South American countries, started by the United States and Europe, a
kind of OECD.

The President indicated that he was convinced that Europe should play a
much more important role in South America. That hemisphere represented a
real danger spot, especially Brazil. At the same time there were many
common factors between Europe and Latin America such as language,
religion and culture. Moreover, the historically conditioned hostility
vis-a-vis the United States does not exist with reference to Europe. He
then asked the Chancellor to indicate the areas of disagreement or
attitudes which the man from Brazil had mentioned.

The Chancellor stated that the Brazilian had complained about the
patronizing attitude displayed by the United States vis-a-vis Latin
America. The Latin Americans considered themselves on a par with the
Europeans and resented such attitudes. At the same time the Brazilian
had indicated that he had been in Washington and complained of the
treatment received, either at the White House or the State Department,
the Chancellor could not remember which. The Brazilian was therefore
complaining out of hurt pride. The Chancellor then pointed out that the
Brazilian in question is now in Washington and if the President permits
he will pass the man's name to the Secretary of State who could then
perhaps ask the Brazilian to come and see him.

The President thought that this might be a good idea. Then, he stated
that as regards Berlin, he felt there was agreement that we should wait
until the complete solution of the present Cuban problem. We should not
make any approach to the Russians on Berlin but stand ready to listen to
their proposals and consider what our position should be in case they
came up with proposals that were different from those made by them in
the past. Gromyko had visited the
President in October and had voiced proposals which were completely
unreasonable and downright insulting. There was no point discussing
proposals of that kind. If, however, Khrushchev came up with different proposals we should be
prepared to exploit them.
Until then we would have to wait. Also since no one appeared to be very
good at reading the Communist world we should be prepared to deal with
the possibility of one or more different reactions. Thus we should be
ready to deal with Khrushchev if
he turned out to have become more unreasonable on the basis of his
pres-ent difficulties, but we should also not discount the possibility
that he might be prompted to want to seek some kind of a settlement. We
should be ready in either case.

The Chancellor then indicated that the Soviets were definitely having
economic difficulties. He made reference to the West German trade
agreement with the Soviet Zone. He stated that some time ago the Soviet
Zone representative approached West Germany expressly with the consent
and knowledge of the Soviet authorities, stating that if West Germany
were to give the Soviet Zone several hundred million DM's they would be ready to enter into an
agreement giving permission to the West Berliners to come and go in the
Zone undisturbed, but not the other way around. The Chancellor had
expected that this matter might have been settled by the time of his
trip to the United States, but this was not the case. He therefore
proposed to keep the President informed of developments. He felt however
that the fact that these questions were raised at the Zone's initiative
with Russian approval was an encouraging sign.

Before joining the larger group in the Cabinet Room the President
indicated that he and the Chancellor would have further private
talks.2

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65
D 533, CF 2181. Secret. Drafted by Lejins and approved in the White House on November
29. On October 10 the President had invited the Chancellor to visit
Washington November 7–8. (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66
D 204) On October 12 Adenauer
accepted the invitation, but on October 22
Kennedy sent the Chancellor a second
letter, outlining the speech he would make that night about the
Soviet introduction of offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba. (Ibid.)
On October 25 the Chancellor thanked the President for the
presentation that Dowling had
made on the Cuban situation and offered to postpone his visit.
(Ibid.) The visit was subsequently scheduled for November 14–15. A
summary of the visit was transmitted to Paris in circular telegram
929, November 17. (Ibid., Central Files, 033.62A11/11–1762)

2 In the meeting with the larger
group the President and the Chancellor discussed Cuba and Berlin
briefly, but devoted most of the conversation to NATO. A memorandum of that part of the
discussion is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2181.

154. Memorandum of Conversation154. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 14, 1962, 16:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

President-Adenauer Talks—2nd
Plenary Session

PARTICIPANTS

US

The President

The Secretary of State

Mr. Tyler

Mrs. Lejins
(interpreter)

Germany

Chancellor Adenauer

Foreign Minister Schroeder

Dr. Carstens

Mr. Weber (interpreter)

Chancellor Adenauer indicated that
he had had a chance to discuss the question raised during the morning
meeting2 with General Heusinger
and had found that views concerning this matter had been clarified
considerably since the Cuban crisis.

The President replied that he had had the opportunity to discuss the same
question with General Taylor and
wished to inform the Chancellor of the following: (1) Our troops are
equipped with some Davy Crocketts but it is our opinion that the Soviets
do not have much similar equipment; (2) If our troops were to use some
of this nuclear equipment in the case of an emergency, the same type of
equipment would immediately be released on the same basis to the other
forces fighting together with us so that there would be no difference in
their equipment.

The Chancellor expressed his satisfaction at this news.

The President indicated that he had asked General Taylor to come and discuss this matter
with the Chancellor. He wondered, however, whether the Chancellor might
prefer to have General Taylor
speak with General Heusinger and then have Heusinger inform the
Chancellor about the discussion.

The Chancellor answered that he would prefer the latter since he himself
is no expert in these matters.

The President said that he understood Defense Secretary McNamara would be the Chancellor's
dinner companion this evening and they would therefore have a chance to
discuss this matter too.

Adenauer then stated that he
briefly wished to explain a few things about De Gaulle in this small group in order to contribute to
a better understanding of De
Gaulle's position. Adenauer had chided De
Gaulle in 1959 for committing so few troops to NATO. De
Gaulle had answered: I do not know your opinion of
generals but if you commit them to NATO, you lose control over them completely. Adenauer stated that he had not really
understood the meaning of De
Gaulle's words until the troubles later with the OAS.

The President said that he did not really see the connection because
having the generals in Algeria was quite a different matter, since that
problem was one in which much emotion was involved. Committing troops in
Western Europe is an entirely different problem since there they are used in our attempts to tackle
our major problem, namely the Soviets. The President conceded that the
uncertain disposition of these troops might possibly have some political
implications, but the danger of not having sufficient troops available
to NATO in our dealings with the
Soviets was far more dangerous.

The Chancellor then stated he felt that the President did not quite
appreciate the French situation. If it were left to the National
Assembly, De Gaulle would be
overthrown at once. The parties represented in the Assembly are rooted
back home, and the officers come from those same areas. This is where
De Gaulle's concern came
from. Adenauer indicated that the
political situation in France is extremely weak. We should not forget
that the Communist Party in France is the second largest party and that
they are the kind of Communists who are willing to fight on the
barricades. It is a little known fact that three military depots were
plundered by OAS revolutionary forces
only a short time ago without meeting any resistance. One of them was in
Versailles. This was done obviously to get arms for the revolutionary
OAS. The Chancellor was convinced
that if De Gaulle were overthrown
the result would be a catastrophe for France. De Gaulle is really trying to give
France some inner strength. He told the Chancellor that this is at the
bottom of his disagreement with the Parliament. If France had even one
party ready to assume sole responsibility then the situation would be in
good hands. There was no such party, however, and the six or seven
parties in existence were all alike. Each knew that when one government
fell the other one would come in and each in turn would have a chance to
furnish the Prime Minister. Therefore things kept going around like a
merry-go-round. The situation in France had really been desperate until
De Gaulle took over and if he
had not come in when he did, there was real danger of a true civil
war.

The President stated that this problem was related to another one which
he wished to discuss with the Chancellor. This was the matter of our
dollar balance, which of course always affects the burdens we are
carrying overseas. Under no circumstances did we want to retrench in our
overseas defense efforts, which were costing us about $3 billion
annually. (The Chancellor expressed surprise that it was so little. He
had thought it would be considerably more.) For this reason the United
States greatly appreciated the Strauss/Gilpatric
arrangement whereby German orders would be placed in the United States
in the amount of $250 million per year. Since our difficulties in
October we had had to draw on our dollar resources even more and had
since then heard the disquieting rumor that for budgetary reasons the
Federal Republic was expecting not to fulfill this agreement this year.
This would mean that our deficit would be that much higher this year and
this would have a very bad
psychological effect. The President hoped that Germany could see its way
to making the purchases as anticipated. The Chancellor indicated that he
was not informed in this matter and that he would look into it on his
return. He would do everything in his power to see that Germany's
promise was kept.

The President stated that we were appreciative of the aid extended so far
in this respect by the Federal Republic, for instance their percentage
of dollar holdings. It was important that our deficit did not go up over
last year. If it remained the same, it was tolerable, but if it
increased it constituted a worsening of the situation. He had heard that
Germany expected to make up next year what they would not be buying this
year but it would be better if it were done this year. The President
then stated that he would like to give the Chancellor a one-page
memorandum on this matter to take home with him.

Returning to the Cuban situation, the President indicated that it was
still very much unsettled. The possibility existed that we might have to
resort to more drastic steps, if the bomber situation was not solved
satisfactorily. The future was therefore still uncertain. The President
then reiterated the consensus reached at the morning meeting concerning
Berlin, namely that both he and the Chancellor thought that it was
inappropriate for the West to undertake any initiative vis-a-vis the
Soviets until a final solution had been achieved in Cuba, and future
Soviet intentions became more clear. After successful completion of the
Cuban affair we should be prepared with our position in case the Soviets
came up with proposals that were better than what they had come up with
in October. Perhaps the right moment for this might come in two or three
months. No one could know the exact time. Perhaps it might be less.

The Chancellor then said that he thought the President might be
interested in hearing the German ideas about a possible cooling off
period of ten years and asked Dr. Carstens to present this problem in English.3

Dr. Carstens stated that this
matter was being treated as highly confidential in Germany and that the
United States was the first one to be told about it. It had not been
discussed with either the British or the French and even in Germany was
confined to a very small circle. Germany felt, however, that if the US
approved, this plan might perhaps be submitted to the Soviets but it had
probably best come from the United States. Dr. Carstens then briefly enumerated the
eight points of the proposal: (1) A ten-year standstill period on Berlin and the German question in
general, i.e., no peace treaty, etc.

(2) This point is one well known to all parties concerned. It deals with
an international access authority with administration and control over
certain traffic routes. (In reply to the President's question whether
they had thought about who the members of the authority would be, Dr.
Carstens replied that they had
avoided this, since the plan was meant to be a very general one in order
not to get bogged down in all the difficulties which would be created by
too much detail.)

(3) Establishment of two mixed German commissions with representatives
from both West and East Germany. These commissions were to handle two
problems: (a) Increase economic exchange between the two parts of
Germany; (b) Establish a free movement of persons between the two areas;
talks on the latter subject have been going on between the two parts of
Germany for some time.

This third point would actually meet the Soviet demand that East and West
Germany get together to work out some of their problems themselves, and
so far the Federal Republic had always refused. If these two commissions
proved successful, this plan envisaged setting up additional mixed
commissions to handle additional problems of a limited nature.

(4) A non-aggression declaration by the NATO and the Warsaw Pact powers together with a statement
renouncing the use of force to solve international questions, especially
frontier readjustments.

(5) After the ten-year cool-off this plan envisaged a plebiscite under
international control on the question of German reunification.

(6) and (7) These two points dealt with the two possible results of the
plebiscite. In case the majority of both areas voted for reunification,
then free elections were to be held to elect a German government which
would then send representatives to a German peace conference. At the
same time certain arrangements would be made to ensure that the
resulting military strength of Germany could not be shifted in such a
way as to create any more favorable or unfavorable situation for the
military alliances to which either East or West Germany belong at the
present time. Later, this unified Germany would then become a member of
the UN.

The second possible result being provided for under these two points was
in case the majority of the Eastern Zone would vote against
reunification. In that case, the Western powers agreed to recognize the
existence of two separate Germanies, which, after the necessary
intermediate steps, would both become members of the UN and a peace conference would be held with
representatives of both Germanies present. The problem of Berlin would still remain in this latter
case, and a plebiscite would probably be suggested to determine the
city's status.

(8) During the ten-year cooling-off period there would be in operation a
four-power committee composed of Deputy Foreign Ministers which would be
dealing with the problems arising during that time.

Mr. Carstens stated that Mr.
Tyler was the only person
with whom he had had occasion to discuss this German proposal very
briefly since his arrival in Washington.

The President said that he had not heard of this as yet. On the surface
it appeared to him that this 8-point proposal would give us all we want
without giving the Soviets much of anything. The Soviets would not buy
the idea, he thought, of a stand-still because that would mean the
continued presence of Western troops in Berlin, and the Soviets wanted
these definitely out. Moreover, we had renounced the use of force
before. All the Soviet Union would appear to be getting out of this plan
would be the somewhat uncertain Eastern German status under an access
authority. The President thought that we could live with this 8-point
agreement. As an argument vis-a-vis the Soviets we could state that we
are giving up our claim to immediate reunification, but the Soviets
might not be impressed by that. Moreover, if the Soviets hold to their
October demands that Western troops be withdrawn, we will not get
anywhere. If they change their attitude on troops they might be willing
to sign an agreement of this sort. The acceptability thereof would
probably depend on the status of West Berlin and what that is called and
the status of the Western forces in Berlin. In this connection, he
indicated, the suggestion relayed by Sir Frank Roberts might be useful.4

Dr. Carstens explained that he felt
that three elements of the 8-power plan should be attractive to the
Soviets:

(1) The 10-year waiting period. Eastern Germany had now been under Soviet
control for 17 years. Ten more years would give the Soviets that much
additional chance to indoctrinate the population and therefore would
increase the chances that a plebiscite would come out against
reunification of Western Germany.

(2) The fact that the West promises to recognize East Germany as a
sovereign state if the plebiscite turns in that direction.

(3) The direct contact envisaged by the proposal between repre-sentatives
of East and West Germany on an official basis which the Soviets had been
agitating for, for a long time.

Secretary Rusk inquired about East
German views on the political implications of the access
arrangements.

Foreign Minister Schroeder
indicated that what had been envisaged so far in this matter was very
limited in scope. The primary aim was for family reunions, and nothing
pertaining to general access had been touched upon.

The Chancellor then suggested that the United States might perhaps
examine the access implications of the US having turned over to the
Soviets such territories as Pomerania and Thuringia. While the US had
held these areas, free access to Berlin should have been assured. West
German law experts had looked into this matter without coming up with
anything useful. Perhaps American experts of international law were more
clever.

The President stated that the presence of Western forces in Berlin had
been the key question in that situation for the past year. It was the
primary concern of Khrushchev's
proposal in October, and the President was not quite sure what Sir
Frank Roberts had meant.

The Foreign Minister indicated that there were two reports on this
matter: one, the report given out by Sir Frank Roberts to his fellow ambassadors in Moscow;5 the second,
these ideas as reported over here by Lord Hood. Khrushchev had used the word
“temporarily,” and apparently had spoken only of exchanging the flag of
the Western powers for the United Nations flag. It was not clear whether
this was meant to be a face-saving device or not. However, Dr. Schroeder was fearful that once the
change in flag had been made, Khrushchev might feel encouraged to raise new problems
every day, using the UN as an additional
lever. This possibility could be excluded only if the changeover were
accompanied by an explicit statement that all other bases remained
unchanged. He feared, however, that Khrushchev would not go along with the latter. The
President expressed agreement with this point of view. It was his
understanding, too, that Roberts
had said the word “temporarily” was used only once. He felt the proposal
was worth considering provided we ensured that West Berlin remain free
and that the commitments of the US, France and the UK remained clear
without the UN being able to take them
over. Under those circumstances it might be useful to make the change
for the UN flag. But the three powers
would have to be carefully watching any infringement of their rights and
if the UN should act counter to these
rights, the former status would be reverted to at once. Perhaps we
should listen somewhat more to find out whether the Russians are
interested merely in a face-saving device, and if it were possible to omit the word “temporarily,”
some progress could perhaps be achieved.

Foreign Minister Schroeder
explained that he thought perhaps a sort of combination of the eight
points in the German proposal and Khrushchev's suggestion to Sir Frank Roberts might prove useful. If
there were agreement on that, the tactical question to be decided upon
would be the timing of the Western proposal to this effect. He hastened
to say that everything would, of course, have to wait until a settlement
in the Cuban affair.

The President stated that there was no indication how soon the Cuban
problem could be considered settled. Serious consequences might result
if the Soviets refused to take out the bombers. If this were the case,
the US was faced with several alternatives. They could reimpose the
quarantine at full force, which was not good psychologically because
world opinion might state that the missiles had been taken out and that
Russia should not be expected to back down twice, as it were. Thus it
might be difficult for us to keep the backing of other countries. On the
other hand, we might eliminate the quarantine which was not really in
operation at the present time, and, without invading Cuba, maintain our
overflights to keep the situation in check. The decision may be forced
upon us within the next ten days to two weeks. If the Soviets agree to
take the bombers out of Cuba, then we can consider that particular
chapter closed. Thus the President was of the opinion that the Cuban
situation should be resolved one way or another first. If Khrushchev refuses to meet our
requirements there, then there is no point to try to discuss anything
with him. If, however, Khrushchev
agrees to our requirements in Cuba, then we might inquire as to Soviet
proposals without, however, making any of our own for the time being. If
the Soviets put forth proposals on Berlin, then we should try to clarify
the status of Western troops in West Berlin. The answer to that will be
the decisive one.

The Chancellor wondered what the possible implications might be of Soviet
fears of Red Chinese progress in Asia.

The President was of the opinion that it was very difficult for us to
determine this. Perhaps his fears in Asia might force Khrushchev to be more reasonable at
this moment, and if this were the case we should certainly seize the
moment. In summary, the President reiterated that we should continue in
the Cuban matter to see what Soviet reaction will be there. If we fail
there, all further dealings with the Soviets will by necessity need to
be delayed. If we achieve a reasonable solution in Cuba, let us await
Soviet initiative on Berlin, see their attitude concerning Western
troops in Berlin, and then, if the time appears right, come back at them
with something like the 8-point proposal.

The Chancellor indicated that this appeared the correct approach. The
President was of the opinion that conversations concerning the
suggestion reported by Sir
Frank Roberts should be
expanded to see whether there might be some acceptable formula behind
it, and if there was, consideration should be given to the way in which
the Western Powers could give way to the UN flag under full assurance, however, of the three-power
status. In any event, however, he felt that any progress in this respect
was possible only if Khrushchev
actually was inclined to relax the Berlin situation.

The Chancellor pointed out that patience and more patience was
indicated.

The President agreed, provided it was coupled with a willingness to take
the necessary chance if and when it came.

The Secretary of State felt that it might be useful to discuss the
8-point proposal in the quadripartite Ambassadorial Group. The 10-year
cooling-off period actually was not such a revolutionary idea from the
Soviet standpoint. Actually they had been talking about a four to five
years delay, and it was therefore not unthinkable that they might agree
to extending this period to ten years. Moreover, consideration of this
plan might lead at an early date to a meeting of the Deputy Foreign
Ministers over an extended period, as in the case of Austria.

The President indicated that it would be very important to keep this
entire matter out of the press, or it might create grave problems.
Therefore, he felt that only after preliminary discussion and
deliberation should this plan or idea be put into the machinery, as it
were, but not before.

Dr. Carstens pointed out that it
would be difficult to keep these plans from our Allies for any length of
time.

The President repeated that he felt it was important to keep this out of
the press. He stated that it happened frequently that the Quadripartite
Group would get into an argument over a given idea and this would leak
to the press, only to have the Soviets come out with a statement that
they are not interested in this proposal at all.

The Chancellor stated that the proposals in question are sort of day
dreams which it is better not to talk about.

The President again reiterated that it might be best perhaps for US and
German representatives to go further into the possible implementation of
the 8-point proposal, but to bring in the Allies only when it was time
to work out the details.

The Secretary of State stated that it was important to avoid the
impression that the plan that will be proposed is something new and
tremendous. He felt it was better to launch this thing quietly and
without fanfare and not as a new plan.

The President indicated that he would be agreeable to whatever procedures
appeared best, but he felt that it was important that controversy on the plan among the
Quadripartite Group should be kept to a minimum.

The Secretary of State suggested that the Quadripartite Group, when the
time came, should not be confronted with this plan as a systematic
8-point program, but rather only the ideas contained therein should be
communicated as such.

Again the President reiterated that it was important not to make anything
spectactular out of this new project because then the Soviets would get
wind of it and would be certain to say that they are not interested. In
any event we should put forth any kind of project only after the Soviets
had put forth proposals different from their October proposals, because
Gromyko's demands in October
had been something fearful.

The Chancellor repeated that we should wait for Khrushchev's reaction and appear ready
to talk further only if the situation appeared favorable.

Dr. Carstens then stated that
French Ambassador Alphand had
asked to see him the next day. What should or could Carstens tell him in view of the present
discussion? The Chancellor stated that he felt it was easy. Carstens should tell Alphand that until the Cuban situation
was solved it was wrong to begin discussions on anything else and
therefore it was decided to let matters rest until a solution of the
Cuban situation had been achieved.

Dr. Carstens added “and until the
presence of Western troops in West Berlin had been clarified.”

The President agreed. He added that it was clear that we would have to
consult the French and the UK before we did any talking with the
Soviets. In the meantime, the whole matter had to be kept out of the
press because otherwise it would be made to appear as a new Western
initiative, and then De Gaulle
would come out, to begin with, with the statement that this was wrong.
And then we would be in another deadlock.

The Chancellor indicated that under the circumstances it might be well to
break up the meeting since, the longer it lasted, the more suspicious
the press would become of what was going on inside.

The President then summed up that it was the consensus of the meeting
that it should not be made to appear as though the Chancellor's visit
had resulted in a decision to take the initiative anew with regard to
Berlin. We might state that we exchanged views on the Berlin situation
and that the exchange was satisfactory. He then outlined once more the
steps to be taken, depending on the Cuban outcome, to await a Soviet
proposal, etc.

The Chancellor suggested that one sentence be added to the communiqué to
the effect that the question of Berlin and Germany had been touched upon
in the general discussion.6

Dr. Schroeder then asked whether it
might not be advisable for the Germans to draw up another memorandum
outlining Western Germany's views with reference to a separate peace
treaty and general German-Soviet relations.

The Chancellor jumped in to say that as long as the Cuba situation was
not settled no such steps should be taken.

The President also indicated that he could not see the advantage of any
such action and that it would be best to wait for Soviet reaction before
any steps are undertaken on the side of the West.

The Secretary of State pointed out that it was important to note that all
during the Cuban crisis both Moscow and Ulbricht had been very quiet about Berlin. They had not
stirred up any excitement about it in their public speeches. Perhaps
they had been caught off timing in general, or perhaps off their timing
on Berlin; and therefore, perhaps, they wanted to wait and see what
would happen.

Dr. Schroeder said that West
Germany had received only one indication from a representative from the
Soviet Zone to the effect that the matter of the draft treaty was not
acute at this time.

The Chancellor reiterated that it was clear no move should be undertaken
vis-a-vis the Soviet Union until the Cuban situation became clear,
because any such step on the part of the partners of the US might be
interpreted as criticism of US measures, and the West could not afford
to have this impression created. The Secretary of State stated that it
was well to continue the talk about the 8-point program but he warned
the German representatives to be careful about what they said about any
possibility of formal recognition of two Germanys. That was, after all,
a major trump to be played at the very end.

The President, in closing, stated that when the Soviets had tried to
insert new topics in the discussions on the Cuba question between
Kuznetsov and McCloy,7 they had
been told repeatedly that we refused to discuss anything in these talks
except Cuba. Therefore it was wise, as agreed, to refrain from raising
any other issues with the Soviets until after the settlement of the
Cuban crisis. This was a protection for the US.

The Chancellor indicated that he considered this standpoint correct.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
033.62A11/11–2062. Secret. Drafted by Lejins and Tyler and approved in S on November 20 and in the White House on November 29.
The meeting was held at the White House.

2 See footnote 1, Document 153.

3 On November 12 Carstens, who had preceded Adenauer to the United States, gave
Tyler a 2-page paper on
Berlin, dated November 11. A copy of the paper, which is described
here, together with a paper discussing it, drafted by Hillenbrand on November 12, was
transmitted to the President by Rusk on November 13. (Department of State, Central
Files, 762.00/11–1362)

4 On November 13 Lord Hood had sent Rusk a report of Roberts' farewell conversation with
Khrushchev. In this
discussion Khrushchev had
suggested that the Western forces might remain “temporarily” in West
Berlin under the U.N. flag. (Department of State, Presidential
Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204) In a conversation with Hillenbrand at 5 p.m. on November
14 Hood discussed Khrushchev's idea, stating that the
British were willing to consider injecting a U.N. presence into
Berlin. (Ibid., Central Files, 762.00/11–1462)

5 Transmitted in telegrams 1264 and 1265 from
Moscow, November 13. (Both ibid., 611.61/11–1362)

6 For text of the
joint communiqué issued on November 15, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp.
626–627.

7 Documentation on these discussions at the United
Nations is scheduled for publication in volume XI.

155. Letter From President Kennedy to Governing Mayor Brandt155. Letter From President Kennedy to Governing Mayor Brandt1

Washington, November 14,
1962.

MY DEAR MR. MAYOR: Thank you for your kind letter of October 29.2

I think that on the plebiscite question you should continue to try to
develop unified German proposals, as we agreed in our conversation here
last month.3 Until we have a clearer picture of how Soviet
policy on Berlin is going to develop in the next few weeks I do not
believe that we can arrive at a definitive position on the timing of
such a plebiscite. With regard to access questions I agree that we
should give high priority to resolving differences in viewpoint as
quickly as possible. It is imperative that the contingency planning in
this field be agreed all around.

It is also too early to tell what effect recent events may have on a new
round of negotiations with the Soviets. The first thing is to get some
further progress in the fulfillment of our Cuban understanding, but
after that, I agree, there may be some chance of more realistic talks,
and we on our side must be ready for them.

With every good wish,

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy4

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The source text
bears no drafting information.

2 In this letter Brandt congratulated the President on his handling
of the Cuban crisis and urged, if the Cuban situation allowed, the
implementation of decisions concerning access to Berlin and the
holding of a plebiscite. (Ibid.)

3 See Document
128.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

156. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer156. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer1

Washington, November 15,
1962.

As I said yesterday, I am gravely disturbed by reports about the level of
German defense expenditures, and I want to state my concern frankly. It appears that the German
defense budgets for 1962 and 1963, as they now stand, will not finance
the scheduled build-up of German forces to NATO-agreed force goals, and will not meet the scheduled
payments for military goods and services received from the United States
under the Strauss-Gilpatric agreement.2

A high state of readiness of NATO
forces—and most particularly those of Germany and the United States—is
essential if we are to be able to defend Berlin. This requires all of us
to maintain the necessary level of defense expenditures. We cannot talk
with firmness unless we act with firmness.

We, for our part, despite a serious balance of payments problem, are
maintaining major military forces in Europe which, in Germany alone,
entail an annual United States balance-of-payments expenditure of about
$700 million. We feel we have the right to expect Germany, in turn, to
do its full share.

The arrangements under which Germany is procuring military goods and
services from the United States have mutual advantages; they enable the
Federal Republic to procure these items at the lowest costs, and they
help to offset the balance-of-payments costs of United States defense
expenditures in Germany. If the Federal Republic did not meet its part
of the military procurement arrangement this year, important payments
which the United States expects during the rest of this year would be
postponed. This would not only add to our balance-of-payments deficit;
it would have destructive psychological effects.

I trust the German Government will meet both its NATO commitments and its procurement arrangements with us.
We understand this will require an immediate supplemental appropriation
of two billion D-Marks to the 1962 German defense budget, and a
comparable supplemental figure to the 1963 budget. We believe total
German resources are ample to meet these needs, if the necessary
measures are taken. We are sure the German people will respond
generously if the real nature of the need is made clear to them by an
act of political leadership.3

JFK

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Secret. The
source text bears no drafting information.

2 Not further identified.

3 On December 12
Chancellor Adenauer wrote to
the President that in response to this memorandum he had assigned an
additional division to NATO and
resolved to increase the West German defense budget by 1.1 billion
DM. (Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204)

157. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union157. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1

Washington, November 28, 1962, 19:34 p.m.

1172. Re Moscow's 1339.2 Following are your instructions for luncheon meeting
with Semenov:

1. We have assumed that in post-Cuba phase Soviets might (a) show by
their attitude in other areas of difference with West that they have
embarked upon a fairly radical course of policy change within which
eventual discussions on Berlin would fall into natural place, or (b)
more likely, in absence of such broad policy change, reopen talks on
Berlin within the framework of previous exchanges but possibly with some
changes in past positions. President said to Adenauer during recent visit that if Khrushchev meets our requirements in
Cuba, we might inquire as to Soviet proposals on Berlin without,
however, making any of our own for time being.

2. Although certain aspects of Cuban situation remain unresolved, we want
to take advantage of opportunity provided by Semenov's opening to initiate probe present direction of
Soviet thinking on Berlin. (While you should make clear at outset that
you are undertaking talks with him on personal basis without any
governmental commitment although both you and he will presumably be
reporting to your principals, we realistically assume that you will be
regarded as speaking on basis of at least general instructions.)

3. A solid settlement in Berlin on terms that keep the city free and
viable is a target of high priority for us, and we do not wish to miss
any opportunity that may now exist for a Berlin settlement. You should
maintain the position that since the Soviet Government started the
Berlin crisis, the initative for new proposals should rest with Moscow,
but you should leave no doubt that we are much interested in a workable
settlement. You should point out that we see no good in facing difficult
negotiations with Germans and French except in terms of a real prospect
of settlement.

4. As we see it, there are two broad possibilities for such a settlement.
One is a de facto continuation of the status quo, in which any peace treaty would leave the
real situation unchanged, and each side would interpret the position in
its own way. This is probably easier to negotiate but less satisfactory
for the long pull than a broader settlement. The terms of a wider
agreement must include for us plainly acknowledged right of Western
troop presence and improved access rights like those proposed under our
international access authority. A number of adjustments of interest to
the Soviets could be made in return for improved access and wholly
accepted presence. Without communicating all of the above to Semenov, you should make it plain to
him that any Berlin settlement which shifts from the status quo must
include advantages for us as well as for them, and that the advantages
of greatest interest to us are improved access and a wholly acknowledged
right of Western presence. It would be appropriate to indicate that we
would be interested in knowing how Soviets would construct a wider
agreement including these two features.

5. Since Semenov will probably not
be able to respond immediately to this hint, you should also endeavor to
draw him out as to the significance of his remark that the Cuban crisis
was not without its implications for German problem. As you know,
lessons which Soviets have presumably drawn from Cuban experience have
been subject of considerable speculation but of little hard information.
One line which had been put out through both satellite and direct
sources is that lesson of Cuba is that, if both sides are prepared to
make concessions as in Cuban case, then similar willingness of both
sides to make concessions on Berlin should likewise lead to resolution
of that problem. Should Senenov take this position, you might point out
that, in discussions of past 16 months, we have already indicated a
number of areas in which West has indicated willingness to make
accommodations. However, compromise cannot extend to what we have
defined as our vital interest in Berlin situation, although even here we
are willing to look at situation in endeavor to examine modalities
provided any changes are consistent with safeguarding of those vital
interests.

6. A further point which it might be useful to probe would be role now
assigned to peace treaty by Soviets. We have noted recent deemphasis of
peace treaty in both Soviet and GDR
statements. Semenov will
undoubtedly continue to pay lip service to peace treaty, but we would be
interested in your impressions from talking with him that this is
definitely on back burner.

7. We are much interested in Khrushchev's recent conversation with Ambassador
Roberts3 and his suggestion that troops might
remain temporarily under a certain unspecified UN role. In the degree that this could be a face-saver for Soviets while
Allied troop presence and guarantee remain, this proposal is of real
interest to us. A major purpose of your talks with Semenov should therefore be to
ascertain whether this suggestion represents a real shift in the Soviet
position or is merely a device for limiting both the duration and the
effectiveness of Western presence. You should make it clear that we
cannot express any judgment on what they have in mind until they have
spelled it out. You might, for example, seek to determine what the
Soviets have in mind among such possibilities (without offering them a
catalog for shopping) as following: (a) simple registration of any
agreement on Berlin with UN, (b)
agreement to report to UN on such matters
as the size, composition, and activities of forces in Berlin, (c) some
form of UN representation and authority
in West Berlin, (d) some new status involving West Berlin request for
Allied troops under some UN umbrella, (e)
a move of elements of UN itself to West
Berlin, (f) a UN role in other respects
than troop presence—as for example access or perforation of wall. You
should probe as to the role and authority of West Berlin Senat, Western
garrisons, and Federal Republic under any such arrangements. In all
this, you should make it clear that we could accept no arrangement which
did not allow visible continuation of our own guarantee of the freedom
of West Berlin, and we repeat that you should avoid any suggestion of a
US position on such possibilities.

8. You are familiar with standard arguments made repeatedly by Secretary
in his numerous conversations with Soviets over past 16 months. To
extent you deem desirable, you should repeat these arguments as
appropriate. We would want to avoid giving impression that our position
has weakened in any way on what we have defined as our vital interests
in Berlin situation. Our position is that of reasonable man whose
strength and restraint have both been demonstrated.

9. We believe foregoing should suffice for exchange with Semenov. With your knowledge of
US-Soviet bilateral exchanges, you will recognize anything really new or
significant which he might say and can exercise judgment as to whether
to pursue it by discreet questioning.

FYI. We would hope that you could have
lunch with Semenov without this
getting to press corps. While we accept inevitability of your having to
brief French, British, and German colleagues, at least in general, on
your discussion, we would also hope that information could be limited to
them. In talking with them, you should be careful to avoid giving
impression that you are in any way negotiating rather than engaging
purely in probing operation on informal basis at Soviet initiative.
President is dubious about possibility of carrying out really useful
exchanges with Soviets if we follow usual procedure of full briefings
for three and then for NATO. In past,
this has led either to leaks and public discussion of Allied differences before reactions
of Soviets have been ascertained, or to debate within Alliance on
theoretical points which have not played role in talks with Soviets.
While President is, therefore, prepared to have you initiate probe with
Semenov, at appropriate point
he may wish to use other channels.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 761.13/11–2362. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.
Drafted by Hillenbrand and
revised in the White House, cleared in draft by Rusk and in substance by the
President and Bundy, and
approved by Davis.

2 Telegram 1339,
November 23, reported that during Kohler's first courtesy call on Deputy Foreign
Minister Semenov, Semenov had suggested he and the
Ambassador meet informally to discuss Germany. The telegram noted
that Kohler would try to
arrange a meeting for November 29 or 30 and asked for instructions.
(Ibid.)

3 See footnote 3,
Document 154.

158. Memorandum of Conversation158. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 30,
1962, 1–3:40 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

The United States:

The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Richard H. Davis,
EUR

Mr. Kamman, Interpreter

The Soviet Union:

First Dep. Premier Anastas
Mikoyan

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Kornienko, Counselor,
Sov. Emb.

Mr. Chistov

Mr. Vinogradov, Interpreter

Turning from the discussion on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, Mr.
Mikoyan said he had another
question to raise. The Cuban question, he observed, could have brought
us to nuclear war, but now the crucial period was over and we should be
able to settle this question peacefully. However, there was a second
question which could lead us to war, and this is Germany. We have
consulted with, and submitted many proposals to our World War II Allies.
Two or three years have passed
during which there have been extensive negotiations with Ambassador
Thompson in Moscow and
between the Secretary and Mr. Gromyko. This has brought about considerable progress.
When Mr. Dulles complained about the Soviet ultimatum of six months in
the first Soviet proposal on Germany and said it could not possibly be
worked out in this time, the Soviet Union had not insisted. Moreover, it
was not an ultimatum. A time limit is not as important for us as the
willingness of our World War II Allies to finalize this question.
Looking back, we do not regret postponing the issue because in our
discussions certain progress has been made.

The Soviet Union could not, Mr. Mikoyan continued, go beyond the proposals already made
by Chairman Khrushchev. The
Soviet Union was concerned by the presence of Western troops in Berlin.
He would like to ask a question: since the Western powers were not
making new proposals, or apparently making any constructive efforts, did
the United States think that this situation could be frozen in
perpetuity? Did the United States expect the occupation forces to remain
in West Berlin for all time? All these questions were legitimate but the
United States did not answer them. If the Soviet Union became convinced
that their World War II Allies don't want an agreement, then the Soviet
Union would proceed alone. It did not wish to do so but we could not
live together with an occupation regime in West Berlin and no peace
treaty. However, Mr. Mikoyan
concluded, he would not repeat the thoughts in Chairman Khrushchev's messages to the President
on this subject.

The Secretary stated that we had had many discussions in the past but he
was glad to tell Mr. Mikoyan of
our position. In the course of these past discussions a number of points
had arisen on which considerable progress had been made. We had tried to
meet the USSR in a spirit of reciprocity. Now we have come to a point
where in trying to meet the Soviet Union on one point, it is then set
aside and the USSR moves on to another point. In all frankness, more
genuine reciprocity from the Soviet side is needed. For example, we were
told East Berlin cannot be discussed, i.e., Allied interests in East
Berlin are not for discussion. We were told we must discuss West Berlin.
This position reflects an absence of the spirit of reciprocity. We have
said for years that the presence of Western troops and a guaranteed
freedom for Berlin is a vital interest of the United States. We haven't
said that this situation will be perpetuated for eternity. We would like
to see a peace treaty for all Germany and we have made many proposals,
but we are faced with the fact of disagreement between us.

Mr. Mikoyan asked on what basis
did the United States intend to keep its troops in West Berlin and for
how long.

The Secretary responded that time limits were difficult to talk about
except in terms of a general settlement of the German question. At this
point there is a sharp
difference between the Soviet Union and the United States. This can be
managed so as not to produce other crises while we proceed to other
questions which might help our relations. In this way time can be of
help, and in the long run will improve the possibilities of agreement.
Also the time factor can be affected by relations between the East and
West Germans, for instance, in the matter of trade, which would indicate
they were prepared to live in peace. Again time would be a factor when
the West Berliners no longer have the threat of a man with opinions and
objectives like Ulbricht hanging
over them.

The Secretary continued that our approach had been broadly along three
lines: First, to settle the German question as a whole, which would mean
the end of the occupation; secondly, recognizing existing facts, of
which there are three important elements—the existence of East Germany,
West Germany and West Berlin; thirdly, given the fact of disagreement,
we must consider how we might manage this problem in order to promote
the possibilities of agreement in the long run, but handle the fact of
disagreement peacefully. This was one of the reasons why we had proposed
Deputy Foreign Ministers. Unfortunately, we had not been able to reach
agreement on any of these three variants. Both of our countries possess
great power and Berlin was important to both. Therefore we must prepare
to discuss the question with great care. We feel that if the Soviet
approach is the same, we can find a way to deal with this issue.

Mr. Mikoyan said the Secretary's
last remark was constructive and he entirely shared it. With many of the
Secretary's past remarks he could not agree. West Berlin was situated in
the territory of the GDR. East Berlin is
the capital city of a sovereign state. Accordingly, by all the rules,
West Berlin should be considered a part of the GDR, and it could have claimed West Berlin. But the USSR
and the GDR, understanding the position
of the Western Powers, had agreed that West Berlin remain a special unit
without becoming part of the GDR. There
was no intention to interfere with West Berlin unless it became a member
of military pacts. The Soviet Union had agreed to talk with the United
States on how to finish the occupation status. It would be much better
if a peace treaty were signed by all the Allies against Germany in World
War II, but if this were not possible, because of the stubbornness of
Adenauer or other Western
Allies, the Soviet Union could sign a separate treaty. But the Soviet
Union would prefer to find an agreed solution. Time does settle
questions, but time can also create contradictions and explosions can
occur. The Berlin and German questions have been delayed for a long time
but such delay makes the situation more dangerous. The United States
should give more thought to its position but it should not delay too
long.

The Secretary said we were prepared to go into this question at any time.
If there was introduced an element of genuine reciprocity, he thought a solution could be
found. However, he felt that we had had agreements in the past on
questions with the USSR but these agreements haven't lasted very long.
In this connection the Secretary referred to the 1945 agreements when
Allied troops had withdrawn from a considerable portion of East Germany,
and to the 1949 agreements which through certain events we felt had been
violated to some degree. The United States wants to remove Berlin and
Germany as a constant source of difficulties, but we must recognize the
difficulty in finding a solution.

The Secretary said he wanted to comment on Mr. Mikoyan's remark about delay. The
United States is not attempting to delay discussions. The delays which
have occurred are bilateral responsibility. One can always hurry into a
crisis, but it is much better if we can find a way to resolve this
question without a crisis. The Secretary said he was confident that he
could speak for President Kennedy in that he wants
to find a satisfactory solution to this issue. Both the Soviet Union and
the United States have many other things to do for their peoples.

Mr. Mikoyan responded that in
order to find an end to this issue, questions must be discussed. The
President should not expect from the Soviet Union additional proposals.
The Soviet Union expects constructive proposals from the United
States.

The Secretary observed the United States had made quite a few proposals
but received the reply that these could not be discussed.

Mr. Mikoyan said it was really the
other way around and urged that the United States think the situation
over. The Soviet Union believes that there must be movement ahead. Mr.
Mikoyan disclaimed any
intention of conducting negotiations, but he wanted the Secretary to
understand the seriousness of this issue for the USSR.

The Secretary expressed the hope that Moscow would give a great deal of
thought to this issue; indeed all of the Powers concerned must give hard
thought to it. Referring to Mr. Mikoyan's remark about Adenauer, the Secretary emphasized that the United
States was not speaking on behalf of our Allies or their interest, but
rather of the vital interests of the United States. It would be a great
mistake to think the United States was paralyzed or tongue-tied by the
attitude of one or more of its Allies. The United States still hoped
that progress could be made on this issue.

Mr. Mikoyan jokingly remarked “so
there is an independent policy of the United States”. He concluded by
remarking that Soviet interests and ours could be reconciled, which was
a good omen.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files,
762.00/11–3062. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Davis and approved in S on December 5. The source text is
labeled “Memo No. 5.” Mikoyan
had stopped in Washington after visiting Havana. A summary of this
conversation and one with the President on November 29, at which
Berlin was not discussed, was transmitted to Paris in Topol 757,
December 4. (Ibid., 611.61/12–462) Rusk and Mikoyan also discussed a non-aggression pact between
NATO and the Warsaw Pact. A
memorandum of this conversation is ibid., 611.61/11–3062.

159. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State159. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, December
3, 1962, 23 p.m.

1415. Embtel 1410.2 Following is detailed report
conversation with Semenov
December 3 at which Sukhodrev
served as interpreter.

At outset substantive portion conversation, I expressed interest in fact
that both Mikoyan, in
conversation with President,3 and Semenov had indicated Cuban experience
was not without implications for German problem. Semenov replied exchange of letters
between President and Khrushchev4 had mentioned problems other than Cuba, specifically
nuclear testing in first instance and disarmament. According his
recollection issue of G/B touched upon.
Semenov said peaceful
resolution of Cuban problem did not automatically mean other problems
could similarly be solved. I noted that question of G/B not really dwelt on in exchange of
letters, but only one element entering into discussions of past year
seemed to be singled out, namely NATO-Warsaw Pact relationship. Semenov replied this did not lessen urgency of
resolution problem West Berlin since forces involved which could get out
of control. Pet project of Strauss has always been bring US and USSR into direct
confrontation in West Berlin. Strauss has gone but his theme remains with Weinstein
serving as principal instrument of pursuit this policy. I said I had
many discussions with Strauss and
never heard anything along lines mentioned by Semenov.

I pointed out US interest is workable solution of Berlin problem. Thus
far, however, USSR proposed four formulae which emphasized word
“temporary” and which constituted variation on theme to oust US from
West Berlin. Semenov said that
this view incorrect and that Soviets not attempting get someone out of
Berlin and assured me this is view of Soviet Government. If he reported
to Soviet leaders that aim was to oust US, they would say it isn't so.
It is not question of pushing US out but normalizing situation in West
Berlin. I itemized four formulae presented by Soviets and said these
contained no element of compromise. They all involved the withdrawal of
Western forces either now or in future. Such an event would completely remove protection now
accorded West Berlin and this was certainly one of most dangerous
developments that could occur in Central Europe.

Recalling previous conversations, Semenov said political-social system in East Berlin same
as in GDR. On other hand, West Berlin
has social system differing completely with that within GDR. Thus there are now three separate
entities in Germany, consisting of West Germany, GDR and West Berlin. An attempt must be made to assure
peaceful coexistence these three entities. One can only speak of
protection when an attack against something is contemplated, which is
not the case. USSR believes West Berlin should be free and independent
as long as sovereign rights GDR
protected. Neither USSR nor GDR has
slightest need for West Berlin and both are prepared provide guarantees
to West Berlin. US believes guarantees should be in form of troop
contingents. Although USSR does not think so, it is willing to meet US
half way. US side itself has said troops should not remain in West
Berlin ad infinitum; therefore US also recognizes principle of
temporariness of troops. In essence question is one of peaceful
coexistence in which both sides will observe international obligations.
USSR wishes to see greater degree of trust and to insure that events do
not lead to explosion. Latest events attest to fact that this is
reasonable position.

I agreed trust desirable if explosion to be avoided. Speaking frankly,
however, Cuban situation has improved matters in this regard. Our aim
must be seek guarantees which are obvious and self-enforcing. In broader
context, problem is less how several parts divided Germany will live
together than how US and USSR will live side by side. USSR can have
peaceful existence in this area and has it at moment because both sides
are observing mutual obligations. Attempt by USSR however to oust
Western presence from West Berlin contrary to mutual obligations and
peaceful coexistence. If two sides can't coexist peacefully in Berlin,
question arises what this term means.

Semenov said general question of
peaceful coexistence between USSR and US involves broad issues which
would involve wide exchange of views. His personal attitude toward me
made such an exchange possible and he would do utmost to have frank
discussions, proceeding from normal positions of both governments.

Semenov said developments in
G/B are of concern to USSR since they
have evolved in abnormal manner. In instances where troops are in direct
confrontation with each other, situation could become dangerous should,
for example, officer on either side undertake irrational act or should
third parties continue their provocations. USSR intends to ensure
freedom of West Berlin and to permit it to have ties with all countries.
Development should proceed in such way as to preclude collision because
this could have dangerous implications, especially since West Berlin located in heart of
Europe. Soviet Union preoccupied by militaristic and revanchist
tendencies in both West Germany and West Berlin. USSR worried and
preoccupied not because it is afraid but because these forces are
seeking to set US and USSR against each other. In past ten years these
tendencies have strengthened and problem must be viewed not only with
respect to past but with respect future probabilities. USSR doesn't want
situation to develop into thermonuclear war. Therefore remnants World
War II must be removed and situation in West Berlin normalized on basis
of peace treaty. Semenov agreed
that both sides have been abiding by international obligations but these
obligations entered into as result Second World War and included German
settlement. Situation however now changed and new obligations must be
undertaken. USSR proposing that both sides undertake new obligations on
basis of existing situation. The occupation in West Berlin cannot last
forever. Soviet Union ready to assume new obligations and US side has
indicated new settlement possible and expedient. In any case, he and I
might make useful contribution by weighing what has been said by two
sides and bringing positions into accord.

On question of peace treaty, I agreed both sides obligated seek peace
settlement with Germany. From our point of view, peace treaty with two
parts of Germany or separate peace treaty would not represent settlement
but legalization of partition of Germany to which US cannot be party. US
profoundly believes partition Germany not in Soviet interests since
division only sows seeds of revanchism. In my view, peace treaty
appeared more a slogan than practical approach to peaceful resolution of
problem. I then stated presence Western forces not negotiable. We are in
West Berlin by same force circumstances USSR in East Berlin and East
Germany. US deeply committed to protection of two and one fourth million
West Berliners. We consider troop presence essential guarantee of our
commitment. It likely that direct confrontation our troops represents
better situation than if Germans confronted one another since latter
might not be as responsible as US and USSR. US desires to reach
understanding as to how two sides can live together in Central Europe.
We could either live as we are or, since Soviets wish to change
situation, reach broader modus vivendi which would take into account
interests of both sides and lead to more peaceful atmosphere. If Soviets
sincere regarding mutual concessions and attempt to solve problem on
broader basis, this would interest us. In past sixteen months, Soviet
side has not reciprocated US attempts to meet interests which USSR
consider vital.

After Semenov said he did not
understand broader measures to which I had referred, I listed items
contained in Principles Paper given Soviets at Geneva, noting that these
were advanced on assumption Soviets would recognize our vital interests
in West Berlin. Semenov noted he
had taken part in recent
exchanges of view and added exchanges had not been in vain. A
rapprochement had been registered on some questions by two sides and
statements of President and Secretary indicated attempt being made to
reach mutually acceptable solutions. He commented that my statements
seemed step backward, although he appreciated it was sometimes necessary
to go back in order to make a big jump ahead.

I said key point made by President and Secretary was that US in West
Berlin and that we would not get out. Soviets would have to use force to
evict us. If Soviets accept fact of our presence in West Berlin as we
accept fact of theirs in East Germany and East Berlin, then would be
possible for two sides live together in Central Europe.

When I asked Semenov whether my
recollections correct, he answered that I knew as well as he.

Semenov then read statement
referred to in Embtel 1410 and
promised send us copy unofficially. Embassy translation will be
transmitted when received.5

I said I appreciated clarification of Khrushchev remarks to Ambassador Roberts since they evidently different
than Roberts understood them.
Speaking personally, however, I said I didn't see how this represented
concession since it was still aimed at removing our troops from West
Berlin. Semenov replied goal is
quite different and what is sought is peaceful settlement and
normalization of situation in West Berlin. Statement requires careful
examination and study in all its aspects and represents concession to
US. I then repeated view that US cannot accept peace treaties with two
Germanies since this would legalize partition and added that signature
of peace treaty by USSR and others with GDR did not represent peaceful settlement German problem.
On contrary, it could lead to dangerous provocation of peace. Semenov then said that US in 1947
considered it possible sign peace treaty with separate parts of Germany
and that Dulles and Murphy were exponents of this view. Stalin, however,
maintained different viewpoint which Soviets now consider to have been
mistake. Life has borne out that US was correct. US however has
retreated as USSR approached once-held US position. Secondly, Semenov said USSR wished register
existing situation. While US not prepared sign peace treaty under
existing circumstances, US has not opposed signature of treaty by USSR
and GDR. USSR believed it good thing to
have such questions as frontiers, access and respect for sovereignty
GDR agreed upon prior to signature
of separate treaty. Soviet Union considered it in its interest to agree on certain arrangements
prior to signature separate treaty with GDR.

I said signing of such treaty would be meaningless in itself. However, we
consider it dangerous if USSR would thereby try to change US position or
Western position in West Berlin and with respect to access. If we could
have accord which would protect our vital interests that would be
acceptable to us.

What concerns us is implied threat that signature of separate peace
treaty would bring with it certain consequences which would affect our
vital interests. US not seeking to change situation to disadvantage
USSR. Dramatic illustration of this attitude demonstrated by our conduct
in events of August 13 last year, which we hope will not be
misinterpreted. This experience indicated US would not move against USSR
where it has physical control. If USSR seeking change, US willing to
listen to and study proposals which take our vital interests into
account. We are looking for such proposals but haven't found them. All
those advanced attempt to bring a change to our disadvantage.

Semenov said he did not want to
repeat Soviet positions and merely wanted to point out that all that has
been said by Soviet leaders retains its force. He hoped contacts would
be continued in order to bring sides closer together although he was
mindful of humility of his position and does not count on possibilities
being too great. I noted that I would be going to Paris next week where
I would see Secretary. I would send clarification of what Khrushchev has told Roberts to the Dept for study and would
discuss with Secretary in Paris.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.0221/12–362. Secret; Limited Distribution.

2 In telegram 1410, December 3, Kohler summarized his conversation
with Semenov, stating that it
provided no real clarification, no discernible hint of change in the
Soviet position on Berlin, and no forward progress. Kohler concluded, however, that
Semenov seemed inclined
to continue the dialog. (Ibid.)

3 See the source
note, Document 158.

4 Texts of the letters exchanged between the
President and Khrushchev
during the Cuban crisis are printed in volume VI and volume
XI.

5 The statement
provided for replacing the Western forces in Berlin by U.N. police
formations, which might include U.S., British, and French
contingents, but which would all be withdrawn in 4 years. (Telegram
1423 from Moscow, December 4; Department of State, Central Files,
762.0221/12–462)

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany160. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, December 6, 1962, 15:21 p.m.

1340. Paris also pass USRO. Ref: Bonn's
1440.2 Subject: Berlin: Advance
Notification for Autobahn Convoys.

1. I have reviewed recommendations submitted by you, Berlin, and General
Norstad concerning our
reaction to statement by Sergin on November 14 that US would thereafter
have to submit advance notification for convoys of more than five
vehicles. In doing this, I have taken into account views expressed by
French and British.

2. US objectives regarding convoy procedures remain those set forth in
Deptel 76 to Bonn, dated July
10:3 (a) to reach Allied agreement on convoy
procedures related to inspection, dismounting, and advance notification
and (b) to gain Soviet acceptance of or acquiescence in these Allied
procedures.

3. From an analysis of messages from Berlin, Bonn, and Paris and our
talks with British and French here, it would appear that we are at
present confronted with following alternatives:

a. French would prefer not to send any note to Soviets and favor
finessing issue by not sending six or seven vehicle convoys.

b. British favor note to Soviets, with oral comment that Allies hereafter
will give notification on eight or more vehicles. British here indicate
they might be prepared to see US, after suitable wait, send six or seven
vehicle convoy, to test Soviet intentions. We agree with Bonn and Berlin
that British probably hope Soviets will engage US in dialogue over
convoy procedures.

c. You and General Norstad have
recommended use of note contained Paris 2252.4 Although you do not say so specifically, I understand
you would propose to follow this at suitable point with convoy of more
than five vehicles.

d. Soviets have proposed that hereafter convoys of more than five
vehicles (not counting escort vehicle) give advance notification. (We
recall in this regard that this
is number of vehicles proposed by US and French Berlin Missions to
British in June. See BQD CC–18.)5

4. If written note were sent to Soviets, I believe it would be important
to follow it up with convoy of six or seven vehicles, in order to back
up our words with action. If such a convoy were sent, I agree that we
should be prepared to invoke Rules of Conduct for Allied autobahn
convoys (SHLO 600/128).6 If we
start down this road, I agree with General Norstad that we should have as much support as possible
from British and French.

5. Advantage of this course of action is that it would demonstrate to
Soviets that we are unwilling accept unilateral Soviet demands regarding
convoy procedures.

6. Disadvantage would be that, if Rules of Conduct implemented, we would
have precipitated crisis over issue on which it might be hard to
maintain Allied unity.

7. On balance we prefer not to precipitate issue by sending more than
five vehicle convoy without advance notification at this time but
neither do we wish to foreclose resort to this alternative at a later
point in time. We recognize, of course, that prolonged delay in sending
six or seven vehicle convoy without notification will tend to rigidify
our position, but we are prepared to accept this risk. Total picture of
Soviet position post-Cuba is still in process of emerging and we should
like to retain as much flexibility as possible to stiffen our position
on access if need be without at this time forcing issue of notification
to a head.

8. You should, therefore, inform British and French that, although we
shall reserve the right to do so at a later date, we do not plan at this
time to send any further six or seven vehicle convoys. In your
discretion, you should also (after informing the British and French)
take advantage of next five vehicle convoy to make statement orally at
Babelsberg checkpoint along lines message proposed by General Norstad. This should preferably be
made by American officer to Soviet officer.

9. We are not transmitting this information to British or French in
Ambassadorial Group, and would prefer to keep consultation on this
subject in Bonn. Believe it advisable also that you include Germans or
at least keep them informed.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.54/11–2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted
and initialed by Ausland;
cleared by Hillenbrand,
Bundy (in substance),
Nitze, Thompson, Davis, and Weiss (all in draft); and approved
and initialed by Rusk.
Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

2 In telegram 1440, November 29,
Dowling supported the
views expressed at a meeting with General Norstad on November 27 for
unrestricted access to Berlin, but noted that Allied procedures
differed on notifying the Soviets about convoys to Berlin. He
stressed the need to resolve the question of notification without
further extensive delay. (Ibid.)

3 Not printed. (Ibid.,
762.54/7–662)

4 Dated November 28. (Ibid., 762.54/11–2862) The
4-paragraph note reiterated Allied rights to unrestricted access to
Berlin.

5 A copy of this paper is in the Kennedy
Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany,
Berlin.

6 A copy of this paper, dated August 28, was attached
to an August 30 memorandum from Norstad to six commands in Europe. (Washington
National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, 092 Germany)

161. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (LeMay) to Secretary of Defense McNamara161. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(LeMay) to Secretary of Defense
McNamara1

Washington, December 10,
1962.

JCSM-981–62

SUBJECT

Berlin Planning (U)

1. On several occasions in the past few months the Joint Chiefs of Staff
have expressed their concern to you that little, if any, progress is
being made toward a solution of the Berlin problem. At best, our most
comprehensive plans aim at a limited objective of return to the status
quo ante following some infringement by the Soviets on our vital
interests related to Berlin. Recent exhaustive examination of this
problem, as transmitted to you in JCSM-556–62, dated 28 July 1962, subject: “Reappraisal of the
Berlin Situation (U),”2 revealed that
in the present situation we have extremely limited leverage, short of
serious military action, to balance the unfavorable tactical situation
resulting from the physical location of Berlin so far within the borders
of the Soviet Bloc. Consequently, our necessarily limited responses in
the Berlin situation do not consistently convey an adequate impression
of our determination to defend our vital interests. This may have
influenced Soviet thinking with respect to Cuba. Knowing that you share
this concern, the Joint Chiefs of Staff forward in this memorandum the
results of a recent Joint Strategic Survey Council study on the Berlin
problem.3

2. The present United States political initiative seeks to take advantage
of the lull in Communist aggressive actions against Berlin. Discussions
at several diplomatic levels are probing to clarify Soviet intentions
and possibly changing policies. Current United States efforts appear to
include some degree of international participation in Berlin and its
access routes. The Joint Strategic Survey Council study introduces an
alternate to the “international” type of solution, and provides a basis
for eventually diminishing rather than maintaining our military presence
in Berlin. While most of the features in this proposal have previously
been considered, as far as we know they have not been presented in a
coordinated package in which both the early and later stages have been
considered.

3. In forwarding the proposal outlined herein, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
would emphasize that any agreement sought for the Berlin problem must be developed within the
framework of continuing struggle between the Free World and the
Communist Bloc. The German question is pivotal in this struggle; and
West Germany's economic, political, and military assets remain important
ingredients in the power equation. In this context, while the German and
Berlin questions represent immediate manifestations of East-West
divergencies, they should never be regarded as the basic source of these
divergencies. Any plan, including that outlined below, which ignores
this premise could be self defeating.

4. In considering the Berlin situation, the following paragraphs
(initially addressed to an analysis of the Cuban situation) provide a
rationale within which to address the Berlin problem:

“a. Both the United States and the Soviet Union each have many interests.
Only a portion of these can accurately be described as ‘vital
interests,’ i.e., interests which, if damaged, would cause serious and
long-term harm to the status of security of one or the other of the two
great powers.

“b. Both the United States and the Soviet Union have vital interests in
Berlin; neither can afford being pushed too far without serious damage
to its own military, political, and international positions. In Laos, to
illustrate a different situation, both the United States and the Soviet
Union have an interest, but neither has a vital interest. Neither would
welcome a loss, but either could, if necessary, afford a loss without
irreparable damage to its own security or to its own network of the
international power structures.

“c. In both these illustrations, Berlin and Laos, there is a sort of
equilibrium-of-interests. In the one case (Berlin), both have vital
interests at stake, and, therefore, each must consider carefully the
effect of its own moves on the other. In the other case (Laos), neither
has vital interests, and, therefore, neither is induced to put forth its
utmost effort with all forms of power in order to keep from losing.

“d. While both have a sort of equilibrium, the important difference
between the two types of interests is that there is much more freedom of
action in the situations which are not vital. The possible actions and
responses-to-actions in those cases in which the great power has a vital
interest are much narrower and at the same time much more predictable
because of the narrowed range of alternatives.”

It follows then that a solution in Berlin must necessarily involve a
certain degree of disengagement of vital interests. One might logically
reason that this process is the reverse of the process of involvement of
vital interests such as the recent buildup in Cuba.

5. In furtherance of this theme, it is quite apparent that the Soviets,
in proposing a treaty with East Germany, are in reality trying to
disengage their political vital interests in Berlin by absorbing them
into their vital interests in the East German Government. The price they
would like us to pay for this is our military withdrawal and sacrifice
of our military interests in Berlin. Since they are asking that a
military vital interest of the United States be sacrificed for the
disengagement of a political vital interest of the Soviets, the power equation would be
out of balance, and the proposition is unacceptable. The only basis on
which we can seriously consider negotiations would be that of a
political disengagement for a political vital interest or a military
disengagement for a military vital interest.

6. To illustrate this thesis, it would be appropriate to reverse the
Soviet proposal and offer the Soviets Allied political disengagement in
Berlin for a major Soviet military withdrawal (such as their military
withdrawal from East Germany). Naturally, this would be as outrageous a
proposal to the Soviets as their proposal is to us; for here we would be
trading a political vital interest for their military vital interest,
and, consequently, the equation would be out of balance. To keep the
exchanges equitable, we could offer to accept the Soviet's East German
treaty scheme expanded to include a comparable West German treaty scheme
with neither side forsaking its military vital interests. This, then,
would result in a political disengagement by both the major powers
without the sacrificing of any of their military vital interests.

7. On the face of it, the equation is now in balance. Political
disengagement on both sides and military involvement on both sides
should be an acceptable solution to each. Some additional safeguards to
make it palatable to each will be necessary. For instance, Khrushchev has referred to a NATO-Warsaw Pact nonaggression agreement;
there might be ways in which this could be worked out. But most
importantly, the problem of access to Berlin must be firmly nailed
down.

8. a. If Berlin were on the border, the access problem would be easy. It
is not, and this is the problem. Most suggestions up to this time have
tended toward some sort of UN or other
international supervision of access. An “international” solution would
bring more, rather than fewer, fingers in the pie. Any form of
international management would serve to perpetuate rather than eliminate
Berlin as a point of international friction (the examples of UN interposition in the Gaza Strip, in
Korea, in Laos, and in the Congo all point to this tendency). Therefore,
it is proposed that we move in the other direction, away from the
“international” type of solution. Since Berlin cannot be brought to the
border, we propose taking the border to Berlin by creating some sort of
an umbilical cord, a guaranteed access corridor, between West Germany
and West Berlin controlled only by West Germans, with no intermediate
accesses and no checkpoints. It is not implied that this guaranteed
access should be the only access; the present water, air, rail, and road
accesses could and should be continued with detailed arrangements worked
out by the West and East Germans on the basis of their mutual self
interests. But the insurance policy, the umbilical, would have to be in
existence in addition to these. This umbilical cord could perhaps be a
long-term lease, guaranteed by NATO and
the Warsaw Pact, of a strip of land on each side of an existing autobahn (with new by-passes around
towns and cities); or it might be a new autobahn, perhaps with a
parallel railroad or a monorail, perhaps even an elevated autobahn,
inside a leased strip all the way from the West German border into West
Berlin. Rough cost estimates are $550 million for an elevated autobahn
and less than that for a new autobahn on the surface. Neither of these
is an exorbitant price for prospect of settlement of this thorny
question, and the cost could be distributed at least between the United
States and West Germany and perhaps throughout NATO.

b. The right of way through East Germany could be closed off by fences,
mine fields, or whatever the East Germans may want; and non-access
bridges or tunnels would ensure free East German crossings. But,
whatever the detailed arrangements, this one insurance access must be
guaranteed and must be under the exclusive control of the West Germans.
By this means we have, in effect, moved West Berlin to the border. This
establishment of the two parts of Germany in juxtaposition to each other
with the basic political barrier of the opposing great powers removed
leads naturally to an evolutionary development of the next step. We can
assume that the arrangement will be peaceful, because it is guaranteed
by both sides. We can hope that, since the external political barriers
would have been removed, the physical barriers might break down.
Inevitably Germans will talk to Germans and, quite reasonably, interflow
between East and West Germany would develop and should be
encouraged.

9. Thus, East Berlin would become a part of East Germany; West Berlin
would become a part of West Germany; both great powers would have
withdrawn from direct political participation in Berlin; both great
powers would retain their military involvements through NATO and the Warsaw Pact in West and East
Germany, and through those two countries in the divided city; West
Berlin's viability would be preserved by the guaranteed and uncontrolled
access; the prospect of a reunited Germany would be extended further
into the future; and the criticality of Berlin as a direct US-Soviet
confrontation point would recede to become part of the more manageable
larger problem of Western Europe versus Eastern Europe.

10. When the matter of the political disengagement is in hand, we might
reasonably look forward to a military-for-military disengagement. This
action would again keep the equation in balance. A phased back-up, a
reduction on a geographic or numerical basis of non-German forces, might
be accomplished by substitution of West German military for tripartite
military and of East Germans for Soviets in Berlin. This would
accomplish one of our aims which is disengagement by both powers in
Berlin. It does not appear practical now or in the foreseeable future to
disengage West Germany from NATO nor
East Germany from the Warsaw
Pact. Any later and more extensive force reductions or redistributions
would have to be considered in the total context of the NATO requirements then existing.

11. By the stratagem of an exclusively German city, which is itself a
concession to the Soviets, we would give physically in Berlin but
maintain our presence and treaty obligations through the West Germans
who would, in fact, own the Allied sectors of Berlin and the access real
estate. Both super powers, the United States and the Soviets, would
eventually withdraw politically and militarily in Berlin and thus
substantially disengage their vital interests there. In time, one could
expect the natural tendency of a people with identical ethnics and
culture to drift toward cohesion and nationalization. Thus, we might
eventually reach our distant objective of unification and a legal
plebiscite.

12. In summation, the major elements of the plan are:

a. East Berlin would become a part of East Germany and West Berlin would
become a part of West Germany, with guaranteed arrangements for West
Germany-to-West Berlin travel controlled only by West Germany (this is,
for the United States, the critical element of the entire proposal).

b. Both the Allies and the Soviets would clean up the World War II
remnants by each side recognizing and completing the treaties with both
West Germany and East Germany.

c. Some nonaggression agreement or comparable and acceptable NATO-Warsaw Pact agreements could be
accepted if not substantively harmful. This should not be offered by us,
but should be available as a negotiating trade feature if asked for by
the Soviets.

13. Berlin thus becomes a German, not a direct US-Soviet problem. The
main task in the future would then be to permit the Germans to work out
their own future while at the same time ensuring that they do not force
a NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict to serve
their own private ends.

14. a. While it might not be feasible for the United States to offer this
proposal today, there are good indications that thought in West Berlin
and West Germany is moving in this direction. Opportunity to offer it
may come in the near future, and will almost surely come at the time
when political forces or the actuarial tables provide a successor to
Chancellor Adenauer.

b. It is recognized that use of such a proposal would depend upon its
acceptance by our Allies. The proposal in this study includes concepts
which may require further development. Since the Berlin problem is under
continuous and extensive study within the United States Government, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff suggest that the proposal be transmitted to the
Secretary of State for consideration.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Curtis E. LeMay

1 Source: Washington National
Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542, 091 Germany. Top
Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. On January
17, 1963, McNamara sent a
copy of this paper to Rusk.
(Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/1–763)

2 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center,
RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542, 091 Germany)

3 Attached but not
printed.

162. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy162. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy1

Moscow, December 11,
1962.

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT:

[Here follow 7 pages in which Khrushchev discusses Cuba.]

Let us, Mr. President, eliminate promptly the consequences of the Cuban
crisis and get down to solving other questions, and we have them in
number. As far as nuclear test ban is concerned this is a minor question
on the whole. I am going to address to you a confidential letter and
proposals on this question2 and I
hope that we will overcome difficulties existing in this question. The
problem of disarmament is a different matter; it is a major and
difficult question now.

But, of course, the main question is the German question and it is an
easy and at the same time difficult one. I say that it is an easy and at
the same time difficult question. But this is really so. It is easy
because our proposals for concluding a peace treaty do not demand any
concessions from either side, neither do they demand any losses from
either side. These proposals only fix the situation which has developed
as a result of World War II.

After the talks that our Minister of Foreign Affairs A. Gromyko had with your Secretary of
State D. Rusk, only one question
in effect remained unresolved—that of troops in West Berlin: troops of
what countries, for what term and under what flag will be stationed
there.

I would like you to understand me correctly on this question. Let us
solve it. We will not escape the necessity to solve this question
anyway. To tell the truth, this question is not worth an eggshell if a
realistic approach is employed in appraising the situation in Germany
where two sovereign German states have developed and if a course
followed is aimed at an agreement on West Berlin and not at leaving it
to remain a dangerous hot-bed of collision between states. Should really
you and we—two great states—submit, willingly or unwillingly, our
policy, the interests of our states to the old-aged man who both morally
and physically is with one foot in grave? Should we really become toys
in his hands? By concluding peace treaty we would lose nothing but we
would gain a possibility to strengthen friendly relations between our
states, would untie the knot in Europe which is fraught with danger for
the whole world only because most extreme aggressive militarist forces
in West Germany are interested in this.

Please, excuse me for my straightforwardness and frankness but I believe
as before that a frank and straightforward exchange of opinion is needed
to avoid the worst.

Please, convey to your wife and your whole family wishes of good health
from myself, my wife and my entire family.

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification
marking. The full text of the letter is printed in volume VI.

2 For text of this
letter, dated December 19, see Department of State Bulletin, February 11, 1963, pp. 198–200.

163. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State163. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Paris, December
12, 1962, 20 p.m.

Secto 10.Subject: Quadripartite
Ministerial Meeting, December 12, 1962.

Following based on uncleared memorandum of conversation:2

After dinner four Foreign Ministers had lengthy private discussion. In
larger group, Secretary subsequently summarized conclusions reached
noting they had agreed that Ambassadorial Group in Washington should
review Berlin contingency plans in order to insure promptest response to
Soviet actions. This would include improvement of communications among
governments, timing of appointment unified command in Berlin, assembly
of Autobahn probe units and timing and application of economic
sanctions. Objective would be to reach larger measure of previous
agreement among governments. Home commented that with respect economic
sanctions emphasis should be on Western response to total blockade of
access.

Ministers had also agreed, Secretary continued, to direct Ambassadorial
Group to study Western position in three categories:

(a) Satisfactory solution of German question. This would involve bringing
1959 approach up to date.

(b) Berlin arrangements based on de facto situation. This would include
proposals on access, Western forces and all-Berlin solution.

(c) If no agreement possible within categories (a) and (b), Western
position on possible modus vivendi to manage fact of disagreement with
Soviets without hot crisis.

Couve noted that Western powers
in 1959 had made all-Berlin proposal based on US draft.3 Secretary said we needed something of this sort to
protect against Soviet pressure to talk only of West Berlin.

Secretary emphasized importance of communications between governments in
crisis management. Goal should be establishment of possibility of
conference type consultation between four governments. This might
involve teletype system, classified telephones, etc. Our Cuban
experience had shown how communications could fall behind requirements.
Both sides had had to resort to public statements, as for example
Khrushchev on December 28.
Lord Home said he hoped
communications could be telegraphic rather than telephonic. Secretary
commented that technical means for establishing such communications
existed. Governments would have to be willing to consider costs. He
noted that fairly good communications now existed between Washington and
three capitals as well as Bonn and other capitals, but interlocking
systems still required. If crisis occurred today he estimated it would
take at least six hours to arrange hook-up for conference type
discussion between Ministers. More rapid facilities should exist.

In discussion of handling subject of Berlin at NATO Ministerial Meeting following day, Ministers concluded
there was no need for particular emphasis but that something would have
to be said about Berlin in communique, since absence would otherwise be
noted unfavorably. Schroeder
suggested reference to December 1958 formula might be simplest
approach.4

Ministers agreed press line that Four had taken advantage of their
presence in Paris for NATO Ministerial
Meeting, as was customary, to consult on Berlin and related subjects.
They had reviewed work of Ambassadorial Group and had given directives
for further work of that group.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/12–1262. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.
Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, and Berlin. According to another
copy, this telegram was drafted by Hillenbrand. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533,
CF 2197) Rusk and the other
Foreign Ministers were in Paris for the NATO Ministerial Meeting December 13–15.

2  US/MC/5, December 15. (Ibid., CF 2198)

3 For text of this proposal, June 16, 1959, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp.
665–666.

4 For text of the North Atlantic
Council communique, December 15, 1962, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp.
570–572; for text of the December 16, 1958, Declaration on Berlin,
see ibid., 1958, pp. 602–603.

164. Memorandum of Conversation164. Memorandum of Conversation1

Nassau, December 19,
1962.

SUBJECT

Berlin and Germany

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary McNamara

Mr. Ball

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. Nitze

Mr. Tyler

Ambassador Thompson

U.K.

Prime Minister Macmillan

Lord Home

Mr. Thorneycroft

Ambassador Ormsby Gore

Sir Robert Scott

Mr. Bligh

Lord Hood

The following are only the highlights of a dinner conversation, as no
notes were taken:

Lord Home raised the question of
Germany and the Berlin problem and asked if there were anything we ought
to be doing. He expressed his own opinion that in view of the attitude
of our French and German allies, it did not seem possible for us to take
any initiative at the moment—which he thought was a pity. He had hoped
that Mr. Khrushchev's
conversation with Ambassador Roberts would have provided a basis for tackling the
problem but Mr. Khrushchev had
backed away from his own proposal.

Lord Home thought that some
provision for some UN presence in Berlin
would be useful in any plan for settlement. He indicated that what he
had in mind was moving various bits and pieces of UN organizations to West Berlin. He also touched upon the
question of what flag Western troops would be under.

Ambassador Thompson expressed the
view that although the Soviets had made much of the troop issue, the
heart of the matter was their desire for greater recognition of the
sovereignty of East Germany and their desire to establish greater
stability in that area.

Ambassador Bruce gave a long
expos[ of his views on the German problem upon which the Prime Minister
congratulated him after dinner, describing it as a brilliant
presentation. Ambassador Bruce
thought any prospects for
German reunification were virtually nil. He discussed the possibility of
an all-Berlin solution and thought personally that one of the few
possibilities of a settlement which might work would be to move the
UN headquarters to Berlin. He paid
tribute to the role Chancellor Adenauer had played in keeping postwar Germany on the
right track.

In reply to a question, Mr. Tyler
pointed out that an important factor in the situation was the psychology
of the population of West Berlin. He did not think that they would feel
secure unless American and other Western troops remained and did not
believe they would consider we had upheld our commitment to them if the
security of Berlin were turned over to UN
forces.

The President said he wondered if we were not making a mistake in always
treating the Soviet leaders with consideration and courtesy.

Ambassador Thompson said he
thought that our doing so had a definite effect for the good on Soviet
policy. He pointed out that the orthodox communist view was that the
capitalist—or, as they would call it imperialist world—was out to
destroy them. Moreover, they were extremely sensitive and had a
deep-seated inferiority complex. It was therefore important to get
across to them that we were prepared to negotiate as equals. He cited
the fact that Mr. Khrushchev had
on a number of occasions, publicly and privately, referred to the fact
that President Eisenhower had called him “friend.”

In reply to a question from Lord
Home, Ambassador Thompson said he thought that the Soviets would try to
seek an agreement with the West in some other area before bringing the
Berlin problem to a head. He thought that in view of the current state
of Sino-Soviet relations, that Khrushchev must badly want an agreement with the West.
He also mentioned the great strain on Soviet resources. He said he
thought we should not take any initiative on Berlin at this time but
should be preparing the position we would adopt when the Soviets did
seriously raise the matter again, as he felt certain they would before
many months had passed.

The President said the Soviets had had many opportunities to settle the
Berlin problem but had, in the past year, gone even further out on a
limb by making an issue of the presence of Western troops.

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Secret. Drafted and initialed by
Thompson and approved by
the White House on January 28. For further documentation on the
talks between President Kennedy and Prime
Minister Macmillan at Nassau
December 18–21, see volume XIII.

165. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)165. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President's Military
Representative (Legere) to the President's Military Representative
(Taylor)1

Washington, December 19,
1962.

SUBJECT

JSSC Paper on “Berlin Planning”
(JCSM-981–62)2

1. General

a. In response to your request for my views on the subject paper, I think
it is an imaginative initiative which deserves a decent hearing that it
is not likely to receive. Attached at Tab A is a brief memorandum on the
paper which I sent to Mr. Bundy
on 12 December, hoping to stimulate his interest without asking him to
focus on the entire paper itself.3 As you will see from my memorandum to Mr. Bundy, I think that the paper
represents the sort of proposition which, even though it may appear
initially to be “non-negotiable”, in the sense that the Sovs/GDR
would not accept it, should nevertheless be advanced and publicized.

b. Since my 12 December memorandum to Mr. Bundy, I have talked further with Mr. David Klein about the subject paper, and
he still thinks that it is rather outlandish. I can only say that, much
as I like and admire Mr. Klein,
“Old Berlin Hands” today are very much like the “Old Chinese Hands” of
yesteryear, in that they have been in the game for so long that they shy
away from anything except the compulsory ballet figures. In addition, I
am certain that Mr. Klein's
attitude quite understandably reflects his concern, and that of everyone
in State, over the fact that Defense (and in this case JCS) is trying to intrude itself into the
conduct of foreign policy. It is for this latter reason that I have said
in paragraph 1. a above that I fear the JSSC paper will have trouble receiving a decent
hearing.

2. Specific

a. The reasoning in paragraphs 5 and 6 is a little too theological for
me; I simply fail to follow the overly fine distinctions and contrasts
between political and military vital interests. In the interest of
simplicity and vitality, I would cut out these two paragraphs
entirely.

b. Paragraphs 10 and 11 strike me as “pussyfooting” a little, at a point
where I think the paper should call a spade a spade. In my view, the paper should be crystal
clear at this point in the development of its logic that what the paper
is proposing is a stark withdrawal of all US, UK, French, and Soviet
troops from both Berlins, and, what is more, I think that this
withdrawal or disengagement feature should be made a part of the initial
package offer to the Soviets. The reason for this latter view of mine is
that it would increase the likelihood of Soviet acceptance or serious
consideration, and would also tend to pull the teeth of some of the
opponents of the paper, such as Mr. David
Klein.

P.S. Walt Rostow might be a good
man to furnish a bootleg copy at staff level.4

LJL

1 Source: National Defense
University, Taylor Papers, Box 38, 505 Berlin Contingency Planning.
Top Secret.

2 Document 161.

3 Not
printed.

4 Legere added the postscript
by hand. General Taylor
wrote “OK” below it.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France166. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in France1

Washington, January 9, 1963, 20:19p.m.

3335. Paris also for USRO, Stoessel,
McGuire. Thompson yesterday
chaired Ambassadorial Group meeting called to initiate work resulting
from Quadripartite Foreign Ministers meeting Paris Dec 12 on Berlin
contingency planning and Western negotiating positions.2

On contingency planning, Thompson
referred to work under way on improvement communication facilities, and
specifically four-way conference teletype facility for FonMins, which apparently technically
feasible but expensive. However, experts' report still to be
completed.

Group agreed continue discussion in Contingency Coordinating Group on
appointment single Berlin Commandant in serious emergency at earlier
stage than provided for in present plans such as implementation Free
Style/Back Stroke or Jack Pine II.3

Also agreed Military Subgroup wld seek agreement on additional authority
for Live Oak as set forth SHLO
9–00013.4 Additional
authority to be sought for SACEUR to
cut down Trade Wind5 assembly time.

Group also agreed on additional study to streamline economic
countermeasures plans and procedures.

Thompson prefaced discussion on
negotiation with review of Sov
intentions on Berlin in light Khrushchev attendance SED Congress. Sov
delegation heavily weighted on ideological side which suggests Sovs see Congress concentrating on dispute
with ChiComs. Thompson gave personal view that Sovs will not come to complete break at
Congress but may take steps leading to this, e.g. anathematizing
Albanian party. Thompson thought
complete break would be prefaced by purge of pro-Chinese elements in
various parties which may have been what happened in Bulgaria recently.
Also possible Khrushchev may use
Congress to take first steps toward Ulbricht ouster. Given 1958 precedent, it is always
possible Sovs may plan new Berlin
initiative or steps toward this at Congress.

Thompson also explained that
sentence in US/Sov agreement to disagree
on Cuba6 which speaks of
“agreement on other subjects” included at Sov insistence. We believe Khrushchev needed this at minimum to justify his Cuba
policy in context Sino-Sov dispute. US
does not expect any Sov initiative at
present because of recentness of Cuba. Khrushchev at present in disadvantageous position to
suggest any concessions to West. In any case, Thompson said we would expect Sov initiative toward any agreement to come
not on Berlin but on matter such as disarmament, nuclear testing, etc.
Thompson said US considers
formal discussions ended on Cuba. In answer to question, said US has no
formal basis for demand that Sovs remove
ground forces from Cuba and has given no formal commitment on invasion,
surveillance flights, etc. Noted that Cuban letter to UN which reserved Cuban right to any weapons
provides justification continued aerial surveillance.7

On Berlin negotiations Thompson
reviewed Secretary's suggestion that Allies be prepared for three
contingencies:

1. A Sov willingness discuss a truly
satisfactory solution which would entail an updating of 1959 Western
peace plan.

2. An arrangement on de facto situation in Berlin which might include
proposals on access, Western forces and all-Berlin solution.

3. Arrangements for managing situation without hot crisis should
agreement in first two categories not be possible.

As basis for preparing positions on these contingencies, Thompson suggested five papers might be
relevant:

1. Revised Western Peace Plan including 1961 Washington Working Group
report.8

2. Substantive negotiating paper included in Dec 1961 Paris Working Group
report.9

3. All-Berlin proposal given Gromyko in Feb 1962.

4. Principles Paper handed Gromyko
informally in Mar 1962.

5. Revised International Access Authority proposal.

Thompson noted that not all
papers are quadripartitely agreed.

Alphand raised question of US
attitude toward Sov initiative on Berlin
in light of sentence in Cuba agreement on “other subjects.” Thompson said US had no formal position
as yet, but obviously we did not want to take “too negative” position if
Sovs really want serious discussion.
For the moment, however, we see no such Sov desire. Alphand
replied that while French see no threat from Sovs neither do they see any change in Sov positions, thus no new openings for
Berlin negotiations are available to West.

Knappstein then read what were
obviously Bonn instructions on negotiations. Exploratory talks have been
“fruitless” and thus there is no reason go into negotiations. Should
Sovs indicate willingness resume
exploratory talks, West should insist on precondition that Western
troops remain West Berlin. This means remain under present conditions
and not for an interim period or under UN
flag. If Soviets accept this precondition, West should begin
negotiations with maximum rather than minimum proposal but one which
should appeal to public and enhance ability to reach modus vivendi.
Thompson replied that Sovs unlikely accept this precondition.
Also pointed out that US has continually made clear to Sovs in all talks that Western troop
presence not negotiable. On maximum negotiating position, Thompson noted Secretary's belief we
might go back to all-Berlin proposals to remind Sovs that East Berlin is also negotiating material.
However, problem of advancing a maximum position which is also credible
must be faced.

Meeting adjourned with agreement to seek instructions on new ideas, new
approaches for discussion after Khrushchev East Berlin visit ended.

For USRO: You may draw on Thompson remarks on negotiations and
Cuba for NAC briefing, except for
reference to documents which we do not wish NAC members to ask for.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/1–963. Secret. Drafted by Holloway, cleared by Hillenbrand and Guthrie, and approved and initialed
by Thompson. Also sent to
Bonn, London, Moscow, Berlin, and U.S. Element Live Oak.

2 See Document 163.

3 See footnote 3, Document 115.

4 Not found.

5 Trade Wind was a
tripartite plan for using a battalion-sized force to attempt to get
the Soviet Union to reopen the Autobahn.

6 For text of this January 7 agreement
(U.N. doc. S/5227), see American Foreign Policy:
Current Documents, 1963, p. 243.

7 For text of this letter (U.N. doc. S/5228), see
ibid., pp. 243–244.

8 Regarding this report, see vol.
XIV, Document 149, footnote 1.

9 Regarding this report, see
ibid., Document 243, footnote 2.

167. Memorandum of Conversation167. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 10, 1963, noon.

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The Secretary

John C. Guthrie, Director,
SOV

U.S.S.R.

Vasiliy Vasilyevich Kuznetsov, First Deputy Foreign
Minister

Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Soviet
Ambassador

Lev Isaakovich Mendelevich, Assistant to Kuznetsov

Viktor Pavlovich Karpov, First Secretary of Embassy
(Interpreter)

Mr. Kuznetsov observed that as he had said to the President
yesterday,2 the USSR and
the United States must put more effort into the attempt to solve
outstanding international problems. He said that he had mentioned the
two most important as those of a German peace treaty and general and
complete disarmament. With regard to Germany, he wished to stress that
in the Soviet view the necessity of solving this question and removing the last traces of World
War II must have priority as life requires this. It was clear, in Europe
at least, he said, that without a solution of this problem a hotbed of
war will continue to exist. The situation is now ripe for the conclusion
of a German peace treaty. In fact, the viewpoints of the two sides are
now much closer than they were a couple of years ago. It is now possible
to reach an agreement and very little remains to be done. If both
governments show a sincere desire, it should not take long to come to an
agreement. Such an agreement would be useful for lessening tension in
Europe while the problem of disarmament would be easier of solution.
Kuznetsov added that he was not linking the German and disarmament
problems.

The Secretary said that he would not attempt to review the 100 hours of
talks on Berlin and Germany which had taken place over the last year or
two. He would, however, urge again that Moscow approach the problem of
Berlin with a general sense of reciprocity. What has caused the United
States difficulty, he said, had been aptly expressed by the President's
expression “What is mine is mine; what is yours is negotiable”. Looking
back to 1945, the Secretary observed, and throughout the whole postwar
period there have been very few bilateral issues between the United
States and the USSR. The great issues involved someone else and if these
latter could be resolved, the strictly bilateral aspects of our
relations would be a relatively simple matter.

Kuznetsov commented that with regard to the German problem the USSR has
made many proposals. The United States has only to take its choice among
them. He asked that the United States bear this in mind and said that it
was now the turn of the United State to advance proposals.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, USSR, Kuznets-ov Talks. Secret. Drafted and
initialed by Guthrie and
approved in S on January 16. The
meeting was held in Secretary Rusk's office. Since Kuznetsov had worked
effectively with U.S. officials at the United Nations during the
Cuban crisis, the U.S. Government extended an invitation to visit
Washington. On January 11 Thompson briefed Knappstein and Rusk briefed Alphand on the talks with Kuznetsov, stressing that
there had been nothing new in the conversations. (Department of
State, Central Files, 762.00/1–1163 and 661.00/1–1163)

2 A memorandum of Kuznetsov's
conversation with the President at 5 p.m. on January 9, devoted to
Cuba, is scheduled for publication in volume XI.

168. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Missions168. Circular Telegram From the Department of
State to Certain Missions1

Washington, January 15, 1963, 13:07 p.m.

1238. Paris pass USRO, Stoessel,
McGuire. Soviets appear be attempting spread story that US Government
has almost reached agreement with them in course discussions with
Kuznetsov on nuclear testing and Berlin (Western troops to remain under
UN flag). This only latest in series of planted Soviet
statements (e.g. Soviet Amb Vinogradov's remarks in Paris and Gromyko speech).2

Obvious purpose this campaign is to accredit notion that US has been
negotiating with Soviet Union behind backs our allies, and thus feed
suspicion and resentment against US. Although Kuznetsov mentioned to
President German problem, including Berlin along with disarmament as
major questions requiring solution, there was no discussion of the
German problem. Kuznetsov did briefly discuss Berlin problem with
Secretary3 but merely along lines restatement
standard Soviet position. Last significant discussion with Soviets on
Berlin was Secretary's talk with Gromyko (October 18, 1962)4 which did
nothing to advance solution of problem. Kuznetsov has not been involved
in testing and disarmament discussions.

Although US continues to hope progress on disarmament including nuclear
testing can be made, addressees can in their discretion take appropriate
means flatly deny Soviet allegations relating to Berlin and expose their
real purpose.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 700.5611/1–1563. Confidential. Drafted and initialed
by Thompson and Tyler; cleared by Davis, Manning, NEA, and
S; and approved by Tyler. Sent to the NATO capitals, Madrid, Warsaw, and
Berlin and repeated to Moscow.

2 On January 10 Vinogradov had stated in a speech at
Paris that the United States and the Soviet Union were close to
reaching a settlement on a number of World War II issues. The next
day, in a circular telegram to European posts, the Department of
State noted that Vinogradov's remarks appeared merely to echo what
Gromyko had said to the
Supreme Soviet on December 13, 1962, and that they were without
foundation. (Circular telegram 1223; ibid., 762.00/1–1163)

3 See Document 167.

4 See Document 136.

169. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State169. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, January
17, 1963, 16 p.m.

790. Paris also for USRO; USAREUR for POLAD; SHAPE for US
Element Live Oak and Stoessel; CINCEUR for McGuire. Ref Deptel 1612 Bonn, 3443 Paris, 3713 London, 1478
Moscow.2

British (Chairman) Deputy Commandant called on Mayor Brandt 1200 hours to give Allied
reaction to Soviet suggestion Khrushchev-Brandt
meeting East Berlin evening Jan 17 or 18. Tripartitely agreed Allied
formula was along following lines: That we knew that Brandt was aware, as were we, of certain
disadvantages in making such visit; nevertheless we left it up to
Brandt to decide whether or
not to go. This formula arrived at after unilateral consultations with
Ambassadors in Bonn and based on strong views here that Allies should
put decision squarely up to Brandt. Allied lack of enthusiasm for adventure has indeed
been unilaterally expressed previously to Brandt by French Ambassador (via Foreign Office) in
Bonn, British Ambassador in Berlin and by three Deputy Commandants.

It was also agreed that Rouse would tell Brandt that if he decided go ahead with visit,
conditions he mentioned to Rouse yesterday were satisfactory: that
meeting would not be in Sov Embassy; no
GDR or SED representatives should attend; and Brandt would avoid giving impression he
was spokesman for Allies.

Brandt told Rouse that
Chancellor's reaction was very similar to Allies, that is, that he had
some reservations but decision was up to Brandt. At Brandt's request, Rouse mentioned several of the
disadvantages from the Allied point of view but reiterated no pressure
intended and decision was for Brandt to make. He also specifically stated on behalf of
Allies that replies to press inquiries re Allied involvement would
follow closely formula outlined above.

Brandt said he had not made up his
mind but would inform Rouse his decision later in afternoon. Rouse
informed me 1500 hours Brandt
decided accept and is proposing meeting 1930 this evening. He is laying
down certain conditions based on those mentioned above. If meeting
arranged, Senat plans issue brief press announcement. Interpreter from
Bonn now on way to Berlin to assist Brandt, who would also be accompanied by Barr and
Klein.

According Albertz 3 Brandt's decision heavily
influenced by last-minute telephone message from Chancellor that refusal
would be detrimental to German/Soviet relations; hence Chancellor
advised Brandt “to make personal
sacrifice of agreeing to see Khrushchev.”4

Lightner

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 661.62A/1–1763. Secret; Niact. Also sent to Bonn and repeated to Paris, London,
Moscow, SHAPE, and CINCEUR.

2 Dated January 16, this telegram
informed the Mission that a meeting between Brandt and Khrushchev in East Berlin would
undercut Four-Power responsibility in Berlin, and so acceptance of
the Soviet offer of a meeting would be disadvantageous. If Brandt insisted, the Allies should
avoid a public debate, since an open rift with the Mayor would be
worse. (Ibid., 661.62A/1–1462)

3  Heinrich Albertz, Berlin
Senator for the Interior.

4 Later in the
day the Mission at Berlin reported that the meeting had been
“abruptly” cancelled after the Berlin CDU threatened to leave the city's governing coalition.
(Telegram 796 from Berlin; Department of State, Central Files,
661.62A/1–1763) For Brandt's
account of these events, see Begegnungen und
Einsichten, pp. 112–113.

January–June 1963: Resumption of Talks With The Soviet Union and President Kennedy's Trip to GermanyJanuary–June 1963: Resumption of Talks With The Soviet Union and President Kennedy's Trip to Germany: Document List

Document 170: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, January 18, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/1–1863. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Berlin, Bonn, Paris, and London.

Document 171: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, January 26, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

Document 172: Editorial Note

Document 173: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 6, 1963, 8:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted and ini-tialed by Brandin and approved in S on February 7. The meeting was held during breakfast at the Department of State. Carstens visited Washington February 4–7 at the request of the German Government, primarily to discuss the U.S. reaction to the French-German Treaty signed January 22. A memorandum of his conversation with Secretary Rusk, February 5, is in vol. XIII, Document 71.

Document 174: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, February 14, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Priority.

Document 175: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 15, 1963, 10 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President. Secret. Drafted by David Klein. The meeting was held in President Kennedy's office.

Document 176: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, February 16, 1963, 10:40 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Tyler on February 15; cleared by Thompson, Hillenbr and, and the President; and approved and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Moscow, Paris, London, and Berlin.

Document 177: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, February 21, 1963, 10:28 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Priority. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand on February 19; cleared by Thompson, Tyler, Guthrie, and Bundy; and approved and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, and Berlin.

Document 178: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, February 21, 1963, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AV 13 GER. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Paris, Moscow, London, USAREUR, CINCEUR, and SHAPE.

Document 179: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, February 25, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Relayed to the White House.

Document 180: Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 7, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted and ini-tialed by Thompson. Copies were sent to Tyler, Hillenbrand, Guthrie, and Cleveland.

Document 181: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, March 20, 1963, 10:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted by Holloway; cleared by Hillenbrand, Guthrie, and RPM; and approved and initialed by Thompson. Also sent to Bonn, London, Moscow, and Berlin.

Document 182: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 26, 1963, 2:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand and approved in S on March 28. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 2294, March 27. (Ibid.)

Document 183: Memorandum of Conversation

Paris, April 8, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Bohlen. The meeting was held at the Elys[e Palace. The source text is labeled “Part III of V.”

Document 184: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 12, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Hillenbrand and approved in S on April 18. Rusk and Dobrynin also discussed nuclear non-proliferation and Laos. Memoranda of these parts of the conversation are ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

Document 185: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, April 13, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. The time of transmission is illegible.

Document 186: Memorandum of Conversation

Moscow, April 26, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–8. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved in M on May 6. The source text is labeled “Part IV of IV.” The meeting was held in Khrushchev's office in the Kremlin. Harriman was in Moscow for talks on Laos.

Document 187: Editorial Note

Document 188: Editorial Note

Document 189: Memorandum of Conversation

Ottawa, May 21, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2263. Secret. Drafted by Cash and approved in S on May 28. The meeting was held at the U.S. Embassy.

Document 190: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, May 22, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Berlin and Bonn.

Document 191: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, May 25, 1963, 12:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Creel on May 24; cleared by Penberthy, Davis, Bundy (in substance), and Guthrie and Thompson (in draft); and approved by Tyler. Repeated to Berlin and Bonn.

Document 192: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, May 27, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bonn and Berlin.

Document 193: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, June 14, 1963, 7:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ausland; cleared by Anderson, Cash, Thompson, Department of Defense (ISA), and JCS; and approved by Davis. Repeated to Berlin, London, Paris, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAFE, and USAREUR.

Document 194: Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, June 14, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2274. Confidential. Drafted by Creel and cleared by Brandin and Tyler. Prepared for the President's European trip.

Document 195: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Austria

Washington, June 22, 1963, 1:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–9. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ausland on June 21; cleared by Creel, Davis, Thompson, AV, Department of Defense (ISA), and JCS; and approved and initialed by Rusk. Also sent to Bonn and repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

Document 196: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Wiesbaden, June 25, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Limit Distribution. The source text bears no time of transmission. Repeated to Bonn, Rome, Paris, London, and Berlin. Passed to the White House on June 26. Secretary Rusk and President Kennedy arrived in Bonn on June 23 for a 4-day visit, including a trip to Berlin.

Document 197: Memorandum of Conversation

Bad Godesberg, June 24, 1963, 6:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret. Drafted by Davis and approved in S on August 8. The source text is labeled “Uncleared.” The meeting was held in Ambassador McGhee's residence. Another memorandum of this conversation, PET/MC/15, is dated June 23, but a summary of the discussion transmitted in telegram 3592 from Bonn, June 25, states that the conversation took place “yesterday.” (Ibid., POL 38–10)

Document 198: Editorial Note

170. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State170. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, January
18, 1963, 6 p.m.

1764. Paris for USRO, Stoessel and
McGuire; US Element Live Oak. Embtel
1763 (sent Dept only).2 Following our discussion
communications, I told Gromyko I
would be glad take back with me any views he or Khrushchev might wish to give me before
departure for transmission to President and Secretary.

Gromyko launched into discussion
of Germany/Berlin.

On Germany/Berlin, Gromyko said
Sov Govt had made its position clear many times, most recently in
Khrushchev's and his speeches
to Supreme Soviet and in Khrushchev's Jan 16 speech at SED Congress.3 There consequently no need for
him to repeat it to me now.

He wished say, however, that Sov Govt considers its proposals good basis
for agreement which take into account interests of all parties,
including USSR and USA. Those who think question of German peace
settlement has lost its topicality and urgency would be making great
mistake. Soviets had emphasized and continue now to emphasize that
German peace treaty and settlement on this basis of problem of West
Berlin remain urgent and acute.

Sov Govt had set no date for peace treaty. It was better not to close
door to negotiations on this subject. If US or its Allies should
conclude from this that problem was not urgent, they would be making big
mistake.

Sov Govt was proceeding from assumption that statements which US Govt had
made regarding desirability of continuing talks, particularly during his
conversations with Secretary remain in force.

However, Sovs cannot understand why certain leading American
personalities were making statements now regarding absence of urgency
on Germany/Berlin. For
example, Secretary had made statement only couple of days ago.4 In it, he said US Govt believes exchange
of views must be continued. That is right. That was positive side his
statement. Gromyko understood it
to mean that US was ready continue talks with view to reaching
agreement. But Secretary also said this only in very general way,
without taking it to logical conclusion, i.e., that talks should be
renewed soon and should not be delayed.

If Sovs were to name a date as term during which talks should be
completed, that would complicate question for both sides. Sov Govt
proceeded from assumption that USG
remains ready to talk. If this is so, talks should be resumed and
exchange of views should continue.

When interpreter had finished translating this, Gromyko said he had “additional
explanation”: Sov Govt emphasized importance of settlement
Germany/Berlin, since this would strengthen confidence between states
and would increase possibility for favorable solution of disarmament
problems. There was lack of confidence in world today. It was necessary
settle this problem so progress could be made on disarmament.

At end his presentation, I said I should of course report his remarks
immediately and fully. Without getting into discussion of
Germany/Berlin, I wanted to confirm that US is interested in reaching
understanding which would reduce tensions in Central Europe. As
Secretary had told him, we do not consider there can be any question of
unilateral procrastination when two sides are attempting to reach
agreement. Soviets had put forward some proposals and so had we, but we
had had no response to our proposals. This was mutual
responsibility.

I said we had noticed in recent Soviet statement on subject some
indications that Sovs might be ready to take our vital interests more
fully into account, e.g., on troop question. If Soviet side had any
concrete suggestions to make, I was prepared to take them back to
Washington with me.

Gromyko did not respond to my
offer convey any suggestions to Washington.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, 762.00/1–1863. Secret; Limited Distribution. Repeated
to Berlin, Bonn, Paris, and London.

2 Telegram 1763, also
dated January 18, discussed communications links between Washington
and Moscow. (Ibid., 911.2161/1–1863)

3 For text of
Khrushchev's January 16
address, see Pravda or Izvestiia, January 17,
1963. For extracts, see Documents on Germany,
1944–1985, pp. 831–833, or American Foreign Policy: Current
Documents, 1963, pp. 532–533.

4 For text of this January 12 statement, see
ibid., pp. 531–532.

171. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State171. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, January
26, 1963, 6 p.m.

1840. Policy. Gromyko called me in
at 2:30 pm Moscow time today and made two oral statements: (1) proposing
continuation Soviet-US talks on German peace settlement, and (2)
protesting large-diameter pipe embargo. He asked I transmit these to
President and Secretary when I returned Washington. I said I would do so
and noted timeliness their presentation, since this would give us chance
discuss them while I was in Washington.

Gromyko said that Soviets did not
intend give either statement press (adding that they sometimes thought
communication with USG was confidential and then found that leak had
taken place “on other side Atlantic”).

We agreed to tell press only that I had been called in to see Gromyko and we had discussed matters
bilateral interest.

Text Gromyko's statement on German
problem follows. (Pipe protest contained next following tel.)2

Begin text. In connection with discussion of January 18,3
I inform you that Soviet Government is ready to continue Soviet-American
exchange of views on questions relating to German peace settlement and
normalization on that basis of situation in West Berlin, with a view to
concluding these negotiations through attainment in near future of
appropriate understanding.

Regarding methods of continuing exchange of views, following
considerations are offered.

We should find acceptable talks in Washington, through Soviet Ambassador,
or here, in Moscow, through Ambassador of USA. If American side agrees
that exchange of views should be continued in Moscow, we should welcome
that.

Of course, we are ready to receive other special American
repre-sentatives as well, whose participation in discussion of German
problem President of USA might find useful.

Soviet Government will give instructions to its representatives to
continue discussion of concrete questions, relating to German peace
settlement and normalization of
situation in West Berlin, taking into account exchange of views which
has already taken place, with the goal of preparing drafts of
appropriate agreements.

When such drafts have been agreed upon, it would be possible to reach
agreement on procedure and means for their definitive approval. End
text.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Niact; Limit
Distribution.

2 Telegram 1841, January 26. (Ibid., Str 12–3
USSR)

3 See Document 170.

172. Editorial Note172. Editorial Note

On January 31 Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Tyler and Ambassador at Large Thompson each sent a memorandum to
Secretary of State Rusk dealing
with Berlin, in preparation for a meeting with the President on the
following day. Tyler, who also addressed a
nuclear test ban treaty and the sale of large-diameter pipe to the
Soviet Union, recommended that the United States respond affirmatively
to Gromyko's initiative for continuing talks on
Berlin and that the dialog should take place in Washington. Attached to
Tyler's memorandum, was a memorandum drafted
by Hillenbrand on January 31,
which expanded on the reasons for responding positively, noted that
nothing more than “passive negativism” could be expected from the
French, and concluded that the United States should inform the
Washington Ambassadorial Group that it proposed to resume the talks with
the Soviet Union. (Department of State, Central Files,
110.11–RU/1–3163)

Thompson's memorandum dealt
exclusively with Berlin and recommended that German Ambassador Knappstein be informed that the United
States would, at the next Ambassadorial Group meeting, propose to
continue bilateral U.S.-Soviet talks in an effort to find out what the
Soviet Union had in mind concerning the presence of Allied forces in
West Berlin. (Ibid., 762.00/1–3163)

The meeting with the President took place at 12:25 p.m. on February 2,
but other than an entry in the President's Appointment Book, which
indicates that Kennedy, Rusk, Tyler,
Kohler, and Thompson attended, no record of the
meeting has been found. However, the participants apparently agreed to
inform Knappstein along the lines
suggested by Thompson, since, at
a meeting in Tyler's office on
February 4, Kohler, Hillenbrand, and Tyler reviewed in detail Gromyko's proposal and told the Ambassador that the United States
intended to raise the subject of a positive response to the Soviet offer
at the next Ambassadorial Group meeting. (Memorandum of conversation and
telegram 1794 to Bonn, February 4; both ibid., POL 28 Berlin)

173. Memorandum of Conversation173. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 6, 1963, 8:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Soviet Overtures on Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

Germans

State Secretary Karl
Carstens

Ambassador Karl Heinrich
Knappstein

Counselor Swidbert Schnippenkoetter

Americans

The Secretary

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler, EUR

Ambassador Walter C.
Dowling, Bonn

Mr. Robert M. Brandin,
EUR/GER

The Secretary said it was necessary to consider the recent overtures
about Berlin which the Soviets had made to Ambassador Kohler, noting that these would be
discussed in the Ambassadorial Group later in the day.2

Dr. Carstens cautioned against any
haste. There seemed to be no present danger of a separate treaty. The
posture of Western unity was not imposing at the moment. Moreover, as
the President had said in November,3 the USSR must clearly
accept Western presence in Berlin. On this last point the USSR was still
rather evasive, apparently having said nothing about it.

The Secretary clarified that what the President meant in November was
that no arrangement could be concluded that did not accept Western
presence in Berlin. The President did not insist that such recognition
be a precondition to discussions. We seemed to feel we should not talk
under pressure and that it was not necessary to talk if things were
quiet.

Dr. Carstens said this was the
situation we all had to live with in view of Berlin's exposed and
isolated position. This tactic had been successful so far.

The Secretary asked whether there was a danger of steady erosion in
Berlin in the absence of clarification of its status.

Dr. Carstens replied that an
improvement in the situation of Berlin would have a good effect, but it
was doubtful we could achieve such improvement. Therefore, it was better
to live with what we had. He did not think there was a danger of serious
erosion in Berlin. The population had decreased slightly, but this was
an inevitable consequence when cities were isolated from their natural
hinterlands.

Mr. Tyler wondered what the effect
would be within the Western Alliance if we did not respond to the Soviet
overtures to Ambassador Kohler.

Dr. Carstens thought there was
little hope of finding an agreed basis for negotiations among the
members of the Western Alliance as a whole.

The Secretary noted there was a difference between expecting or hoping
for a solution and keeping channels open. Our idea in proposing that the
Berlin problem be discussed by Deputy Foreign Ministers was simply to
keep discussions going, as in the case of Austria.

Ambassador Dowling said the conversations with the
USSR had helped to prevent an erosion of the situation. He thought we
should keep the talks going along quietly without being adamant or
hasty.

The Secretary stressed the importance of a united front to keep Khrushchev from getting the wrong ideas. The
Secretary referred to Gromyko's
hint that talks should be on a broader basis. Khrushchev had also said that West
Berlin was not important to the Allies who were only echoing Adenauer. There was also a report that
De Gaulle had told Khrushchev that France did not need West Berlin.
To deal with these Soviet
tactics, the United States had always stressed its own national interest
in Berlin.

Dr. Carstens said there was a
question of what should be discussed with the USSR—the German problem or
the Berlin problem. There was much in favor of reintroducing the German
question.

The Secretary recalled this possibility had been discussed among the
Foreign Ministers in December.4 Soviet propaganda
emphasized that the USSR alone was making proposals. Perhaps we should
present counterproposals at all levels—e.g., All-Germany, All-Berlin,
modus vivendi, etc. There was a danger of a psychological erosion in the
attitude of the rest of the world toward the Berlin question. If the
USSR proposed changes in the status quo for its purposes, why should we
not propose changes for our purposes?

Dr. Carstens said such an approach
would have the advantage of reintroducing the proposals made by the West
in 1959 about Germany. He emphasized that there was more confidence in
West Berlin now as a result of Cuba than there had been at any time in
the last four years.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28
Berlin. Secret. Drafted and ini-tialed by Brandin and approved in S on
February 7. The meeting was held during breakfast at the Department
of State. Carstens visited Washington February 4–7 at the request of
the German Government, primarily to discuss the U.S. reaction to the
French-German Treaty signed January 22. A memorandum of his
conversation with Secretary Rusk, February 5, is in vol. XIII, Document
71.

2 During this meeting Tyler read Gromyko's statement (see Document 170), and Kohler added that he believed this was the most
serious Soviet approach on Berlin since 1958. In response to
Tyler's invitation for
comments, the British and French representatives stated that they
were without instructions, and Carstens repeated the points made in the
conversation with Secretary Rusk. (Telegram 4175 to London, February 6;
Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin)

3 See Document 153.

4 See Document 163.

174. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State174. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, February
14, 1963, noon.

2093.2 Eyes only for Secretary and Amb.
Dowling. During course of
Under Secretary Gilpatric's
discussion with Chancellor yesterday, which lasted almost two hours,
Adenauer charged that US had
gone back on agreement reached between him and President, to effect that
we would take no initiative with Soviets over Berlin and Germany.

In his opening statement, Gilpatric said that President has been concerned over
recent signs of greater Soviet intransigence since De Gaulle's January 14 press conference,3 citing as examples both
nuclear test negotiations and Soviet attitude on removal of troops from
Cuba. Chancellor said that he also felt that during month of January
Soviets had become tougher. However, he thought there were two reasons
for this, and that in addition to French-UK-US differences over Brussels
negotiations and Nassau, Khrushchev had also been encouraged by Kohler's initiative. In this
connection, Adenauer referred to
his agreement with President last November, in view of which he had been
“amazed” to learn that before Kohler left Moscow, he had asked Gromyko if he had any
message for President, which led Gromyko only two days later to say that Soviets wished
to resume discussions over Berlin and Germany.

Gilpatric replied that he did not agree with
Chancellor's interpretation and that what actually happened was clearly
initiative by Gromyko and not by
Kohler, who had merely made
usual routine inquiry, as any other Ambassador, leaving for
consultations at home.

Most of meeting with Adenauer taken
up by lengthy and frequently emotional discourse by Chancellor on long
history of Franco-German relations, including strong defense of recent
reconciliation and treaty. As result, there was virtually no discussion
of defense problems, apart from Gilpatric's opening statement and
Chancellor's concluding comment. After emphasizing how “flabbergasted”
he was at reaction in U.S. to Franco-German Treaty, Adenauer asked that President be assured that treaty in no way
affects Germany's support of NATO or
recognition of U.S. free world leadership.4

Gilpatric will report fully on
discussions upon arrival Friday.

Morris

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Priority.

2 On the source text 2095 is crossed out
and 2093 written above it.

3 For a transcript of De
Gaulle's January 14 press conference, see Major
Addresses, Statements and Press Conferences of General Charles de Gaulle, May 19,
1958–January 31, 1964, pp. 208–222.

4 Later in the day the Department of State informed Morris that he should see Carstens, express U.S. surprise at
the Chancellor's accusation, and repeat to him that Gromyko had made the initiative,
not Kohler. (Telegram 1891 to
Bonn; Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin)

175. Memorandum of Conversation175. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 15, 1963, 10 a.m.

PRESENT

The President

Secretary Rusk

Ambassador Thompson

Ambassador Dowling

William Tyler

McGeorge Bundy

SUBJECT

Berlin

The President raised for discussion our response to Gromyko's proposal to Ambassador Kohler for the resumption of bilateral
discussions on Germany and Berlin. The President said he was concerned
because the Germans and the French were not in favor of further
exploratory talks and, given Chancellor Adenauer's present mood and suspicions, the Chancellor
could at any time attempt to exploit these discussions to our
detriment.2 The President said for our own protection it was
necessary to have the French and the Germans as fully locked into these
talks as possible. He suggested that if this were not possible, we might
tell the Soviets that we could not carry on with the talks in the
absence of Allied support.

The Secretary argued that discussions with the Soviets on Berlin were
necessary if only to keep the Berlin situation under control. Moreover,
it was important to keep the channels of communication with the Soviets
open to determine what was in the Soviet mind. In any event, he did not
think it possible to refuse to discuss Berlin with the Soviets on the
ground that our Allies were opposed to such talks.

The President, however, wondered whether there was any advantage in
moving ahead without the Germans fully in tow. Unless they were fully
locked in, the Germans would be in a position to take advantage of the accomplishments of the
talks, but remain ever ready to criticize us if things went wrong. The
President also questioned whether there was any real advantage in
putting ourselves in an exposed position vis-a-vis our Allies in the
absence of indications that the Soviets were prepared to come up with
constructive Berlin proposals. He asked whether a more profitable course
might be to try to get from Gromyko some indication of Soviet thinking before again
raising the question of Berlin discussions with the Allies. Unless the
Soviets were prepared to be forthcoming, he saw no useful purpose in
continuing a dialogue bound to arouse the suspicion, even the
antagonism, of our Allies.

Ambassador Thompson interjected to
say that it would be awkward for the U.S. to say it was not prepared to
continue exploratory talks with the Soviets on Berlin. Moreover, if we
refused to meet the Soviets' request now, they could heat up the
situation and put us in a position where we would be forced to discuss
the problem under pressures they deliberately created.

After further discussion, the President laid down the following course of
action:

1. He asked that Foy Kohler be
instructed not to reply to Gromyko's overture on Berlin until we had a further
opportunity to attempt to reconcile our position with that of the
Germans.3 (Ambassador
Dowling thought he might be
able to discuss this matter with the Chancellor on Tuesday.) If
Ambassador Kohler had to speak to
Gromyko before we talked with the Germans, Kohler should say he was awaiting instructions.

2. He directed Ambassador Dowling
to see the Chancellor immediately on his return to Bonn to discuss the
question of further exploratory talks on Berlin with the Soviets. He
asked that Ambassador Dowling
make it clear to the Chancellor that we did not relish the idea of
talking with the Kremlin if the Germans objected to our doing so. If the
Chancellor objected to the talks in the context of the Gromyko proposal, the President would
again review the situation.4

3. In this connection, the President suggested that Ambassador Dowling assure the Chancellor that the
President attaches great importance to close and mutual cooperation with
him and make clear that if there are to be further exploratory talks
with the Soviets on Germany and
Berlin, we would like to be sure the German Government considers such
talks worthwhile.

4. The President also suggested Ambassador Dowling tell the Chancellor that Ambassador Thompson thought that if we refused to
speak with the Soviets now, they might apply new pressures on Berlin and
force us to talk with them under less favorable circumstances. The
Secretary undertook to instruct Ambassadors Kohler and Dowling accordingly.

DK

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President. Secret.
Drafted by David Klein. The
meeting was held in President Kennedy's
office.

2 At the Ambassadorial Group
meeting on February 14 Ormsby
Gore reported that the United Kingdom favored an
affirmative answer to Gromyko. Alphand
and Knapp-stein, while not in
favor of talks on Berlin, indicated that France and Germany would
not oppose further exploratory conversations with the Soviet Union.
Ambassador Thompson stressed
how awkward it would be for the United States to say it was not
ready to talk and informed the group that Kohler would be instructed to
discover the Soviet position before proceeding further. (Telegram
4344 to London, February 14; Department of State, Central Files, POL
28 Berlin)

3 Instructions to Kohler along this line were
transmitted in telegram 1712 to Moscow at 2:10 p.m. on February 15.
(Ibid., POL US–USSR) On February 16 Kohler reported that he had been noncommittal when
Gromyko had approached him about Berlin
at a reception the previous day and that he had indicated he would
ask Gromyko for a meeting the following week.
(Telegram 1995 from Moscow; ibid., POL 38)

4 See Document 176.

176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany176. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, February 16, 1963, 10:40 a.m.

1914. Eyes only for Ambassadors and Lightner. When you see the Chancellor
you should tell him that the President has asked you personally to
assure him that his impression that US Govt took initiative with Soviets
to resume talks on Berlin and Germany is erroneous.

You should tell Chancellor we note that German position, as set forth by
Amb Knappstein in Ambassadorial
Group meeting Feb 14,2 is that
FRG sees no advantage in reacting
swiftly to Gromyko overture, but
that if US Govt wishes to resume talks FRG will not oppose. You should make it very clear to the
Chancellor that if talks were resumed with the Soviets, we would want to
limit their scope to exploring with the Soviet Govt whether a resumption
of bilateral exploratory talks could lead to finding a basis for
fruitful negotiations. We entirely agree that there should be no
negotiations as such unless the Soviets are prepared to recognize the
Western troop presence in Berlin without any unacceptable qualification.
It seems to us that position now taken by German Govt toward talks is
more negative than it was a year ago, and that there is now no
difference between the German and French positions on this point. You should say that the
President attaches great importance to close and mutually confident
cooperation between him and the Chancellor, and that he has asked you to
tell the Chancellor this. If we are to talk to the Soviets at all in
response to their initiative, we would like to do so in the knowledge
that the German Govt feels that such preliminary exploration is worth
undertaking. You should tell the Chancellor that we have delayed sending
Amb Kohler instructions in order
to have this further exchange of views with him, and that we would like
to have his completely candid thoughts and suggestions on the matter. If
you think it helpful you might point to probability that refusal to talk
with Soviets now may result in their increasing pressures on Berlin to
force such talks, and this would be less desirable context in which to
have exploratory conversations with them. You should say that we don't
relish the idea of talking to the Russians if the Germans are really
against our doing so, and if the Chancellor feels that it would be a
mistake we would like to review the situation.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Tyler on February 15; cleared by
Thompson, Hillenbr and,
and the President; and approved and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Moscow, Paris,
London, and Berlin.

2 See footnote 1, Document 175.

3 On February 19 Morris, who discussed Berlin with the Chancellor
because of Dowling's sudden
illness, reported that he had found Adenauer in a relaxed and reasonable frame of mind.
After Morris reviewed the approach by Gromyko, the Chancellor replied that he now
understood who had taken the initiative and that he was satisfied
that President Kennedy was in the best position
to judge how to respond to the Soviet proposal. (Telegram 2149 from
Bonn; Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin)

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union177. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1

Washington, February 21, 1963, 10:28 a.m.

1771. Eyes only for Ambassadors and Lightner. In light of Chancellor's
attitude reported Bonn's 2149 repeated Moscow 2432 and weighing all
factors, we have concluded that, given our underlying assumption that
responsible governments must do all they can to keep open channels of
diplomatic communication on issues as potentially explosive as Berlin,
there is no sound alternative to resumption of talks, now that Soviets
have taken initiative.

During course of next meeting with Gromyko at which you will presumably have at least one
other subject to cover (wide diameter pipe), you should inform him along
following lines: 1) US Government has carefully considered statement
which Soviet Foreign Minister made during your meeting with him on
January 26;3 2) you have been instructed to advise him US
agrees to resumption bilateral exploratory talks on Berlin and Germany
to see whether basis for fruitful negotiations exists; 3) US will not
have mandate to speak for three occupying powers in Berlin; 4) we have
weighted considerations as to best location for talks and would prefer
that they be held in Washington. Since we assume from Gromyko's statement of January 26 that
this would be acceptable, we anticipate that Soviet Government will wish
to instruct Ambassador Dobrynin
accordingly.

In view of foregoing, believe you will wish to avoid any further
discussion of Berlin during meeting with Gromyko. If, however, he insists on making substantive
comments, you are sufficiently aware of US position to make appropriate
responses within your discretion. While we have not come to final
conclusions as to precise tactics which we will follow here, primary
objective of any resumed talks must obviously be to ascertain whether
Soviet position has in any way softened on vital question of continuing
Western troop presence. If Gromyko's remarks make this appropriate, you may wish to
comment along same lines as reported penultimate para of Moscow's 1764
of January 18,4 noting that, if
Soviets have any concrete suggestions to make, they should do so when
talks are resumed in Washington.

FYI. While we have considered fully case
for resumption of talks in Moscow, on balance we have concluded that
arguments in favor of Washington, with which you are familiar, seem
prevailing at this point. We will, of course, keep you fully informed of
all developments, and do not exclude later use of Moscow should this
prove desirable.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Priority. Drafted and initialed
by Hillenbrand on February
19; cleared by Thompson,
Tyler, Guthrie, and Bundy; and approved and initialed
by Rusk. Repeated to Bonn,
London, Paris, and Berlin.

2 See footnote 2, Document
176.

3 See Document
171.

4 Document 170.

178. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State178. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, February
21, 1963, 9 p.m.

908. Paris also for USRO; USAREUR and CINCEUR for POLADs; SHAPE
for US Element Live Oak and Stoessel. Berlintel 905.2 Reftel
reports Feb 21 Yakubovsky to Freeman message re helicopter flights over
East Berlin. This message received just as final steps taken in
preparation for periodic flight Feb 24 or first good weather thereafter
(last such flight Dec 19). Berlin brigade's plan proposed several days
ago approved Feb 21 by USCOB.

Yakubovsky letter now raises
issue whether flight should proceed on schedule. In considering
question, we have had following points in mind:

1) Letter appears fit into pattern of increased harassments by Soviets
and East Germans we have noted recently. Apparent increase in GDR harassment of Allied traffic at
Friedrichstrasse has been observed over past three months. Signs of
Soviet activity commenced second week in February with their handling of
minor train incident at Marienborn. Incident (dismounting of train
commander on side away from station) was minor in itself but Soviets
raised it with each successive train commander that night and ultimately
called meeting with US checkpoint commander. Similarly, very minor case
of mistaken identity at Helmstedt Autobahn checkpoint on Feb 16 also led
to Soviets calling similar meeting, even after incident was closed. At
this meeting, however, Soviets reraised train issue and proposed higher
level discussion be held “in Berlin” on that subject. Finally, on Feb
19, Soviet duty officer at Babelsberg Autobahn checkpoint asked for
minor change in our procedure for filling out movement orders and
threatened to deny passage to the next convoy if this not done (we are
protesting this behavior to checkpoint commander).

We are led to speculate that, having in a sense won their point on
Autobahn convoys of six and seven vehicles, and seeking exploit
aftermath of Cuba, Soviets may be renewing pressure at other points on
periphery of Allied position here. They may reason that we will be
reluctant contest their encroachments in atmosphere following Cuba and Soviet concessions there.
Evidence is only fragmentary and preliminary, but something does seem to
be afoot.

2) This is third letter on this subject between CINCs since Dec 26, 1962. It is not markedly more harsh in
tone than other Soviet communications on subject, including long series
of protests in BASC.

3) If we do not wish to abandon flights altogether, which would seem
particularly undesirable if analysis in para no. 1 above is correct,
best timing for another flight from purely political point of view would
be soon as possible, and prior any US reply to today's letter. After
this flight, reply could be sent and several weeks or more pass before
in normal course events next flight would be considered.

In light of these considerations it is present intention to proceed with
flight as planned on first good weather after Feb 23.3

Gen Polk concurs.

Lightner

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, AV 13 GER. Secret; Priority. Repeated to
Bonn, Paris, Moscow, London, USAREUR, CINCEUR,
and SHAPE.

2 Telegram 905, also dated February 21, transmitted
the text of a letter from Yakubovsky to Freeman that stated that Soviet military authorities
could not guarantee the safety of U.S. helicopter flights over East
Berlin and advised Freeman to stop them. (Ibid.)

3 On February 23, in a telegram approved by the White
House, the Department of State advised the Mission at Berlin to
postpone the next helicopter flight until February 27 to give
policymakers in Washington time to decide whether to reply to the
letter first. (Telegram 606 to Berlin; ibid.) On February 25
President Kennedy authorized making the next
flight before replying. (Memorandum for the Record, February 25;
Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany,
Berlin)

179. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State179. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, February
25, 1963, 8 p.m.

2094. Policy. Deptel 1771.2 At one-hour meeting
this afternoon with Gromyko I
made oral statement embodying points contained second para reftel, adding on personal basis that,
while in Washington, I had expressed opinion that we might now make
progress on problem of Germany/Berlin on basis mutual recognition each
other's interests. I trusted I would not be proved wrong.

Gromyko said he noted our
favorable reply to question of continuation talks. With regard my
supplementary remark, he said he wished to say that, in SovGovt's
opinion, if there were genuine desire on part USG and its Allies to reach agreement, then there would be
basis for understanding. He said Soviet proposals, as put forward in
exchange of views between US and USSR, are good basis for agreement. In
supporting these proposals, Soviets did so not simply because they were
their own proposals, but, and here he had in mind question of Western
troops in West Berlin, because Soviets believe they correspond to
interests of USSR, US, Britain, and France. He asked that USG assess these proposals objectively and
without bias, and said that Soviet proposals, including those which had
been put forward in conversations with and speeches of Chairman
Khrushchev, are designed to
facilitate agreement. He said he would report to Soviet Govt and to
Khrushchev on US answer on
resumption talks and we should evidently revert to this matter in near
future. Reports of discussions of pipeline, communications, test-ban,
Cuba, and Embassy building plans follow septels.3

Dept please repeat as desired.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Relayed to
the White House.

2 Document 177.

3 All dated February 25, telegrams 2095 and 2096
(Department of State, Central Files, STR 12–3 USSR) and 2097–2099
(ibid., DEF 18–3, BG 6 Moscow, and POL 27–5 USSR,
respectively).

180. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State Rusk180. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of
State Rusk1

Washington, March 7,
1963.

SUBJECT

Berlin negotiations

The timing of the Soviet proposal to reopen talks on Berlin is somewhat
curious, since there are many reasons which would favor a delay. The
following occurred to me as possible explanations of their motives:

1. Khrushchev may miscalculate
what his possibilities are of obtaining an agreement along the lines of
his statements to Ambassador Roberts and others involving a major U.N.
responsibility.

2. Khrushchev may have felt
compelled because of commitments made to Ulbricht and possibly others, to keep the question
alive.

3. The Soviets may simply intend to exploit known differences of opinion
between the Western Allies.

4. Khrushchev may have decided
that it would not be advisable and possible to reach a modus vivendi
satisfactory to both sides.

5. Khrushchev may have decided
that an agreement on Berlin which he could accept is hopeless, and that
the present round of talks is designed to prepare for a break following
which he would take some action such as signing a separate peace treaty,
but in a manner which would avoid a military confrontation.

On the assumption that at an early stage in the talks the Soviets will
put forward their “NATO flag” proposal,
I suggest that you should concentrate at first on bringing out the
“bugs” for us in any such scheme. You might probe hard on two points;
namely

1. The extent to which they envisage a real change in the status of our
forces and in giving the U.N. command responsibilities, and

2. The length of time they envisage for the arrangements proposed.

So long as they maintain an unacceptable position on these two points, I
suggest we should avoid getting drawn into any discussion of what kind
of U.N. presence we would accept. While I agree with the general line in
the IO paper,2 I
believe that for us to get drawn into a discussion of possible U.N.
arrangements in the absence of a Soviet willingness to be realistic
about points that are not negotiable for us would merely upset our
Allies to no good purpose, would tend to prolong the discussions, and
possibly mislead the Soviets into thinking that our position on these
matters was not as firm as it actually is. I suggest, however, that
without obtaining a Soviet backdown on these points we could, if they
are disposed to do so, discuss such matters as access arrangements.

In probing on the Soviet U.N. proposal, you might usefully explore, or
expose, what they have in mind and what their objectives are. You could
stress that Berlin is not a NATO base,
and ask them to explain why they consider it necessary to change the
status of our forces there. They have repeatedly stated that they have
no military value and that if war were to break out, the more we had
there, the better from their point of view, since they would all be
easily captured or destroyed. Until Germany is reunified, it can be argued that these troops would
be less likely to bring on a conflict than would be the case if East and
West German troops were facing each other alone.

In what way do they think their removal or weakening would contribute to
stability? It is not an answer to this question simply to state that
this would draw a line under World War II or would remove a NATO base. These troops cannot be used
offensively, and the Soviets know it. We cannot help but think that they
would like to have the Western presence in Berlin weakened in order that
the East Germans could bring pressure on the West Berlin population,
discourage them psychologically, and probably eventually arrange for a
complete take over. If asked why we consider it necessary to keep them
there, the answer might be in the first place to fulfill commitments we
have made and, in particular, to see that measures of force, under the
guise of strikes or other subterfuges are not employed to subvert or
overthrow the present setup in Berlin. By pressing the Soviets to say
what it is specifically in the present situation that disturbs them, you
may be able to show that what they are working toward is a setup in
which they, or the East Germans, could change these things
unilaterally—for example, RIAS
activities, etc.

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted and ini-tialed by
Thompson. Copies were
sent to Tyler, Hillenbrand, Guthrie, and Cleveland.

2 Presumably Thompson is referring to a 2-page
memorandum from Cleveland to Rusk, drafted on March 1, which summarized a longer
paper (attached) entitled “UN
Involvement in Berlin Settlement.” Cleveland's memorandum noted that
the paper had been discussed by Thompson, Tyler, Hillenbrand, and other interested officers in the
Department of State, and was now agreed. A copy of the memorandum is
attached to a March 5 memorandum from Klein to Bundy in the Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin.

181. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France181. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in France1

Washington, March 20, 1963, 10:05 p.m.

4447. Paris also for USRO, Stoessel,
McGuire. Thompson today informed
Ambassadorial Group of Semenov aide-m[moire to McSweeney on March
18,2 replying to US comments of February 25 on resumption
exploratory talks on Berlin.3 Text of aide-m[moire
pouched all addressees March 18. Dobrynin told Thompson yesterday that he had instructions. Because of
Secretary's absence and Dobrynin
trip to New York, talks will
probably be postponed until sometime next week. Dobrynin seemed in no hurry and
suggested that delay in receiving instructions had probably been due to
Gromyko absence in Scandinavia.

Ormsby Gore reported on Khrushchev-Trevelyan talk of March 6 in
which Khrushchev sought to
disabuse British of any notion that Sovs had forgotten Berlin.4 No
time limit on Berlin settlement mentioned. Khrushchev did refer to possibility that West Berlin's
communications could be “guaranteed internationally” reminding Trevelyan
that “bridges could rot and not be repaired for a year and half.”
Another reference to past was reminder of Soviet proposal in 1955 for
mutual checks on Western and Soviet troops in Germany. Khrushchev professed puzzlement at US
aims in Berlin talks, suggesting that domestic political needs were
foremost. In answer to Home's question Soldatov5 indicated “UN flag” in West Berlin meant Western troops under UN command.

British also reported Lord Home's
conversation of March 11 with Soldatov at latter's request. Home disclaimed any intention of
setting up parallel UK/Soviet talks on Berlin, but did suggest that Sovs
would have to propose something new if progress were to be expected.
Soldatov suggested that peace treaty with German states could lead to
progress on disarmament treaty, while Home countered that some progress on disarmament might
encourage solutions on other problems. Soldatov's aim seemed also to
remind West that Sovs had not shelved Berlin.

Germans reported on Groepper conversation with Khrushchev on March 9 which also had
nothing new. Khrushchev twice
mentioned that Sovs would agree to nothing which would be detrimental to
GDR. Khrushchev proposed peace treaty with two German states
in which West Berlin would become free city with guaranteed
communications, with non-interference guaranteed and with border of
German states fixed irrevocably. Signatories to peace treaty could
re-affirm their aim of reunification, but as reunification not possible
now, peace treaty could not wait.

For USRO: You may inform NAC of Soviet aide-m[moire, and possible
schedule for talks.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted by Holloway; cleared by Hillenbrand, Guthrie, and RPM; and approved and
initialed by Thompson. Also
sent to Bonn, London, Moscow, and Berlin.

2 In this 3-paragraph aide-m[moire,
given to Charg[ John McSweeney on March 18, the Soviet Union agreed
to continue the U.S.-Soviet exchange of views on Berlin, agreed to
conduct the talks in Washington, and stated that Dobrynin would be instructed
accordingly. (Telegram 2325 from Moscow, March 18; ibid., POL
US–USSR)

3 See Document 179.

4 On March 11 the Embassy in Moscow reported
that Sir Humphrey Trevelyan, the new British Ambassador, and Horst
Groepper, the new West German Ambassador, had briefed Kohler and the French Ambassador on
their meetings with Khrushchev, March 6 and 9, respectively. On Berlin
Khrushchev had reiterated
the Soviet position without suggesting a deadline, but had not
mentioned U.N. presence or Western forces in West Berlin. (Telegrams
2237 and 2240; Department of State, Central Files, POL 17–1 UK–USSR
and POL 17–1 W GER-USSR)

5  Alexandr Andreyevich Soldatov, Soviet Ambassador
to the United Kingdom.

182. Memorandum of Conversation182. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 26, 1963, 2:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

US

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Hillenbrand

USSR

Anatoliy F. Dobrynin,
Ambassador of USSR

Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counselor, Embassy

After an initial exchange of pleasantries, Ambassador Dobrynin read a prepared statement
along the following lines (translation from Russian text handed us
informally):

“In connection with the agreement reached with the Ambassador of the
United States in Moscow, Mr. Kohler, the Soviet Government has instructed me to
continue, taking into account the exchange of opinions which took place
in 1961 and 1962, the discussion of concrete questions in connection
with a German peace settlement and normalization of the situation in
West Berlin. For its part, the Soviet Government will strive to make the
discussion of these questions constructive. It would like to express the
hope that this attitude toward the matter will also be shown on the part
of the United States and that the exchange of opinions will be concluded
in the nearest future with the achievement of the agreement necessary in
the interests of strengthening peace and security in Europe.

“In the course of the earlier exchange of opinions the parties succeeded
in reaching definite results on well-known questions in connection with
a German peace settlement. There was also achieved definite mutual
understanding concerning the necessity for normalization on this basis
of the situation in West Berlin taking into account actually existing
conditions which came about on German territory as a result of the past
war.

“The main question on which it was not possible to overcome differences
is the question of the presence of foreign troops in West Berlin. The
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, N.S. Khrushchev, has pointed out
repeatedly that the Government of the USSR in principle is not against the presence
in West Berlin of troops of the three powers, if the Western powers
attach importance to this at the present time. However, the troops which
may be stationed in West Berlin for purposes of guarantees must be there
not under the NATO flag, but under the
UN flag. Their stay in West Berlin,
of course, must not be permanent. The occupation regime in this city has
outlived itself, and it must be liquidated. In order to impart a truly
international character to the guarantees for West Berlin it is
necessary, as the Soviet Government has emphasized many times, to
include in the composition of UN troops
in West Berlin also military units of certain other UN member states, according to an
appropriate agreement.

“The Soviet Government is convinced that this proposal is a good basis
for reaching an agreement on this most difficult and acute question.
Unfortunately, the Government of the USA still has not expressed its
attitude toward this proposal, and this proposal still has not been
subjected to concrete discussion.

“The Soviet Government, as in the past, maintains the opinion that the
most sensible solution of the question of the normalization of the
situation in West Berlin, and a solution which corresponds most to the
conditions of peace time, would be its transformation into an
independent political entity—a free, demilitarized city. Such a solution
would also take into account the wishes of the Western powers with
regard to freedom of access to West Berlin consonant with requisite
respect for the sovereignty of the GDR
and guarantee to the population of this city the right to decide by
itself questions of its social-economic system, to retain that way of
life which it most prefers.

“Naturally, we proceed from the fact that in appropriate form those
positive results will be realized which were achieved by the previous
exchange of opinions by the parties on the questions of: finalizing and
strengthening of the existing German borders; guarantee of free access
to West Berlin; respect for the sovereignty of the GDR; precluding the armament of the FRG and the GDR with nuclear weapons; conclusion of a non-aggression
pact between NATO and the Warsaw Treaty
organization.

“We hope that the resumption of the Soviet-American exchange of opinions
will be a step forward in the direction of a solution of the problem of
drawing a line under the Second World War, the fundamental improvement
of the situation in Europe and the consolidation of universal peace.

“An agreement on a German peace settlement and a normalization on this
basis of the situation in West Berlin would have great significance also
from the point of view of creating more favorable conditions for solving the problem of disarmament
and strengthening confidence between the USSR and the USA, as well as
among other states.

“We understand that, in such important international questions as the
question of a German peace settlement and normalization of the situation
in West Berlin, there are many aspects which have to be considered in
working out agreed decisions. But given the presence of good will and a
sincere desire for reaching agreement, without a doubt it would be
possible to overcome existing difficulties and to come to an agreement
which would take into account the interests of all parties.

“The Soviet Government anticipates that the results of the exchange of
opinions will be fruitful and, after they have been agreed upon by each
of the parties with its allies, arrangements can be made concerning the
manner and method for definitive formulation of agreement.”

The Secretary commented that, as far as we are concerned, we are prepared
to explore the present situation. Although Berlin is a subject which is
a vital matter to both sides, we thought it should not be allowed to
assume crisis proportions. Although there were some in the West who
questioned the value of these discussions, as far as the President was
concerned, we were willing to explore the subject further. It should be
no surprise that we do not accept the specific Soviet formula regarding
a peace settlement and the normalization of the Berlin situation on that
basis as an appropriate description for the exercise. We would describe
it in more general terms. We think there is a point in exploration, if
thereby the question can be reduced in size and importance. This does
not mean that the subject is less serious to us than before as a major
US responsibility. Ambassador Dobrynin was familiar with the inherent difficulties in
the problem.

The Secretary continued by asking whether, in Ambassador Dobrynin's judgment, there had not been
a reduction in the tensions surrounding Berlin during recent weeks and
months. There seemed to be somewhat less tension in the GDR and the
relations between the Germans themselves likewise seemed to be somewhat
less tense. We were interested in the agreement between the Federal
Republic and Poland for the establishment of trade offices as indicative
of a reduction of tension in the area. Ambassador Dobrynin said he could accept this
assessment but would not over-emphasize the easing of the situation.
Basically the situation was still an uneasy one since it was unbalanced
with the essential issues remaining unsolved. He said he would like to
explore with the US the Soviet proposals for the replacement of the
NATO flag in Berlin by the flag of
the United Nations. This exploration could take place in a concrete way,
on an item by item basis, either in connection with a Soviet proposal or
“in connection with your list.”

The Secretary asked whether Dobrynin had any further idea with respect to the UN involvement contemplated? Did he have any
further thoughts on this?

Ambassador Dobrynin said he was
prepared to discuss the question fully. How the Soviets felt about the
role of UN troops had been mentioned to
Ambassador Kohler on December 3,
1962 by Deputy Foreign Minister Semonev. What the Soviets propose is to
replace the troops presently in West Berlin with, say, a force made up
one half of troops of the three Western powers and the other half of
troops from other UN countries (perhaps
one or two neutral countries, one or two other NATO countries and one or two other Warsaw Pact countries).
These troops would stay there on the basis of a guarantee. But this
subject had never been discussed concretely. The Soviets had never
received a detailed reply on this issue. They wanted to start from the
point where the talks with the US had left off, that is to start with an
exploration of the last Soviet offer.

The Secretary observed that this proposal was one of several which the
Soviets have made over a period of time. Thus, for example, they had
started with the idea of Western and Soviet troops in West Berlin, then
introduced the idea of NATO-Warsaw Pact
troops, and then the UN had been brought into the picture. The
difficulty about these proposals, the Secretary continued, is that they
are unbalanced. They did not seem to show that element of reciprocality
which he had stressed before. A basic factor on the German scene since
the end of the war is that the Four Powers were to hold Berlin in trust
for the German people. It had been the capital of Germany and in all
likelihood would be again. The Four Powers were to hold it for this
purpose. To forget Berlin and to take only West Berlin destroyed this
basic idea. To dilute the Western forces worked against the security of
Berlin. When he had inquired, the Secretary noted, the Soviets had made
clear that they were referring only to West Berlin. This was the reason
why the discussions had not gone very far forward. It is difficult to
find a solution to the whole without thinking of the parts, but it is
also difficult to find a solution for the parts without reference to the
whole. The Soviets have left open the possibility of the Germans coming
together to discuss reunification. The Soviets have suggested one
procedure to achieve reunification, we another. In any event Berlin
belongs to the Germans. We have tried not to tear it out of context. If
there is to be a change, we have felt it should apply to Berlin as a
whole and an imbalance in proposals created a serious problem for
us.

We have not understood, the Secretary continued, what is “really in your
mind” on the point which the Soviets have made about the Western troops
in Berlin being NATO troops. In the
sense that the US is a member of NATO
they might be considered to be such. But the Berlin garrison has never been assigned to or
constituted a part of the NATO forces.
To think of West Berlin as a NATO base
is not realistic on either military or political grounds. If we were
looking for a NATO base, we wouldn't
put it in West Berlin. We wondered if there were something here which we
had not fully understood. Why was this NATO aspect of such concern to the Soviets? The presence of
NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in the Berlin area was, if anything, a
stabilizing factor. The Secretary said he did not think the Soviets
wanted a situation where the Four Powers did not share the
responsibility for a final settlement in Germany. We attached some
importance to the Four Power responsibility as a stabilizing element
pending a final settlement of the German question.

The Secretary went on to say that we had not replied in detail with
respect to a particular UN formula for reasons which he had mentioned.
Another way to test such a formula would be to put oneself in the
position of a West Berliner. What would he think of it?

At one point, the Secretary continued, Gromyko and he had been considering whether it would be
useful to talk further on the access problem and to see what might be
worked out on this subject. However, this broke down because it quickly
became a question of access to what. The Secretary said he did not know
if it would be useful to think of the access problem a bit. Today the
Ambassador and he were just exploring.

As an analogy, the Secretary observed, we thought it useful to complete
the nuclear test treaty even though we did not know the precise number
of inspections which could be agreed. An arrangement could be discussed
to protect our security interests as against Soviet interest in avoiding
espionage. We still thought it useful to complete the treaty text,
although there was still no agreement on the number of inspections. We
might likewise consider whether there was any point in talking about the
access problem. He did not, however, see quite how to take hold of this.
In the background there was always the problem of troops. The Soviets
have said that the presence of some Western troops is not an obstacle,
but the dilution of that presence, not on the basis of reciprocity and
for a limited time, makes this a real problem. The Soviets had proposed
a period of four years, for example. The Secretary said he did not know
a better way to undermine the confidence of the West Berlin population
than this.

Ambassador Dobrynin said he could
not accept what the Secretary had said about Four Power responsibility.
The fact is that West Germany, East Germany and West Berlin exist as
“separate states,” if one could use this term. After 17 years the
responsibility of the Four was not the same as in 1945. Their
responsibility then was to conclude a peace treaty with Germany. The
Soviets have nothing against reunification or against finding a formula
which would mention reunification. The Soviets would not oppose agreement between the
two Germanies on this subject.

As to access, Ambassador Dobrynin
continued, since the main point at issue was the troop question, that is
the question of access to whom, it would be easier to find a solution to
the access problem after the troop question was settled. The analogy
which the Secretary had drawn with the nuclear test discussions proved
just the opposite of what the Secretary had indicated. There was a need
to reach agreement on specific figures first, the nuclear test
discussions had shown. Therefore, the Soviets felt the troop question
was the most difficult and that the question was how to substitute the
UN flag for the NATO flag. The Soviets
were prepared to discuss this item by item. They were prepared to
continue discussions to find a way to an agreement. Their suggestion is
that the two sides begin with a more detailed discussion of the Soviet
proposal, item by item. Then they could take a look at the status of
West Berlin and discuss this item by item. The Soviets did not refuse to
discuss the access question but they thought that the two should begin
with the most difficult question: access to whose troops and the basis
of a change from NATO to the UN.

The Secretary said he considered the conversation today in the nature of
a preliminary exploratory talk. We had wanted to hear from Dobrynin the
basis on which Foreign Minister Gromyko had raised the Berlin question with Ambassador
Kohler. We would expect to go
over these matters again. Ambassador Dobrynin commented that the discussion was preliminary
to the preliminaries.

The Secretary noted that he was not talking about delay as such but he
could remember saying to Gromyko
at one point that time has a way of taking care of some of these
questions. He was not sure that there were not developments in Central
Europe, to which the Soviets presumably agreed and to which we had no
objections, which tended to take some of the danger from the situation.
For example, there was the agreement between Poland and the Federal
Republic to exchange trade missions. A few years ago, the Poles seemed
to have more concern about the Federal Republic than today in the light
of their present willingness to establish relations of this kind. The
Secretary asked what elements Dobrynin saw as imposing urgency in the present
situation. After all, there was nothing magical about 17 years.

Ambassador Dobrynin said the
recent agreement between Poland and the Federal Republic was perhaps a
hopeful but certainly an isolated sign. Such improved trade relations
were not tantamount to a real improvement in basic factors. Although he
did not want to raise this question now, he could only cite the famous
pipe example. Today the West Germans make an agreement with Poland;
tomorrow Adenauer might overturn
this agreement. There was no stability in the present situation. He could not agree that
everything was moving in one direction. Other developments were moving
in an unfavorable direction, for example with respect to
non-proliferation or the West German claim to have rights in West
Berlin. The question of a multilateral force was certainly not a hopeful
one. Delay could not be justified in the hope of improvement. The
situation might be even more complicated in a year or two. The Secretary
commented that he himself thought that the trend was not in an
unfavorable direction. Dobrynin
cited the growing influence of the Federal Republic in NATO as another unfavorable trend. He went
on to say that the unsettled question of Berlin affected relations
between the US and Soviet Union.

In response to the Secretary's query as to how he saw developments in
East Germany, Dobrynin said that
the GDR was more actively participating
in CEMA. It was joining other Eastern
European countries in increasing economic specialization.

The Secretary asked what the Soviet Government had in mind when it talked
of a limited time for any arrangement on Berlin. What happened
thereafter? Dobrynin said that
West Berlin would then become a free neutralized city with some UN presence and certain guarantees given by
“your country and my country.” The Soviet Union was prepared to give
guarantees. The UN headquarters could be
put near Mayor Brandt's office, if
this were desired. The limited time, therefore, referred to the Western
troop presence, the Secretary observed. Dobrynin noted that the time period was to be four years
in the Soviet proposal. The Soviets were prepared to discuss all of
this.

The Secretary said that perhaps we had better plan to sit down for a
systematic review of these points to see if there are any possibilities.
Dobrynin asked whether the US
would prepare a list. The Secretary observed that, as Dobrynin had gathered, the question of
Western troop presence is a fundamental point for us. We were
responsible for the security of West Berlin. He wanted to mention again
the importance of reciprocity. Ambassador Dobrynin suggested that they take item by item during
the next discussion. The Secretary assented and noted that our purpose
was to talk about anything reasonable. Both he and Ambassador Thompson stressed that this did not
mean acceptance of the presence of a UN
flag in West Berlin for a NATO flag
which was not there. The question of a UN flag for the Warsaw Pact flag
in East Berlin would also have to be discussed.

Ambassador Dobrynin commented that
the Secretary knew the Soviet position with respect to East Berlin. It
was a part of East Germany both practically and juridically. On the
other hand, from the Western viewpoint, West Berlin had a special status
and was never part of the Federal Republic. He was not instructed to discuss the situation in
East Berlin point by point. There was nothing new in this Soviet
position.

The Secretary observed that this is where the point of reciprocity came
in. The Soviets did not want to discuss those subjects about which they
had tied a string. Yet they did not have any responsibilities in West
Berlin which we did not have in East Berlin. Ambassador Dobrynin commented that the situation
was different. Ambassador Thompson noted that the situation was different because
we had kept it different. Dobrynin said that East Berlin was part of the GDR, and the Secretary pointed out that it
was a part of the city of Berlin. Dobrynin said that the Soviet Union did not oppose the
unification of Berlin as a capital of a reunited Germany. The Soviets
had nothing against reunification, though it was difficult to discuss
practical points as to how it could be achieved.

The Secretary said that, in the next talk, each should review the
position from his point of view. Acceptance of such a review would not
mean acceptance in principle of the other's position. They could spend
some time in a systematic review. Dobrynin suggested that, in order to begin with
something, they should start with the Soviet proposal.

The Secretary recalled that, from time to time, we had mentioned three
levels of discussion: a final settlement of the German question, a
factual solution and a modus vivendi. Did Ambassador Dobrynin see any remote possibility
that we could find a final solution to the German question, for example
along the lines of our 1959 proposals? Dobrynin said he did feel we
could reach some practical arrangement. The Secretary said both should
review the background of the talks and go over them systematically.

The Secretary and Ambassador Dobrynin agreed that, in response to press inquiries,
they would say merely that they had begun their exchange of views. If
queried as to whether any new proposals had been made, they would say
that this was just the beginning of talks and no papers had been
exchanged.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28
Berlin. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by
Hillenbrand and approved
in S on March 28. A summary of the
conversation was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 2294, March 27.
(Ibid.)

183. Memorandum of Conversation183. Memorandum of Conversation1

Paris, April 8,
1963, 5:30 p.m.

US/MC/5

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING Paris, April 8–10, 1963

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Bohlen

French

General De Gaulle

Mr. de La Grandville

SUBJECT

Berlin

The Secretary then said that on Berlin there was very little new to
report. This did not surprise him since he had always thought that there
would be a solution to the Berlin problem only if we offered one in the
shape of concessions to the Soviet Union. If we did not do this, there
would be no solution. He thought the thing for us to do was merely to
hold fast to our present diplomatic and military positions.

Although the Soviets had initiated the talks, they did not seem too
interested in pressing them. He had seen Dobrynin a week ago,2
who had nothing to offer beyond the repetition of the UN suggestion which they had made months
before—even before the October crisis. This suggestion involved the
placing of UN forces in Berlin along with
the Western troops for four or five years, after which time the city
would become the free, neutralized city about which the Soviets had been
speaking. This, needless to say, was totally unacceptable to us—both the
U.S. and its allies. The Soviets claimed that there had been no reply to
this proposal. The Secretary said he would be seeing Dobrynin again
following his return to make our negative position absolutely clear. He
repeated that the Soviets did not seem to be pressing the Berlin
question although this could change overnight. However, there were no
external signs of Soviet anxiety on this question.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Bohlen. The meeting was held at the
Elys[e Palace. The source text is labeled “Part III of V.”

2 See Document 182.

184. Memorandum of Conversation184. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 12, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

US

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Hillenbrand

USSR

Anatoly F. Dobrynin,
Ambassador of USSR

Georgi M. Kornienko,
Counselor, Embassy

The Secretary began by referring to certain language with which
Ambassador Dobrynin had opened
their previous meeting,2 specifically his
statement that “In the course of the earlier exchange of opinions the
parties succeeded in reaching definite results on well-known questions
in connection with a German peace settlement. There was also achieved
definite mutual understanding concerning the necessity for normalization
on this basis of the situation in West Berlin taking into account
actually existing conditions which came about on German territory as a
result of the past war.” This general language was a little hard to
read, the Secretary observed. He wanted to enter an early reservation so
that the Soviets would not think we had agreed to something to which we
had not agreed.

We would like to see the Berlin problem cleared up, the Secretary
continued. There was perhaps no other problem which was so disruptive of
relations between the two countries. In this connection the Secretary
referred to the continuous exchanges and the many incidents over Berlin.
As he had told Mikoyan
recently,3 he hoped the question could be
resolved by agreement and thus a crisis be avoided. This would be
possible if both sides would be willing to take account of the vital
interests of the other. As he had said before, the Secretary went on,
this taking into account of “actually existing conditions which came
about on German territory as a result of the past war” included our
position in Berlin. This also had to be taken into account.
Normalization does not apply only to Berlin but also to the division of Germany which has existed
since the end of the war.

The Secretary then referred to the remarks in Dobrynin's opening statement at their last meeting to
the effect that the Soviet Government proceeded “from the fact that in
appropriate form those positive results will be realized which were
achieved by the previous exchange of opinions by the parties on the
questions of: formalizing and strengthening of the existing German
borders; guarantee of free access to West Berlin; respect for the
sovereignty of the GDR; precluding the
armament of the FRG and the GDR with nuclear weapons; conclusion of a
non-aggression pact between the NATO
and the Warsaw Treaty organizations.” It was true, the Secretary said,
that, as indicated in the Statement of Principles which he had handed to
Gromyko in Geneva, we felt
that some real progress had been made on these points. But we did want
to note some possibility of misunderstanding. We want it to be
understood that these are subjects which would require discussion before
any agreement could be reached.

With reference to “respect for the sovereignty of the GDR”, the Secretary noted that he had
previously said that we did not see how a satisfactory arrangement on
access need interfere with GDR sovereignty. The two could be mutually
non-interfering in character. Access to Berlin need not involve
interference with or intrusion into East German affairs. The Secretary
said he had pointed out that many States by agreeing to transit rights
over them do so without interfering with their sovereignty, for example
in the case of aircraft overflights. We would not want to leave the
implication, however, that we are talking about the political question
of recognizing GDR sovereignty. We
understand that there is such a place as East Germany and we do not act
as if we did not understand this. But that is another matter.

At this point the Secretary began a lengthy discussion of nuclear
nonproliferation (covered in a separate memorandum of conversation).
During the course of this, Dobrynin came back to the Secretary's remarks on his
Berlin statement made at the previous meeting.4 He said that he wanted to clarify the Soviet
reference to “positive results” point by point. As to borders, his
government proceeded from the assumption that there was a sort of
understanding between the Secretary and Gromyko and the President and Gromyko on this subject.
The Secretary asked whether the Soviet language was intended to apply to
the borders of Germany as a whole. Dobrynin answered in the affirmative. Ambassador
Thompson's remark that the
word “formalizing” was broad in its meaning led to a brief discussion whether this was the
best translation from the Russian. The Embassy had apparently translated
the key word as “fixing” rather than “formalizing”. In response to the
Secretary's query whether the Soviets were also referring to the
demarcation line between East and West Germany, Dobrynin said that the Soviets were
aware that the United States did not recognize the GDR but this demarcation line was a border.
He assumed that the Secretary did not wish to add anything new to what
he had discussed with Gromyko. The Secretary said there was no change in
the conversation from our side but we did not want this to be understood
as anything like formalizing or that we considered it would lead to
formalizing. The Secretary noted that we had talked of a parallel
arrangement. The three Western powers would agree with the Soviet Union
on access. The Soviets would speak to the East Germans and this would
take care of GDR sovereignty. This would
be non-interference. Dobrynin
commented that the Secretary knew the Soviet position; it was not a
question of formal recognition.

The Secretary observed that he had also said that, if the central
question of our vital interests were solved, he saw no difficulty in
these other questions falling into place. He wanted to point out that
various aspects of these matters were not agreed, though there had been
some progress or movement. Dobrynin commented that this is why the Soviets had used
the expression “positive results”. The Secretary noted that the Soviet
Ambassador in Paris had said that the Soviet Union and the United States
had reached agreement.5 That
was why the Secretary felt that he had to say that we had not reached
agreement. Our Allies had come to us and said that we should show them
the agreement. We did not want any general formula to conceal a
misunderstanding as to what had actually been said on these various
points. Dobrynin agreed there had
been no formal agreement but merely what the Soviet language stated.

Returning to the first quotation from the Soviet statement which he had
noted, the Secretary pointed out that this was nothing but the same old
Soviet formula which turned up everywhere. Dobrynin said that the subject had been discussed many
months. The Secretary responded that no agreement had yet been found
that fitted this language. Dobrynin said that the language merely
described the situation. The Secretary observed that the Soviet
reference to “actually existing conditions” was undermined in the next
paragraph directed against the presence of foreign troops in West
Berlin. Dobrynin commented that
he did not see anything new here.

At this point the discussion of nuclear non-proliferation resumed.

Just before the end of the meeting, Dobrynin asked about future discussions on Berlin. How
did the Secretary feel about an exchange of views on the troop question
and related matters. The Secretary responded that these could be
discussed in the near future. On the troop issue, he might say that
difficult questions for us were involved in dealing with this issue
solely in terms of West Berlin, substituting a UN flag for the NATO flag,
diluting our forces in West Berlin, or the limited time period involved.
How could we consider that our vital interests were met thereby?
Dobrynin suggested that they
go through the subjects point by point and that the Secretary say what
was wrong with the Soviet proposals.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28
Berlin. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted and initialed by
Hillenbrand and approved
in S on April 18. Rusk and Dobrynin also discussed nuclear non-proliferation
and Laos. Memoranda of these parts of the conversation are ibid.,
Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

2 See Document 182.

3 See Document 158.

4 A typed notation on the source text indicates that
the text of this paragraph from this point through the sentence
ending “would lead to formalizing” was classified Secret;
Noforn.

5 See footnote 1, Document 168.

185. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany185. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, April 13,
1963.

2484. Please deliver following personal and confidential message from
Secretary to FonMinSchroeder at earliest appropriate
opportunity:

“I feel I must tell you that a Bundestag session in Berlin at this
time,2 with all the attendant difficulties and
frictions which this would generate, might well give rise to a situation
which could compromise the possibility of the President visiting Berlin
in the course of his forthcoming trip to Europe. I am sure that such a
course of events would run counter to your wishes in the matter as well
as to our own. I am therefore looking to you and your colleagues to use
your influence in every appropriate way to help bring about a
satisfactory resolution of this matter.

I anticipate that the three allied governments responsible for Berlin
will be in touch with you shortly on this point.”3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret;
Priority; Eyes Only. The time of transmission is illegible.

2 On April 6 a German Foreign
Ministry representative had stated in the Bonn Quadripartite Group
that the President of the Bundestag intended to call a plenary
meeting of that body in Berlin May 20–22. (Telegram 2685 from Bonn,
April 8; ibid., POL 15–2 W GER)

3 On April 19 the three Western powers presented
identical aides-m[moire to the German Foreign Ministry expressing
their “serious reservations” about holding a Bundestag meeting in
Berlin. (Telegram 2799 from Bonn, April 19; ibid.)

186. Memorandum of Conversation186. Memorandum of Conversation1

Moscow, April
26, 1963, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Nuclear Test Ban and Germany

PARTICIPANTS

USSR

N. S. Khrushchev

Andrei Gromyko

S. G. Lapin

Viktor
Sukhodrev—translator

US

Under Secretary W. Averell Harriman

Ambassador Foy D. Kohler

Mr. Michael V. Forrestal

Mr. William H. Sullivan

In response to Khrushchev's
request for Harriman's “advice”, the Governor suggested that the USSR
come to an agreement on a nuclear test ban. This would enable them to
devote more of their resources to civilian production. He assured Mr.
Khrushchev that the President
wanted this very much.

Mr. Khrushchev replied soberly
that the Soviets have been thinking about this for some time and they
want it too. He added that they are now preparing their position and the
President could expect an answer in the near future. He said, however,
that the Soviets attach greater importance to the German question,
although he was not saying these two subjects were linked.2 Harriman asked what aspect of the German
situation: Berlin or an independent nuclear capability for the
Germans.

Khrushchev said that the Soviets
want a normalization of Europe. The Americans should free themselves of
Adenauer's influence. The
socialist countries have gained more in Berlin from the wall than they
would have gained by a peace treaty, which would have provided that no
wall could be built. “Berlin is no longer a source of any trouble.” He
said they raised the German question only because a settlement there
would contribute to the alleviation of tensions. The Soviets seek no
advantages in that country. If there were a German peace treaty nothing
would change; the only result would be that the current situation
involving two Germanies would be legitimized.

Harriman said that since the Soviets were satisfied with the current
situation in Berlin, why do they not wish to get on with other important
things such as a test ban agreement? Khrushchev replied: “We'll sign one right away, but,
with no espionage inspections, ever.”

Harriman said he wished to raise one aspect of nuclear proliferation
which concerned him and, he assumed, was of concern to Chairman
Khrushchev. He said Khrushchev had expressed his worry
about the Germans. Why hadn't he said anything about the Chinese and the
possibility that they may have nuclear weapons in the near future.
Khrushchev suggested Harriman take that up with the Chinese. The Soviets
and the United States could talk about Germany because we were mutual
victors in the war against Germany, but China was one of the Soviet's
allies and Harriman should treat them as equals. Harriman said he had
personally wanted to go to talk with the Chinese a few years ago but
that Mikoyan would not cooperate. Khrushchev replied that Mikoyan was not the Foreign Minister of China and could
not get Harriman into China.

In response to Governor Harriman's invitation to luncheon the Chairman
regretted that he would be especially busy for the next two days and
would not have time. He stressed that he and his colleagues regard Mr.
Harriman with the highest esteem and would like to return our relations
to the state they were in during the period when Mr. Harriman was
Ambassador. He proposed: “I will give my word that I will find a basis
for a test ban agreeable to both sides provided you agree to work out
the basis of a German settlement which would recognize the two Germanies
as they now exist”.

Harriman replied he could not buy a “pig-in-a-poke”. The United States is
always ready to talk about both the test ban and about the German
settlement. Khrushchev remarked
with a smile that Harriman was an old diplomat who knew how to talk
without saying anything. He asked the Governor to convey his best wishes
to the President and his family, and to tell the President that he
wanted to continue to cooperate with the United States in finding
reasonable language and in the search for a solution to all the world's
problems. In closing, he also asked the Governor to convey his best
regards to Secretary Rusk.

Governor Harriman thanked the Chairman for these words and said he would
convey them to the President and the Secretary.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–8.
The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved
in M on May 6. The source text is labeled “Part IV of IV.” The
meeting was held in Khrushchev's office in the Kremlin. Harriman was in
Moscow for talks on Laos.

2 In the telegraphic summary of this conversation a
parenthetical notation states “(Although, in fact, he linked them
twice).” (Telegram 2771 from Moscow, April 28; ibid., POL 7
US/Harriman)

187. Editorial Note187. Editorial Note

In a letter to President Kennedy on April 29,
Chairman Khrushchev reviewed the
state of U.S.-Soviet relations. In a paragraph near the end of the
letter he wrote: “I agree with you that we have before us also other
questions and problems aside from those mentioned in your message. In
the first instance I would mention the conclusion of a German peace
treaty and normalization of the situation in West Berlin on that basis.
The solution of this problem, and given mutual desire that is not now
such a difficult matter, would undoubtedly bear the greatest returns
both from the standpoint of the interest of consolidating peace and for
a serious improvement in Soviet-American relations. As long as the
remnants of the Second World War, which constantly make themselves
known, continue to exist, then both you and we will be forced to devote
ever greater funds to armaments, that is to increasing our ability to
destroy each other. And understandably in such a situation it is
difficult to count on agreement on disarmament, which requires above all
faith and still more faith for its attainment. Therefore, if one
realistically evaluates the situation, one cannot but come to the
conclusion that the conclusion of a German peace treaty would create
better conditions also for the resolution of the question of questions
of the modern day—universal and complete disarmament.” (Department of
State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163)

The full text of this letter is printed in volume VI.

188. Editorial Note188. Editorial Note

After presenting his credentials to President Luebke on May 18, the new
Ambassador to Germany, George C.
McGhee, paid his first official call on Chancellor
Adenauer on May 20. The
conversation lasted 2–1/2 hours and was devoted almost entirely to
arrangements for President Kennedy's June 23–26
visit to Germany. McGhee
reported on this meeting in telegram 3129 from Bonn, May 21 (Department
of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy) and in
two memoranda of conversation attached to airgram 2165 from Bonn, May
22. (Ibid.) For a detailed report based on the latter, see An
Ambassador's Account, pages 26–31.

189. Memorandum of Conversation189. Memorandum of Conversation1

Ottawa, May 21,
1963, 8 p.m.

US/MC/10

UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-FIRST MINISTERIAL
MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL

Ottawa, Canada, May 22–24, 1963

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Butterworth

Mr. Tyler

Mr. Cash

Germany

Foreign Minister Schroeder

Herr Krapf

Ambassador Grewe

Herr Kusterer

United Kingdom

Foreign Secretary Home

Defense Minister Thorneycroft

Lord Hood

Mr. Thomson

France

Foreign Minister Couve de
Murville

M. Lucet

M. Gillet

M. Lebel

SUBJECT

Berlin and Germany

The Secretary opened with an account of his May 18 discussion with Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin.2 The latter's principal effort
was to get across the idea that this is a crucial time of policy
re-examination in Moscow, during which it is exceedingly important to
find some point on which the Soviets can reach some agreement with the
West. The discussion covered nuclear testing, nonproliferation of
nuclear weapons, Laos, Cuba, and a glancing reference to Berlin. For
some strange reason, even though the Soviets asked for the talks on
Berlin, they are not pressing them. Dobrynin even said that US–USSR agreement on civil air
transportation would be psychologically important during this particular
period.

The Ambassador concentrated hard on the Soviets' NATO-Warsaw Pact Nonaggression Pact (NAP) proposal. He agreed it would be of little practical significance,
but it would do no harm and would show some people in Moscow that
East-West agreement on something was possible. He indicated more than
once that the NAP form was not important, and that the problem of
nonrecognition could be discussed. The Secretary had replied that while
this was not an easy problem, he did not think the NATO nations were completely negative on
this matter. However, all of them had bad memories of the Kellogg-Briand
pact. If NATO agreed to an NAP, and a Berlin crisis broke out
subsequently, NATO would look extremely
foolish. The complete lack of progress on substantive issues outstanding
between the Soviets and the West makes an NAP hardly worth while. Dobrynin responded that he could understand this, but an
agreement—even though of no practical significance—would greatly
diminish the prospect of a Berlin crisis. He did not seem particularly
interested in the Berlin talks as such but emphasized the importance of
reaching agreement on any point—especially an NAP.

The Secretary told the Foreign Ministers that it might be worth while
looking at this matter against the background of what seems to be going
on in Moscow. It appears that the Soviets are going through a period of
reappraisal. They have suffered serious political losses in expensive
areas such as Iraq and Indonesia, and it is possible that a dangerous
situation may develop. The time between now and July, when the talks
with the Chinese begin, is very important, and it would be worth our
while to spend some time examining what is going on in the Kremlin.

Lord Home agreed that there was a
thorough re-examination going on in Moscow. He recalled that Gromyko had seemed interested last fall
when the Foreign Secretary had mentioned the possibility of an NAP. One could not tell, however, whether
anything sufficiently worth while could be developed.

The Secretary said that as he recalled the NAP draft the Soviets presented in Geneva,3 it called for ratification in each particular
country. He supposed, however, that ratification could be avoided by
letters from the respective Secretaries General denouncing aggression
and calling for the settlement of all disputes by peaceful means. It is
just possible that this would be of interest to the Soviets. The US
Government has reached no conclusions. We have been skeptical since
1945. However, Dobrynin left the
impression that this might be a good time for the Soviets to have
something to point to in the way of an agreement with the West which
would be of psychological, rather than practical, importance. We have, of course, during the
last two years of talks on Berlin thought of an NAP as the end of the trail rather than the beginning.

Couve remarked that as the
Soviets don't seem particularly interested in discussing Berlin, this
problem is more or less liquidated.

Lord Home asked whether an NAP wouldn't make it easier for the Soviets
to leave Berlin alone.

Couve commented that an NAP might very well lead to recognition of the East German
regime.

The Secretary replied that Dobrynin seemed to be saying that nonrecognition would
not be an obstacle. At this point the Secretary read some excerpts from
the NAP text the Soviets submitted in
Geneva on February 20, 1963, and circulated a copy. He remarked that the
formalities could be discounted. An NAP
might be in the form of simultaneous declarations from each side with no
direct connection.

Schroeder said he felt the Soviets
were seeking something which would to some extent cement the status quo.
Even without a peace treaty and recognition of the East German regime,
an NAP would go far toward stabilizing
the status quo. An NAP is very important
to the Soviets as proven by their bringing it into the Geneva
discussions. Such a pact should be the end of a chain of events, not the
beginning. Khrushchev,
incidentally, thinks he invented the NAP in Geneva in 1955 and therefore
has a special interest in it.

Lord Home asked what sort of
declarations of nonaggressive intent could be made by NATO which would go further than what has
already been done.

The Secretary read the operative portions of the Soviet NAP draft of February 20 as a possible
example.

Schroeder remarked that for the
first time this would get the basic conflict out of a Four Power context
into somewhat of a UN context.

The Secretary interjected at this point that he was this evening engaging
in a discussion with colleagues and not in an official expression of US
policy.

He added that during the last six months there had been a number of
encouraging significant developments among the satellites, e.g. Poland,
Hungary, Bulgaria, and Rumania.

He would speculate that the Communist system has an inevitable great
crisis to face when it must choose between pressing, or abandoning,
world revolution. In October Khrushchev removed his missiles from Cuba on the pretext
that he had obtained from us a guarantee that we would not invade Cuba,
which we had no intention of doing anyway. He might be grasping at
fairly slender straws.

Couve said an NAP might be useful to the Soviets even
though appearing insignificant. It would be a very important move and
would be considered by many as
the beginning of a d[tente. This did not mean that it was inappropriate.
It might even be appropriate.

The Secretary said the recognition problem could be forgotten for the
moment. We had previously rejected an NAP to avoid putting NATO
and the Warsaw Pact on an equal footing. Pressing the status quo could
be a serious matter if it implied acceptance of the division of Germany.
However, we should give the NAP a fresh
look against the background of Moscow's problems.

Lord Home commented that one
problem would obviously be to avoid recognition of East Germany, but he
did not see how one could bring about a d[tente with the Soviets—if the
Russians want one—without giving serious consideration to something like
an NAP.

Schroeder remarked that a few
years ago he, himself, supported ideas like an NAP. He had felt that if it were important to the Soviets
and unimportant to the West, it should be undertaken. But today the
situation is different. An NAP would now
seem like the end of an epoch. The psychological effect would be that
concepts such as self-determination and reunification would appear to be
buried. It would be better to continue the relative tension that exists
today rather than pay the price for a d[tente which would be no real
d[tente because no problem would have been solved.

The Secretary asked about the current NATO consideration of a possible NAP.

Grewe said consideration of a
POLAD report on this subject was
interrupted by the current meeting in Ottawa but would soon be
resumed.4

The Secretary said it might be well for the Ambassadorial Group to study
this problem before NATO froze it one
way or the other. He was not prepared to give a firm view of the US
Government, which has been very skeptical about an NAP, but in view of Dobrynin's remarks and what is probably
going on in Moscow, we should not fail to examine the problem.

Lord Home asked if Dobrynin had given the impression that
an NAP would make it easier for the
Soviets to leave Berlin alone.

The Secretary said the Ambassador had not put it that way but had said it
would make a Berlin crisis far less likely. We can't simply brush this
aside.

Lord Home asked how contact would
be maintained with the Soviets on this subject.

The Secretary said either side could make the next move. No specific
arrangement was made to pursue this topic. It is likely that the Soviets
will revert to this before
their talks with the Chinese now slated to begin on July 5. We should be
ready with an answer.

Couve said the real issue was
what was in the best interests of the West—not of the USSR. The two are
not necessarily identical.

The Secretary said the Ambassadorial Group should be asked to pull
together as much information as possible concerning what is going on in
the Bloc with the changes in military command, the Kozlov illness, the
Rumanian refusal to accept its assigned role in the economic plans, etc.
We don't have a really good idea of what has happened since October
22.

Krapf asked if an NAP was the cheapest
concession that could be made to the Soviets.

The Secretary said Dobrynin had
mentioned the civil air agreement, which seems to be of some importance
to the Soviets, although Khrushchev is not particularly interested. They have
made some gestures concerning outer space, and have even hinted that
maybe the US and the USSR should combine their efforts to put men on the
moon.

They do not seem, he continued, to be really interested in talking about
Berlin. Dobrynin has offered
nothing new in the two talks that have taken place in the current
series, and he did not devote half-a-dozen sentences to the subject on
May 18.

Couve said it is certainly not in
the Western interest to stop a move toward a d[tente if there is a
possibility for one.

The Secretary asked about the current status of the IZT talks.

Schroeder said first he would like
to point out that the Soviets' concept of a d[tente was to obtain
acceptance of a situation they have created.

As to the IZT talks, no progress has been
made because the East Germans have refused to discuss all political
concessions.

Some progress has been made with Poland, Hungary, and Rumania, but the
Soviets permit this because it helps the economic development of these
countries and lightens the burden on the Soviet Union. The West Germans
are anxious to keep these Eastern European contacts open. The two most
difficult problems are the inclusion of Berlin in agreements with
Eastern European countries and the problem of diplomatic relations.

Lord Home suggested that this
might be discussed in the Ambassadorial Group.

Schroeder added that Khrushchev is realizing that the Bloc
countries, and even the Soviet Zone of Germany, are becoming
increasingly difficult to control.

The Secretary reiterated the need for a fundamental reassessment, under
the guidance of the Ambassadorial Group, of our intelligence on the
Soviet Union.

Schroeder stressed the importance
of contingency planning—keeping it up to date and carrying it forward
especially in: 1) the protection of civilian traffic; 2) passports and
visas; and 3) economic countermeasures.

Lord Home returned to the NAP saying that since the Russians might
want a reply by July, it would be well to be armed with parallel
declarations.

The Secretary suggested that the Ambassadorial Group examine alternate
forms for an NAP.

Grewe reminded the Ministers that
the NAP was still being discussed in Paris and Geneva. It will be
difficult, he added, to continue to refuse to discuss it substantively
in the Geneva ENDC.

The Secretary agreed that the whole NAP
subject, including the Geneva and Paris aspects, should be studied
promptly.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2263. Secret. Drafted by Cash and approved in S
on May 28. The meeting was held at the U.S. Embassy.

2 The memorandum of this conversation, which took
place on board the Patrick J, has only a passing reference to
Berlin. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Chron) At a private dinner
on May 17 Dobrynin had asked
Thompson why the United
States opposed the Soviet proposals on Berlin. Thompson had replied that they
would adversely affect the Allies' position in Berlin and have a
“disastrous” effect on the West's commitment to West Berliners and
Germans generally. (Tosec 3 to Ottawa, May 20; ibid., Conference
Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2265)

3 Dated February 20, U.N. doc. ENDC/77; printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp.
388–389.

4 Not further identified.

190. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State190. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, May 22,
1963, 6 p.m.

2957. Zorin asked me call on him
at MFA at noon and made following oral
statement.

Begin text. In connection with trip of President USA to Europe, including
West Berlin, scheduled for June, Chancellor Adenauer has declared that he, as head of government of
FRG, together with other West German leaders, intends to accompany
President Kennedy officially on his trip to West
Berlin. According to available information, Adenauer intends to meet President in West Berlin and
remain there during his visit.

It is as yet difficult for us to judge whether these plans of Adenauer are supported by White House.
It is however completely obvious that these plans of FRG
Chancellor bear an openly provocative character. They are clearly
directed toward aggravating situation and creating additional
difficulties for resolution of important international question, on
which Soviet-American exchange of views has now been resumed. Moreover,
everyone knows—and this has repeatedly been confirmed by USA—that West
Berlin is not part of FRG. End text.

I told Zorin I should report this
to my government and give him official reply upon its instructions. On
basis my familiarity with question, however, I wished point out that
much of US-Soviet discussion Berlin had centered precisely around
question free movement persons between West Germany and West Berlin. I
could see nothing in such movements that could be described as
“provocative”. There had been many meetings in East Berlin at which
Soviet leaders had been present together with Ulbricht. Both of us had
the same responsibilities in this matter for all of Berlin. I therefore
could not see how Chancellor's travel to West Berlin could be called
“provocative”. Nor did I see how it could be regarded as prejudicial to
US-Soviet talks.

Zorin said: First, this was not a
question of simple movement of persons. Adenauer was not just West German citizen with ordinary
passport, but head of FRG Government,
which had nothing to do with West Berlin. Consequently, these two
aspects of matter could not be put on same plane. Second, it was
altogether different situation when Khrushchev was there with Ulbricht. East Berlin is part, and capital, of GDR and no one had ever disputed this. On
other hand, West Berlin not part of FRG;
even US admits that. Consequently, these two things can't be put on same
plane: It was not unlawful for Khrushchev to be in East Berlin, whereas Adenauer had nothing to do with West
Berlin. Thirdly, I had said there was nothing provocative in this, but
Soviets considered this kind of step as not directed toward facilitating
US-Soviet talks, but rather toward hindering them. Our points of view on
this are different, but first two points he had put were purely factual
ones.

I responded by agreeing there was difference between situations in East
and West Berlin, but this was because Soviet action had made them
different. However, I did not propose that he and I should take over
discussions of Germany and Berlin already started by Secretary and
Dobrynin. I should bring his
representation to attention of my government and report his additional
remarks.

Comment: Perhaps emboldened by reports of Franco-British-US attitude
toward Bundestag meeting in Berlin, Soviets appear intent on trying a
little splitting maneuver on US and FRG.
(FRG Embassy, which we have informed
of approach, tells us they have not as yet received any representation
on subject.)

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret;
Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Berlin and Bonn.

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union191. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1

Washington, May
25, 1963, 12:37 p.m.

2551. Moscow's 2957.2 Concur in line you
took with Zorin re Adenauer
presence in Berlin. Request you inform Zorin we are surprised that Soviets would wish raise at
this juncture propriety of Chancellor Adenauer's being in West Berlin at time of President's
visit and that we do not see how this could be considered in any way
“provocative” or as prejudicial to US-Soviet talks.

Believe you should also, in interest setting record straight, take direct
issue with Zorin's statement to
you that East Berlin is “part of GDR and
no one had ever disputed this.” You could recall to him in this
connection following passage in Embassy's note to Soviet FonOff of August 17, 1961:3 “It (US Govt) reiterates that it does
not accept the pretension that the Soviet Sector of Berlin forms a part
of the so-called ‘German Democratic Republic’ and that Berlin is
situated on its territory. Such a pretension is in itself a violation of
the solemnly pledged word of the USSR in the agreement on the Zones of
Occupation in Germany and the administration of Greater Berlin.”
Identical notes were sent by UK and France. You should stress that this
has always been and still remains our clear position on this issue.

FYI. German Embassy here has made
inquiries of Dept re our attitude toward Zorin d[marche, which FRG Embassy Moscow had already reported. We are informing
Germans here of tenor above instructions to you.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted
by Creel on May 24; cleared
by Penberthy, Davis, Bundy (in substance), and Guthrie and Thompson (in draft); and approved
by Tyler. Repeated to Berlin
and Bonn.

2 Document 190.

3 For text of this note, see Documents on Germany,
1944–1985, pp. 777–778.

192. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State192. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, May 27,
1963, 10 p.m.

2996. Deptel 2551.2 In forty-five minute
meeting today, I made oral statement to Zorin as per reftel.

Replying, Zorin referred to first
part my statement (expressing USG's
surprise at Sov representation) and said US did not answer May 22
statement and apparently did not wish to answer it. US did not wish to
admit that Adenauer presence West
Berlin while President there could not be viewed as factor contributing
to Sov-US exchange of views and to lessening of international tension,
both between US and USSR and with regard to situation in Europe. He said
he could not view our “surprise” as justified. When Adenauer decided to visit West Berlin
during President's visit there, he understood full well this would serve
to sharpen tensions between US and USSR. If US finds Sov statement
surprising, this means US doesn't recognize importance of such step. He
could therefore only regret that statement had not been accepted and
express Soviet concern on that account.

With regard portion of statement setting record straight on East Berlin,
Zorin said this did not
relate to his oral statement, but to comment he had made on my
commentary on statement. He did not want to polemicize about it, but
could only conclude from it that we agreed with what he had said about
West Berlin's not being part of FRG since we did not dispute that part
of his statement. In that case, what business did Chancellor of FRG have there, what connection was there
between his visit and that of President? This confirmed that his
statement had been well-founded.

So far as what I had said about East Berlin was concerned, Zorin said he could not agree. US and
its closest allies might think this, but whole rest of world regarded
East Berlin as capital GDR, since
government of that country is located there. But this point was in
dispute and we could not settle it here.

I said I agreed that it was first part of our statement which responded
to theirs, but that my government had wanted to set the record straight
with the second part so as not to leave him under any impression that we
agreed with his remark on status of East Berlin.

I said I wished, too, to straighten out any inference he appeared to be
drawing in his statement, and still seemed to be drawing, that there
might be different points of view between USG and FRG on Adenauer trip. Such implications had
been made in Sov press, as well, most recently in Izvestiya May 25
article by M. Mikhailov. I then read him brief statement from May 9
Wireless Bulletin to effect President always assumed Chancellor would be
with him in Berlin.

I said I might comment a little further on his statement that West Berlin
is not part of FRG. This point had in a
sense been answered by second part of my statement. Fact is that, by
Four-Power agreement, all of us had agreed that all of Berlin should
have Four-Power status. Within limits of possibilities, USG had remained faithful to that
agreement, while USSR had made East Berlin a separate part. In these
circumstances, closest possible ties and working conditions had
developed between West Berlin and FRG.
Not whole rest of world, but USSR and its close friends, may believe
East Berlin is part of GDR. This is,
however, one of important points at issue between us.

Zorin broke in here to ask if I
were saying West Berlin was part of FRG.

I said I was not, but was saying all of us had agreed Berlin should be
kept together as the capital of a future reunited Germany.

Zorin said it had not been they,
but the US, which first created a self-sufficient West Berlin. Not the
USSR, but the US, had created the FRG before the GDR had been created. Not the USSR, but the [omission—US?],
had first violated the Four-Power status of Berlin. Four-Power
agreements on Berlin had no juridical force today and this was result
solely of unilateral Western actions. It was not to advantage of US to
look for the guilty ones, since historical facts were not on side of US.
He could therefore confirm from second part of my statement that US does
not consider West Berlin a part of FRG.
Thus, burden of his May 22 statement remains justified. Why should
Chancellor Adanauer be in West Berlin together with President? This
decision had been dictated by political considerations and was not
directed toward reducing tensions, but only towards aggravating them.
That had been whole point of their statement: To warn US about political
consequences of this step.

I said I must take issue with a couple of his remarks, since we differed
on some of facts involved. Fact is that Sov side had walked out of
Berlin Kommandatura in 1948 and had instituted blockade. Allied
Kommandatura, now continuing as tripartite organ, had suspended
provision of FRG Constitution making
Berlin Land of FRG.

But West Berlin must live and, with Allied sanction, has developed close
political, economic, financial, and cultural ties with FRG. Even Chairman Khrushchev has publicly recognized West
Berlin and West Germany have
same political system. We think it quite natural Chancellor should be in
West Berlin when President is there.

I said I trusted I had not heard correctly about our agreements on West
Berlin. I assumed Bolz-Zorin
agreement, with which he was certainly familiar, was still in force.

Zorin said it was clear he could
argue endlessly with me on subject. I agreed and repeated we did not
want to assume work of Secretary and Amb Dobrynin.

Zorin said I had forgotten about
separate currency reform in West Berlin, which had been put through long
before blockade. It was that which had led to division of Berlin and
Germany.

I said we differed on history, but I hoped he would consider seriously
our position that we could see nothing provocative or
tension-heightening in Chancellor's accompanying President to West
Berlin.

Rising, Zorin said they could not
agree with us on this and must maintain the view expressed in the May 22
statement.

Comment: Zorin nodded to my
statement about Bolz-Zorin
agreement but did not specifically comment. By his reasoning, appears we
can take his failure to respond as agreement that it remains in
force.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Limit
Distribution. Repeated to Bonn and Berlin.

2 Document 191.

193. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany193. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, June
14, 1963, 7:34 p.m.

3151. Paris also pass USRO. Reference:
Bonn 3434 and 3435 and Berlin 1230.2 Subject: Possible Soviet/GDR Action Related to East Berlin.

1. We agree that special attention should be given to collection and
assessment of evidence bearing on possible Soviet/GDR actions related to east Berlin. We also
agree that formal incorporation of east Berlin into GDR is one of more likely Soviet moves. We
believe, however, that we should be careful not to focus so closely on
this contingency that we might miss other signals which point to other
possible Soviet moves related to Berlin.

2. We believe there should be a review of existing contingency plans, in
order to be ready to deal with full range of possible Soviet/GDR actions related to east Berlin. This
should include:

a. Possible Allied and/or German actions, including warnings, to
forestall Soviet/GDR action.

b. Preparation of appropriate statements and protests.

c. Possible Allied actions to offset psychological impact on Germans of
Soviet/GDR actions.

d. Possible Soviet/GDR action related to
Allied and/or non-Allied access to east Berlin.

3. We believe that this review should be initiated on tripartite basis in
Berlin. (We notice from Berlin's 1247 that there has already been
preliminary discussion.)3 The planning should then
be reviewed quadripartitely in Bonn, with aim of submitting
recommendations to Ambassadorial Group by July 15.

4. Request that Live Oak be kept informed.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by
Ausland; cleared by
Anderson, Cash, Thompson, Department of Defense (ISA), and JCS; and approved by Davis. Repeated to Berlin, London, Paris, Moscow,
SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAFE, and
USAREUR.

2 Telegrams 3434 and 3435 from Bonn, June 13, and telegram 1230 from
Berlin, June 7, each explored various aspects of possible Soviet
moves in Berlin, including the incorporation of East Berlin into the
German Democratic Republic, and advocated a review of contingency
plans to meet the full range of possible Soviet actions. (All
ibid.)

3 Telegram 1247, June
13, reported that the British had raised the question of contingency
planning in response to incorporation of East Berlin at a Deputy
Political Advisers meeting. (Ibid.)

4 On
June 19 the Department of State advised the Embassy in Moscow that
the Soviet Union might be planning some action for East Berlin,
perhaps in connection with President Kennedy's
visit to the city on June 26. The Embassy was further informed that
if any Soviet official gave an indication of a change in the status
of East Berlin, he should be told that this would cause the United
States to review its position on the status of West Berlin without
specifically stating that it would support incorporation of the
western part into the Federal Republic of Germany. (Ibid.)

194. Paper Prepared in the Department of State194. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, June 14,
1963.

PET/O–6

SCOPE: Germany

Background

While officially labeled an “informal working visit”, the President's
trip to West Germany and Berlin will have many of the trappings of a
state visit and can be expected to attract more public attention and
interest than any previous visit by a foreign statesman to modern
Germany—including probably even De
Gaulle's state visit of last September.

There are a number of reasons for this:

1) The visit will be the first to Germany by President
Kennedy since assuming office and only the
third by a US President to postwar Germany. (President Truman was in
Berlin in 1945 for the Potsdam Conference and President Eisenhower
visited Bonn in 1959.)

2) No American President has visited Berlin since 1945 when President
Truman did so—under totally different circumstances—and no other
non-German Chief of State from a NATO
country has ever been in Berlin.

3) The visit comes at a time of change and flux in Western Europe when
the role and influence of the American President have acquired added
significance in German eyes.

4) The visit will be made against the backdrop of a scheduled further
visit by De Gaulle to Germany in
early July, following the anticipated entry into force of the
Franco-German Treaty.

5) The visit comes at an important turning point in modern German
history, on the eve of the transition from Adenauer to Erhard with its obvious relation to the
shifting of generations in German political life.

Broad Objectives

1) To furnish tangible evidence of American good will toward the German
people and of our recognition of the increasing importance of the
Federal Republic as one of our major allies.

2) To underscore our abiding interest in the welfare, stability and
freedom of Germany as an integral part of Europe and the Western
community.

3) To provide graphic emphasis to the continuing American presence in and
responsibility for Europe and to help restore some of the momentum
toward European unity and Atlantic interdependence.

4) To emphasize for the benefit of all Germans—both West and East—our
continued recognition of the importance of Berlin, and our determination
to defend and maintain our position there.

5) To accord appropriate recognition and tribute to Chancellor Adenauer, in the twilight of his long
tenure as Chancellor, for his invaluable and lasting contributions to
the causes of democracy and freedom.

6) To give the President an opportunity to see—and be seen by—as many
Germans as possible in representative major cities of Germany. (Although
De Gaulle toured West Germany
extensively last fall, he did not visit Frankfurt, Wiesbaden or
Berlin.)

7) To strengthen German-American cooperation, understanding and sense of
common purpose at the top level by discussion of current problems of
mutual concern.

Problem Areas

1) There may be a few problems in the general area of protocol and
precedence involving primarily Adenauer, Erhard
and Brandt, each of whom will be
engaged in a certain amount of jockeying for position. These could
become particularly delicate in Berlin as concerns the respective role
of the Chancellor and the Governing Mayor, but we should continue to
regard this matter as primarily one for the Germans to work out among
themselves. There will also be the problem of paying appropriate
attention to Erhard in his role of Chancellor-apparent without giving
offense to Chancellor Adenauer,
the President's host.

2) As concerns the President's substantive talks with the Chancellor and
other German leaders, these should not be viewed primarily as a vehicle
for pressuring the Germans into a series of specific actions we would
like them to take. Our dominant posture should be one of sympathetic
interest in problems of mutual concern and of confidence that in close
cooperation we can master them. At the same time, there are several
major problem areas of particular concern to the United States which
should be brought up with a view to making our interest and our position
unmistakably clear. These areas include, at a minimum:

a) the MLF and attendant problems in the
field of military strategy and planning.

b) trade policy (including United Kingdom entry into EEC) and current trade negotiations, and
their relationship to our own policies under the Trade Expansion
Act.

c) our balance of payments situation, with particular reference to
current offset arrangements.

3) There will also be the problem throughout the visit, and particularly
in Berlin, of how to deal with the problem of German reunification in a
way which will meet the political and emotional requirements of the
Germans themselves on this issue without holding forth false hopes or
sounding overly provocative.

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2274. Confidential. Drafted by
Creel and cleared by
Brandin and Tyler. Prepared for the President's
European trip.

195. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Austria195. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Austria1

Washington, June
22, 1963, 1:48 p.m.

3228. Paris also pass USRO. Reference:
Bonn 3540 and 3545.2 Subject: Air Access to Berlin.

1. Although picture is still somewhat murky, it appears to us that
potentially serious threat to Allied air access may be on horizon.

2. As we understand situation, following are basic facts:

a. Regular GDR air service to Vienna from
Schoenefeld has been initiated, with support of Austrian government.

b. There has also been some discussion of establishing direct Austrian
air service between Vienna and Tempelhof, with aircraft overflying
GDR outside Allied air corridors.
(Although it is still not entirely clear who said what to whom on this
subject, it would appear that West Berlin authorities, as well as
Austrians and Soviets, have expressed interest in this. We apparently do
not know attitude of GDR
authorities.)

3. In this situation, our primary objective is to avoid any dilution of
Allied rights of air access to Berlin. We believe that a process of
dilution could be begun, if aircraft are allowed to land at West Berlin
airfields which do not use air corridors. Furthermore, to allow Austrian
airlines to land at Tempelhof under agreement with GDR would begin
process of intermingling Allied
and GDR aviation arrangements, which would advance Soviet/GDR objective
of obscuring our rights of air access.

4. With regard to Schoenefeld-Vienna air service, we are prepared to
support FRG effort to get Austrians to
withdraw from agreement. We are in principle opposed to any step which
builds up Schoenefeld as a rival to Tempelhof and lends support to
GDR campaign to convince public that
Tempelhof unsafe and Schoenefeld offers superior facilities.
Furthermore, if Austrian arrangement (which is first time GDR has obtained traffic rights in non-bloc
country on regular basis) allowed to stand, other Western airlines will
be encouraged to follow suit, thus enhancing status GDR. (On other hand, in order to be
consistent with paragraph 3 above, we have regretfully concluded that we
would rather see any Western flights outside air corridors land at
Schoenefeld than Tempelhof, if we are unable to discourage their taking
place.)

5. In any discussion with Berlin authorities of use of Tempelhof by
aircraft not using corridors or flying under arrangements with GDR, it should be made clear that we could
not accept this. US has undertaken extensive commitments to maintain air
access to Berlin and cannot permit its rights to be obscured in order to
make travel more convenient for a relatively small number of air
travelers. Allied air access is so important to viability Berlin that
neither we nor Berliners can afford to expose it to unnecessary risks
because of differences regarding air fares.

6. Vienna is authorized to work out with French, British and German
Embassies best way to support German effort get Austrians end
flights.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–9. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by
Ausland on June 21;
cleared by Creel, Davis, Thompson, AV,
Department of Defense (ISA), and
JCS; and approved and initialed
by Rusk. Also sent to Bonn and
repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live
Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

2 Telegrams 3540 and 3545,
both dated June 20, discussed various aspects of East German air
service to Vienna from Schoenefeld Airport and the opening of a new
crossing point in Berlin at the Waltersdorfer Chausee to enable
passengers to get to Schoenefeld. (Ibid., POL 38–6 and AV 9 AUS–E GER) In a June 20 memorandum to Bundy, Klein pointed out that the Allies might find
themselves in the anomalous position of wanting to close a hole in
the wall that the East Germans had opened because it was not open to
all Germans and because it threatened Allied access rights. (Kennedy
Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany,
Berlin)

196. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State196. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Wiesbaden, June 25,
1963.

Secto 11. Paris pass USRO. Berlin for
USDel. Reference: Secto 7.2 After President and Chancellor had started private
discussions Palais Schaumburg
morning June 24,3 Foreign Minister
Schroeder suggested that
Secretary and other scheduled participants convene in separate session.
He thought it useful to have brief survey major issues current interest
while we were waiting to join President and Chancellor.

Time available permitted discussion only two subjects—MLF and German reunification. Following
summaries based on uncleared memcons.4

[Here follows discussion of the MLF.]

(2) German reunification.

Schroeder said a point which
Germans took very much to heart was how problem of German reunification
should be set forth publicly. Germans had noted that in recent US
statements there were more references to Berlin and Berlin access than
to reunification. For US, Schroeder said, Berlin has significance only in context
of a policy aiming at German reunification. He was aware this presented
practical difficulties to us in our relations with Soviets but thought
we could express the matter in a more positive way. Could we not try
convince Soviets that exercise of right of self-determination by Germans
was in Soviets' own interest and need not have any unilateral adverse
effect. Emphasis should be that to permit self-determination to Germans
would help bring about safer and more secure situation for Soviets in
Europe. Should we however continue to talk only about West Berlin and
our rights there, this helped maintain atmosphere of tension.

Secretary said he glad have these comments. He wished to stress there
should be no question of strength our feelings about German
reunification in light our attitude about self-determination for peoples
everywhere, including at home. He had spoken to Sovs, particularly
Gromyko, on many occasions in
these terms. He was himself convinced we could not have peace in Europe
in absence of self-determination, which included German reunification.
But then it was always necessary to face up to next question: what are
you going to do about it?

Schroeder suggested there were at
least certain indirect steps we could take in concern:

(a) Prevent GDR from acquiring additional
status under international law and thereby promoting Soviet thesis re
existence two Germanies, and

(b) Avoid any action by Western side which would tend to freeze status
quo in Europe and thereby impair right of self-determination for peoples
of Europe, including Germans.

(Latter comment obviously intended to apply to Dobrynin suggestion NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression
agreement.)5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Secret; Limit
Distribution. The source text bears no time of transmission.
Repeated to Bonn, Rome, Paris, London, and Berlin. Passed to the
White House on June 26. Secretary Rusk and President Kennedy
arrived in Bonn on June 23 for a 4-day visit, including a trip to
Berlin.

2 Secto 7, June 25,
transmitted a brief 2-paragraph summary of the talks on June 24.
(Ibid.)

3 No record of the
President's private conversation with Adenauer has been found.

4 PET/MC/3 and 11. (Department of
State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110)

5 Following this conversation
the Foreign Ministers joined President Kennedy
and Chancellor Adenauer for a
more general conversation. A report on their discussion of the
MLF is printed in vol. XIII,
Document 203; Memoranda of their conversation on trade and the test
ban negotiations (PET/MC/12 and 14)
are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2275.
4

197. Memorandum of Conversation197. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bad Godesberg, June 24, 1963, 6:30 p.m.

US/MC/34

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Dean Rusk

Ambassador George McGhee

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler

Minister Martin J.
Hillenbrand

FSO—Robert D. Davis

Governing Mayor Willi Brandt

Berlin Senator Schuetz

Senat Press Chief Bahr

After noting that we had not come to any final decisions on the
Waltersdorfer Chaussee crossing point, the Secretary said he would like
to talk the matter out with Brandt
and hear his views.

Brandt said that he would have
serious doubts about closing the crossing point even though it works
exclusively in the GDR interest. The
whole set of crossing arrangements worked similarly, i.e. the limited
crossing points and the distinctions between West Berlin and West German
access to the Soviet Sector. The Vienna-Schoenefeld deal might soon collapse, and crossings
would be limited to a very few Bloc travellers. The Western position was
“anti-Wall,” and any deviation from this would weaken our case in the
world.

As to the Schoenefeld flights, the Austrians were trying to get
permission for overflights over the GDR for Austrian Airlines (AUA) to land at Tempelhof. Brandt thought this was a good idea from
the local standpoint, since it would give cheaper and faster service to
Vienna. If GDR permission was withheld,
he thought that Vienna would cancel the Schoenefeld service on July 31.
AUA would, of course, have to get
Allied permission for West Berlin landings, and he hoped the Allies
would ask for Senat views.

He realized there was a feeling on the Allied side that air service
outside the corridors might weaken the Allied legal position. He saw
this point but was not convinced. There are now other non-Allied
non-Communist access routes. He mentioned the several roads used for
West German access, and the Swedish train to Stockholm. It was
absolutely clear if the Allies had to decide negatively in view of the
corridor problem, that the Senat would have to respect this.

The Secretary said we were not at that point yet. We were soliciting his
views. Returning to the gate, had there been any contacts with the
GDR as to whether West Berliners
could use it? Brandt replied negatively. The Secretary said we were in
favor of practical arrangements to ease life, and were confident of the
superior attractive force of West Berlin and the FRG. But practical steps can create new problems. What is
the popular opinion on this? Does it accuse the Allies of tolerating a
unilateral action?

Brandt admitted there was strong
feeling against the crossing point last week. But he had discussed the
question with 20–25 senior Senat officials of the SPD on June 22. All were against closing
the crossing, and the most radical views were only to support a popular
boycott. West Berlin had never resorted to police measures. Actually a
boycott already existed. The second flight of the Vienna service flew
out empty on June 22.

The Secretary asked, not as a suggestion, but as a possible contingency,
that if the West Berlin authorities asked us not to close the point,
whether they would take the responsibility for public opinion. The
confidence of the population was important for the security of Berlin.
If confidence goes, security melts out from under us.

Brandt replied that no discussion
would be at the expense of the Allies. There were a lot of young people
who were irritated. The Senat knows how to convince them what to do from
past experience. “We would not evade responsibility.”

The Secretary said he understood that Brandt's policy was to punch holes in the Wall even with
no advantage to his side.

Brandt said his policy had never
been to keep people from leaving West Berlin, and this was a sound
principle for the future.

When the Secretary asked whether the GDR
did not arrest people on the Swedish train, Brandt said “No.” There
might be a few instances, but the passengers had a visa-like “piece of
paper,” which implied special permission.

The Secretary said there was a great deal of theology about Berlin, and
it was often hard to learn the practical effects of policy. Popular
opinion was a not unimportant part of the problem.

Brandt said it was an element.
Some West Berliners resented use of Communist facilities, i.e. for
travel to Bulgaria, in order to meet East German relatives there. Only
wealthier people could afford this. Still the workers accepted it.
(Schuetz interjected that
newspapers were not the same as Berliners.) Brandt continued that Berlin could not become a ghetto
and ignore the principle of free movement.

Ambassador McGhee asked whether
there was no leverage to influence the GDR on the crossing point.

Brandt said “no,” but he was not
sure. Schuetz said the FRG thought so, through IZT. Leopold considered that GDR had traffic processing troubles which might create an
interest in making interzonal traffic easier.

The Secretary said that there were several problems about the Austrian
flights. Air access was of special sensitivity and was the critical
element of our access. If part of air access were dependent on the
agreement of the GDR and this dependence
grew in amount, the GDR would say that
we accept access with agreement of the Zone; the occupation was
therefore over, and there was no need for Allied access.

Brandt professed to see the point,
but doubted if this danger could arise from the Austrian service.

The Secretary said one service could grow to many, e.g. with Switzerland
and Scandinavia.

Brandt said that SAS overflew the
GDR from Prague, reportedly without
any government agreement. This involved NATO Allies. The Austrians thought they could also work out
something without government agreement.

The Secretary feared this might be a nibbling away at recognition of the
GDR.

Assistant Secretary Tyler noted
that our air access was virginal, pure and undiluted. The GDR had nothing to do with it. If the
AUA overflew the GDR, the GDR air control system would govern the flights, and this would engender some
measure of relations between BASC and
the GDR. Corridor flights would no
longer be autonomous.

Minister Hillenbrand explained
that the Soviets were only notified of Allied flight plans; they did not
otherwise participate in traffic control. AUA or other non-corridor flights to West Berlin would in
effect be guided into Tempelhof by the Schoenefeld control tower, and
this would present infinite possibilities for disruption of our air
traffic.

Schuetz asked if they did not now schedule
flights which required adjustment of Western flight plans.

Minister Hillenbrand replied
negatively. They had tried to do something analogous in the February
1962 crisis.

The Secretary said that the Soviets had pushed hard to connect
sovereignty of the GDR to access. We
have resisted and told them to make their own arrangements, since we
will not submit our access to the GDR.
This would open us up to suffocation by Ulbricht. We are concerned about GDR consent for entry into West Berlin. This moves down a
trail leading towards great problems, unless the East Germans have
goodwill or the West Germans have an effective means to regulate such
matters with them. We don't want to rely upon the East Germans and we
don't want to lose the speciality of our air access. The case of the
Swedish train is different.

Brandt said that everyone knew
that he wanted no weakening of the status of Western access. The
question is whether additions would weaken it.

The Secretary said that following this line of argument, he could imagine
a situation in which several airlines flew to Tempelhof or Schoenefeld.
If the subject were later to come to the U.N., the Soviets could make an
argument that there already existed full and sufficient non-Allied
access to Berlin, and that they wanted only to block U.S. military
access. We could hardly get a majority on such an issue if we had
participated in building up the alternatives.

Brandt argued that Sweden,
Switzerland and Austria do not offer major routes. Schuetz added that Tempelhof could
regulate which aircraft could land that the other side could not.

The Secretary asked whether technical arrangements could not be made to
transfer the tower control from Schoenefeld to Tempelhof 50 miles out of
Berlin.

Minister Hillenbrand observed that
this was possible, but it was difficult to see how it could happen,
since the aim of GDR policy in this area
was to attack the validity of the Tempelhof ATC.

The Secretary asked if it were true that Brandt
wanted to multiply means of access. Brandt said this was the case. The fare to Vienna would
cost DM 80 less and take a shorter time, and we should examine the
possibilities from a practical
viewpoint. The Austrian Consul General had asked him whether he could
discuss the matter with AUA, and
Brandt had inquired whether
there was any chance of the GDR agreeing
to AUA overflights to West Berlin. The
Austrian Consul General said he has asked the same question of Vienna,
and on June 22 had received the answer that there were “substantial
chances,” given the support of the Soviets. Brandt personally had the feeling that the Austrians
think that they don't stand a chance. However, even if the project does
not lead to results, all of us should discuss the general problem since
it might come up again. If there were an eventual possibility to get an
interim agreement with the Soviets which would include new elements,
would it not perhaps be necessary to add additional elements of
access?

The Secretary said that this was a long-term problem. We welcomed
possibilities of West and East Berlin working out reciprocal advantages
by punching holes in the Wall, and we welcomed FRG trade and contacts. These aspects did not present any
problems. What bothers us is to bring access into a position where it is
subject to the agreement of the East Germans. He said frankly that we
could make a deal with the Soviets tomorrow if we were willing to
concede this point.

Brandt said that he agreed.

The Secretary continued that there are changes under way in the Bloc and
rumors of differing attitudes. It was too early to see where these would
lead. As late as last October, the U.S. was exposed to the most colossal
deceit on the part of Khrushchev
personally. We had no illusions that they would cut our throats if they
could. We feel that the security of West Berlin fundamentally depends on
the U.S. presence in West Berlin which is based on the right of victory,
not on agreement. We won't be pushed out or negotiated out. This is
utterly fundamental. Some day the situation may change and other
considerations might govern, but our primordial principle is that we are
there by right and not by the consent of anybody. Of course we might
consider leaving if we heard the West Berliners shouting “Yanks go
home.”

The Secretary summarized by saying that we will be in consultation with
the Federal Government and with West Berlin on the gate problem, since
this is a matter in which they have an interest. We want to talk with
the French and the British and will gladly say that Brandt's views and those of the Federal
Republic should fully be taken into account. The Secretary personally
thought it was a good idea to punch holes.

Air services other than through the corridors was another question. The
Secretary characterized this as a more difficult problem and much more
serious. We would talk about it with Brandt later. Perhaps the problem arose because the
Austrian Commerce Ministry acted without consultation of the Foreign
Office. The international ramifications were very considerable and he was not sure that the
Austrians appreciated them.

Brandt promised to prepare a
memorandum on what the Austrians had told him, which he hoped to finish
the next day.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7
US/Kennedy. Secret. Drafted by Davis and approved in S on August 8. The source text is labeled
“Uncleared.” The meeting was held in Ambassador McGhee's residence. Another
memorandum of this conversation, PET/MC/15, is dated June 23, but a summary of the
discussion transmitted in telegram 3592 from Bonn, June 25, states
that the conversation took place “yesterday.” (Ibid., POL
38–10)

2 Following this conversation
Brandt and Rusk briefly discussed the subject
of U.S. firms in Berlin. The Mayor reported that special efforts,
including assistance by General Clay, had resulted in bringing in 10 U.S. firms, and
stated that he also wanted to get them the same tax benefits that
German firms had. (US/MC/35; ibid., POL 7 US/Kennedy)

198. Editorial Note198. Editorial Note

On June 26 President Kennedy flew from Wiesbaden Air
Force Base to Berlin, arriving at Tegel Airport at 9:45 a.m. After
arrival remarks at Tegel the President traveled by motorcade to the
Congress Hall where he addressed the German National Congress of the
Industrial Trade Union of Construction Workers. The Presidential party
then stopped at the wall and at Checkpoint Charlie, before arriving at
City Hall to sign the Golden Book and address an enormous crowd that had
gathered in the Rudolph Wilde Platz. After lunch he made an address at
the Free University of Berlin and then, at 5:15 p.m., left Berlin for
Ireland. For texts of the remarks and addresses cited above, see Public
Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pages 522–530.
For Brandt's account of the visit,
see Begegnungen und Einsichten, pages 72–74.

June-October 1963: Discussions at Moscow, New York, and WashingtonJune-October 1963: Discussions at Moscow, New York, and Washington: Document List

Document 199: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, June 27, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Dublin, Moscow, London, Paris, and USAREUR. Passed to the White House on June 28.

Document 200: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, July 3, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bonn.

Document 201: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, July 27, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Harriman. Secret; Eyes Only. Passed to the White House.

Document 202: Memorandum of Meeting

Washington, August 2, 1963, 10 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President. Secret. Drafted by Kaysen.

Document 203: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, August 5, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–4. Secret; Priority. Received at 6:15 p.m. and relayed to the White House. Repeated to Berlin.

Document 204: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Moscow, August 5, 1963, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Confidential; Priority. Passed to the White House. Rusk was in Moscow August 3–10 to sign the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

Document 205: Letter From President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer

Washington, August 6, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 US/Kennedy. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. The letter was transmitted to Bonn in telegram 374, August 6 at 9:58 p.m., with the instruction that it be delivered as soon as possible. (Ibid., DEF 18–4)

Document 206: Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State

Berlin, August 6, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 US–USSR. Confidential; Priority. Received at 3:23 p.m. and repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, and Moscow.

Document 207: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Moscow, August 6, 1963, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Operational Immediate; Eyes Only. Received at 9:07 p.m. and passed to the White House.

Document 208: Memorandum of Conversation

PitsundaAugust 9, 1963, 10:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER. Secret; Eyes Only. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved in S on August 28. The meeting was held at Khrushchev's dacha. A summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 53 from Moscow, August 9. (Ibid., ORG 7 S)

Document 209: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Bonn, August 10, 1963, 7:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2290. Secret; Operational Immediate; No Other Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Rusk.

Document 210: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, August 15, 1963, 2:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ausland; cleared by Ambassador at Large Thompson, Valdes (SOV), and Baraz (INR/SOV); and approved by Davis. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

Document 211: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, August 20, 1963, 1:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–4. Secret; Operational Immediate. The source text bears the notation “Text rec'd from White House.”

Document 212: Memorandum for the Files by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)

Washington, August 22, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 21. Secret.

Document 213: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, August 27, 1963, 7:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Confidential. Drafted by Rusk and Thompson and cleared by Bundy.

Document 214: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 19, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Secret. Drafted by McGhee on September 25 and approved in the White House on October 1.

Document 215: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, September 24, 1963, 9:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2315. Secret. Drafted by Creel, Finn, and Stalder (GER) and approved by Tyler. Repeated to Paris, Rome, London, Berlin, and USUN for Secretary Rusk.

Document 216: Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New York, October 3, 1963, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Secret; Limit Distribution.

Document 217: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, October 3, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Limit Distribution.

Document 218: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 7, 1963, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved in S on October 13. The source text is labeled “Part 3 of 6 parts.” Couve de Murville was in the United States to attend the 18th session of the U.N. General Assembly. In addition to Germany, the Foreign Ministers discussed NATO, East-West relations, and French-U.S. relations.

199. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State199. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, June 27,
1963, 10 p.m.

1350. Dublin for Presidential party. USAREUR for POLAD.
Presidential visit Berlin was major political event in history this
city, and one whose full implication unlikely be apparent for some
time.

Conveying accurate first-blush reaction is problem in proper choice of
superlatives. The tumultuous reception accorded President was clearly
unprecedented and at times overwhelming. The record crowd of
approximately 1.5 million lining entire 35-mile route and massed before
City Hall had been anticipated. In the event, however, the emotional
quality of that great crowd, its enthusiastic friendliness and
openhearted spirit was an unpredictably moving experience. To us it
seemed that the Berliner wished to express at one time his high regard
for, and trust in the President, his open gratitude for US support past
and present, his commitment to the West in the face of Communist
pressures and his proud confidence in himself and the future. By so
doing in company of bulk of his fellow citizens, the Berliner may well
have deepened that trust, gratitude, commitment and confidence. As one
editorial commented: Any remaining reserve in German-American relations
is dissipated and whatever threats Khrushchev may bring can now be met with confidence.

Berliners clearly were enraptured by the President—perhaps as much by the
human warmth, personal involvement and evident modesty frequently cited
in today's press, as by his generous words of praise and encouragement
to them. Not overlooked, however, even in the first reaction were the
President's sober messages concerning the indivisibility of freedom and
the heavy demands which it places upon us all. We expect those messages
will be taken up by a broad range of leadership groups here after the
emotional after-glow of the visit subsides. This process began even
today with a thoughtful editorial in the independent newspaper
Tagesspiegel interpreting the President's university speech as a warning
to make full use of present opportunities to advance long-term goals
(Berlintel 1349).2

We would not be surprised if further discussion here were to turn on the
need for and shape of German/Berlin initiatives in the German problem,
the possibilities and limits of relations with the Communist world, and
the further development of Berlin ties to the West, i.e., to the Federal
Republic, Europe and the Atlantic partnership. In all this we believe
that the President's forceful reiteration of the very real US
self-interest in Berlin will be a useful counter to the insidious
Communist argument that the Soviet interest in Berlin is more lasting
than the American.

June 26 was also great day for Chancellor Adenauer and General Clay who were warmly received by the crowds, and
especially for Mayor Brandt.
Latter gave stirring demonstration of his rapport with and confident
control of Berlin populace by stilling huge, enthusiastic crowd before
City Hall into respectful, moving silence while President signed Golden
Book to accompaniment of tolling freedom bell. The reflected glory of
being host on such a day seems likely to strengthen further Brandt's political appeal in Berlin and
perhaps in West Germany as well. It may also serve to exacerbate certain
frustrations of the Berlin leadership at the necessity of continuing to
work within an occupation structure which can be cumbersome and which
they, including Brandt,
occasionally feel does not fully comprehend the Berlin psychology.

It should not be overlooked that June 26 was a day of some importance for
the French and British in Berlin owing to the President's public praise
of their contribution to the Allied effort here and owing to the
prominent role accorded by US to the UK and France in the Presidential
program. We believe this has given a useful boost to local US relations
with the British and particularly with the French. We also expect
beneficial local gains in our relations with the trade unions,
universities and other important groups particularly affected.

In short, June 26 was a great day for the US in Berlin and one which
fully realized the several objectives set forth two months ago in our
tel 1122,3 i.e.,
(a) to demonstrate anew and unmistakably breadth and depth of US-Berlin
solidarity; (b) to underline tripartite unity of Western responsibility
here; (c) to reassure thoughtful Berlin leaders who still may be
apprehensive over long-run prospects for city, and (d) to give President
representative impression of Berlin setting and spirit.

Calhoun

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Kennedy. Confidential;
Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Dublin, Moscow, London, Paris, and
USAREUR. Passed to the White
House on June 28.

2 Dated June 27.
(Ibid.)

3 Dated May 1. (Ibid.)

200. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State200. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, July 3,
1963, 3 p.m.

12. During talk with Gov Mayor Brandt July 2 latter gave me general rundown on his talk
with President Kennedy on June 25 in Bonn.2 Brandt said they took up four
general subjects.

1) A personal exchange of views on German political situation and leaders
with particular reference to period between now and 1965 elections.

2) A discussion of general European policy, including reference to
forthcoming international meetings in Stockholm and Berlin, where
Brandt will have opportunity
talk with Harold Wilson and Monnet, among others. Brandt believed that summer meeting in
Stockholm and autumn meeting in Berlin would afford opportunities to
examine where Europe is going and how to broaden participation in
European community.

3) Brandt said President had asked
for his views on MLF, and had told
President frankly that from political viewpoint he was not enthusiastic,
although recognizing that there may be important military reasons for
moving ahead in this field.

4) Regarding Berlin, President asked Brandt for his ideas regarding speeches and statements
to be made there, and this had led to general exchange on current
situation. According to Brandt
they discussed specifically latter's ideas on alleviation of human
misfortune caused by the wall through limited contacts and visits
between two parts of Berlin, initially of families most affected by
division. Brandt apparently
described his current efforts through Red Cross to bring about quiet and
informal discussion of these possibilities by both sides.

Brandt commented at end that he
was both surprised and pleased at depth and detail of President's
information about Berlin.

Calhoun

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Confidential; Limit Distribution.
Repeated to Bonn.

2 No other record of this conversation, which
took place at 8:15 a.m., has been found.

201. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State201. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, July 27,
1963, noon.

365. From Harriman.2 Harriman, accompanied by Kohler, Kaysen and Akalovsky, met with Khrushchev in latter's Kremlin office from 3 to 5:45
p.m., July 26. Khrushchev
accompanied by Gromyko and
Dobrynin.

[Here follows extensive discussion of the test ban agreement, trade,
China, and nuclear weapons.]

Khrushchev said perhaps we should
move from particular to general. Of course, it would be better if we
solved general problem because in such case particulars would fall in
place. However, great efforts would be required to resolve general
problem and apparently we unable to do it now. Yet, particular or
individual measures would also mean progress toward disarmament and they
were easier to achieve. Noted we were celebrating today agreement on
what was also a partial disarmament measure. At this point Gromyko whispered in Khrushchev's ear.

Khrushchev continued Sovs
believed conditions were now right for conclusion NAP between NATO and Warsaw. Everybody supported this except one man
who was against, i.e., Adenauer.
De Gaulle, without coming out
against NAP on his own, supported
Adenauer but he did it only to have Adenauer on his side in his fight against US. All other
NATO members were in favor of idea.
He had spoken with Spaak and Wilson 3 and they favored
such step. He knew Macmillan would
also agree. This matter was ripest for solution. Thus if only US
mustered courage to get Adenauer
to agree, this step could be made. For if Adenauer agreed De
Gaulle would be disarmed.

Khrushchev then said people in
West Germany were now seeking new ways, e.g., Brandt too judging by his recent statements seemed to be
concerned about present situation and wanted find new ways. US should
prompt West Germans to find new ways, but it now appeared that US as
victorious power was afraid of the vanquished. Thus, NAP was ripe for solution, and Sovs were
pleased they had found understanding re this question on US and UK part.
As to further steps, he had listed them in his recent speech.4 Indeed, in interview
he had given to Pravda and Izvestia today, he had also referred to those
steps. One of such steps could be establishment of control posts on
communications routes to prevent surprise attack; such measure would not
harm prestige of any country. Also a peace treaty with Germany was
necessary because so long as there was no peace treaty there could be no
question of disarmament. For before healing wound one must remove pus.
This was standard surgical procedure, and Sovs saw no difficulty in
doing it. Some people spoke of general elections in Germany, but such
elections were quite inconceivable; indeed, they were impossible.
Khrushchev said he fully
understood US desire see united capitalist Germany and Sovs were not
offended at all that US entertained such desires. For that part, Sovs
also wanted have united socialist Germany. However, US desires were
unrealistic because things did not depend only on US desires. Sov desires were also unrealistic because
things did not depend only on Sov
desires. Meanwhile, West Germany, East Germany and West Berlin existed
and this situation should be legalized. Khrushchev suggested it could be written into document
that all parties would assist Germans in agreeing on creation of single
unified state. Once pus was removed we could sit down and discuss
solution of disarmament. There was nothing insuperable. Said he deeply
convinced that everything that was being done now was done to satisfy
Adenauer's caprice.

Khrushchev went on that while he
did not wish to be visionary he did not rule out possibility of US
policy prompting Germans seeking a Rapallo-type arrangement with USSR.
Rapallo policy had been in both German and Sov interests, and such
policy in interest all classes in West Germany even today. This idea was
now growing in minds of West Germans and would progress even further.
For West Germans had joined NATO in
hope they would thereby satisfy their national aspirations. They had
hoped that leaning on US, which at that time had had monopoly of nuclear
power, they would achieve situation where USSR would be forced agree
liquidation GDR and establishment united
capitalist Germany. However, those hopes had not been destined to come
true and there was no chance they would materialize. De Gaulle had said he recognized
borders established after last war. US had said similar things in
private, and thus only difference was that De Gaulle had stated this publicly while US said this
tete-a-tete.

Harriman turned to Kohler who
pointed out US had not expressed formal recognition of borders but had
merely said force would not be used to change them.

Khrushchev suggested Harriman
should not beat around bush: Harriman understood what he meant and he
understood what Harriman meant. Macmillan had taken similar stand, and other NATO members, such as Norway, Holland and
Belgium believed this was most reasonable position. True he was not sure
about Luxembourg, and this caused him great concern. Even Adenauer recognized this, for he said he
had no intention of changing existing borders by means of war. Thus,
Adenauer had suffered defeat
in all of his aspirations, and was now leaving arena. New man would
come, although he, Khrushchev,
did not know who it would be, but if even he should fail understand this
point he would have to go. Other man would replace him and eventually
there would be another Wirt (signer of Rapallo) in power and East
Germans would sign another Rapallo. Reiterated Rapallo had been in
interest of all Germans. For under Rapallo Germans had obtained
unlimited orders from USSR and had received raw materials from Sovs,
both industrial and agricultural; Sovs had been unlimited consumers of
German industrial commodities. Such situation in interest of both
Germans and Sovs and would be contributing factor to world peace.
Repeated should support forces seeking new avenues, and that would be
most noble course US could take. Otherwise Germans would eventually turn
against US.

Harriman said he not losing any sleep over this. Brandt had said West Berlin should
increase exchange of goods with East. This healthy idea and West Germany
should do same. However, so long as Sovs sat on East Germany they could
not expect friendship from West Germany.

Khrushchev interjected this was
where main US delusion lay.

Harriman commented Khrushchev was
very heavy.

Khrushchev said he weighed a lot
but did not asphyxiate Germans. In fact, he was in state of
weightlessness with respect to Germans and their interests.

Harriman said like in outer space.

Harriman continued German question had been discussed by Rusk with Gromyko and Dobrynin and hoped they would be able continue
discussion this matter as it related to non-aggression in West Berlin.
Recalled he had told Gromyko we
believed there was relationship between access to W. Berlin and
non-aggression arrangement. Sovs should take this into account.

Khrushchev interjected this would
not work. West Berlin problem related only to peace treaty. He could say
here and now that on basis relationship between access and NAP there could be no results.

Harriman continued this matter would be first discussed in Paris.
Rusk could discuss it with
Sovs. Secretary planned stay after formalities of signing TB treaty were over and have talks which had
been planned before. While he
did not wish commit Secretary, he believed Secretary might have some
response from our allies re consultations we had agreed upon yesterday,
although consultations would not be completed. [Here follows discussion
of the production of fissionable materials.]

Khrushchev then said wished
return question of Germany. Said he somewhat surprised by what Harriman
had said, and although Harriman had repeated his remarks he, Khrushchev, did not believe Harriman
really thought so. Specifically he had in mind Harriman's remark re Sovs
sitting on GDR. This remark meant
Harriman not properly informed re situation in GDR. In fact, per capita consumption of meat in GDR was somewhat greater than that in
FRG, something like 63 kg. versus 60
kg. Same went for consumption of butter. Indeed, during his visit to
GDR he had been pleasantly surprised
by situation there. Situation in GDR had
changed greatly after border and control thereof had been established.
People there were very happy with their govt, except of course for some
category of population; but then even in US there were some people who
were displeased with US Govt.

Khrushchev continued more and
more people in West Germany beginning realize present situation in
Germany was to US advantage but not to German advantage, e.g., at
Kohler's recommendation US
had applied pressure on Germans and had deprived them of orders for
pipe. Germans would never forgive US for this. Adenauer had held meeting with
businessmen on this subject and had promised them further development of
trade with socialist countries. If US continued to prevent Germans from
signing peace treaty, he quite sure there would be another Rapallo. Did
not know how many years this would take, perhaps 5 or 10, but this was
only way out for Germans. Reason for this was the Germans becoming
convinced US, France, and other Allies could do nothing to GDR and unable establish united capitalist
Germany.

Harriman said Khrushchev mistaken
as US had never stopped Germans from entering in peace treaty. As
Kohler[Khrushchev] knew very
well, West Germans themselves had always been unwilling to do so. We had
never stopped them. Not only Adenauer but also broad masses in West Germany held this
view.

Khrushchev interjected this had
been true until now, but turning point was approaching.

Harriman continued West Germany would never turn to Sovs so long as they
prevented unification. Once Germany was unified, he believed Germans
would be much more cooperative. In any event, there was no point arguing
who right in this matter. Point was to come to some constructive
understanding. Expressed hope Rusk
could pursue this discussion when here. Commented US had never prevented
increased interchange between
Germans and expressed hope what Khrushchev said meant he was ready to tear down Berlin
wall.

Khrushchev said could assure
Harriman wall would not be removed even when peace treaty signed. Wall
would be torn down only when unified socialist Germany established.

Harriman remarked this long time off.

Khrushchev said did not know and
was not saying when this would happen, but what he was saying was
present situation would remain until then. Sovs felt fine, even very
fine, with wall; they felt cozier and more tranquil. Therefore, Sovs in
no hurry. Wall played very important role and he furious with himself
not to have thought of it earlier.

Harriman recalled Khrushchev had
said to him Lippmann was right re wall.

Khrushchev replied Lippmann was
right, but it had not been Lipp-mann who had recommended establishment
of wall to Sovs. In reply to Harriman's question he said from time to
time Sovs would step on President's foot so he could realize he should
cut out his corns.

Harriman had observed previously that Khrushchev had used this simile in conversation with
Spaak. Said did not know that President had corns, but assuming he had
how did Khrushchev propose to
tread on them.

Khrushchev said that was a
secret.

Harriman commented that might be Khrushchev's secret weapon.

Khrushchev continued that, for
instance, he had seen press reports about plans establish civil air
communications with West Berlin. Said such communications would not be
allowed; if necessary planes would be forced down and extreme measures
would be resorted to. Asserted establishment such communications
contrary to Potsdam Agreement which allowed only US, UK, and French
military transport planes in corridors. Thus, here was one corn, and
Sovs would find corns without difficulty.

Khrushchev continued he could
cite another corn. Western powers now enjoy low tariff privileges for
cargo transport in Germany, privileges which had been acquired by right
of victorious power. However, this could not be tolerated any longer,
because 18 years had passed since end of war. This arrangement entails
financial loss by GDR and would be
ended.

A third corn, Khrushchev went on,
lay in following situation. Western powers now using GDR cables for their telephone and
telegraph communications and pay nothing or next to nothing for such
use. Thus, Sovs would find corns, these as well as some more. Said he
sure world public opinion would regard these claims by GDR as fully justified. US should take them
into account, as GDR might soon advance
them. Sovs believed all these
measures economically justified. Western powers had been using GDR territory on grounds they had won war;
18 years had passed since end of war—did they want enjoy these
privileges for hundred years? Moreover, he wished point out that West
Germany had been supposed pay reparations to USSR, but had not paid with
US support.

In short, Khrushchev said, best
thing to do was to wash our hands and put final end to WW II by signing
peace treaty, so that questions could be resolved on peaceful basis by
agreement between Govts FRG, GDR and West Berlin. Observed as soon as
discussion turned to this problem relations between us too cooled off,
and this was additional proof this boil must be done away with. Wondered
why the hell US or USSR needed it; Sovs certainly did not.

Harriman remarked Rusk would talk
with Gromyko about this question,
and did not believe useful for him take Khrushchev's time to pursue it further.

Khrushchev smiled and commented
Harriman apparently wanted leave unpleasant questions to Rusk.

Harriman said he was interested in what he had said, and had been glad to
listen. Said he understood Khrushchev had said to Spaak he would take off his hat
and bow apologizing after he stepped on corns.

Khrushchev laughed and said yes,
that was way it was done sometimes. One stepped on someone's foot
accidently, apologized, but then ground his heel a bit.

Harriman commented as long as Khrushchev said it with a smile, he was not taking it
seriously. Said he was not trying throw all unpleasant questions on
Rusk, but noted he had been
exiled to Far East for two years. It was Secretary who had been dealing
with this problem. [Here follows discussion of Laos and Cuba.]

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/Harriman. Secret; Eyes Only. Passed to the
White House.

2  Harriman was in Moscow
July 14–25 for discussions leading to the initialing of a nuclear
test ban agreement.

3 Paul-Henri Spaak, Belgian Foreign Minister, and
Harold Wilson, British Labour Party leader.

4 For text
of this July 19 speech (ENDC/113,
August 23, 1963), see American Foreign Policy:
Current Documents, 1963, pp. 542–543, or Documents on
Disarmament, 1963, pp. 247–249.

202. Memorandum of Meeting202. Memorandum of Meeting1

Washington, August 2, 1963, 10 a.m.

The President met with Secretary Rusk in the Cabinet Room to discuss the Secretary's trip
to Moscow. Also present were: Messrs. Ball, Harriman,
Foster, Thompson, Bundy, Kaysen,
Davis, Read. The meeting
lasted for approximately 45 minutes.

The Secretary went through the points listed in Mr. Thompson's memorandum of August 1 on
the agenda for the Secretary's visit to Moscow.2 The following points
received particular emphasis in the discussions:

[Here follows discussion of bombs in orbit, Laos, a possible Khrushchev visit to the United Nations,
trade, bilateral U.S.-Soviet issues, and Cuba.]

7. The discussion then moved on to non-aggression arrangements (2). The
President made a number of points. First, while there appeared to be
little in such arrangements for us, we should keep an affirmative
position and try to maintain the mood which Harriman's visit created. On
the other hand, it was clear that we had to get finished with the test
ban treaty before we could do anything further on this subject. It was
important to find out what the Soviets saw in this proposition, and
whether such arrangements could give us additional security in
Berlin.

8. He asked for Mr. Thompson's
comments, and Mr. Thompson
pointed out the disadvantages of any non-aggression arrangement in its
impact on the Allies and in particular the Germans. The President noted
that Mr. Harriman had a different view and asked him to state it. Mr.
Harriman pointed out the consequences of a detente in permitting a
further loosening of ties between the satellites and the Soviet Union.
This would apply to East Germany as well, and make more possible an
improvement in the East German situation along the lines that Brandt had asked for. He spoke of
Khrushchev's concern over a
possible repetition of the 1953 uprising in East Germany, and urged that
we had the same concern. Secretary Rusk commented on the Italian reaction to the proposals
for a non-aggression pact in terms of this as a further step in
legitimatizing the Italian Communist Party.

9. The President observed that while Berlin was not now in trouble and in
his judgment, did not seem likely to be in the near future, the
connection between an improvement in the Berlin situation and a
non-aggression pact was one that was useful for us to maintain in terms
of our relations with the Germans. The President said that while it was
important to deal with the West German problem, he thought that
Kohler's views were too
negative, and we should have a more positive attitude. Mr. Thompson pointed out again the
difficulties which a non-aggression pact would create in the Alliance
and its effect in discouraging hope in East Germany, and suggested that
if we ran up against a dead end in our negotiations with the Allies, we
might try unilateral NATO declarations.
On the other hand, he
agreed that if we could make a gain in Berlin, it would be useful, and
warned that it is likely that the Soviets will soon incorporate East
Berlin into East Germany if they do not get a non-aggression pact. The
Secretary doubted whether a mere declaration by NATO would answer Khrushchev's needs.

10. Discussion then turned to the problems of getting the Federal
Republic to sign the test ban treaty. The President said he thought it
is very important to get them to sign, both from a domestic point of
view and from the point of view of the Soviets. There were some
discussions of the way that the questions raised by the Germans in the
last few days could be answered. The Secretary said that these questions
reflected as much on Von
Brentano's political attitude toward Schroeder as they did the concerns of
the German Government in general. The Secretary pointed out that while
Von Brentano was Foreign
Minister, Germany had adhered to several conventions to which East
Germany had also adhered. Further, Secretary of State Dulles had taken
note of East Germany's adherence to the Prisoner-of-War Convention and
stated that on this matter, the U.S. was in treaty relations with East
Germany.

It was agreed that the Secretary should not say anything on East German
adherence at the time the treaty was signed, in view of what the
President had already said at his press conference. We could make it
plain to the Soviets that we would treat East Germany as they proposed
to treat Taiwan. It was left unclear as to whether this point should be
communicated to the Federal Republic now, or wait til later.

CK

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and
Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President. Secret. Drafted by
Kaysen.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

203. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State203. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, August 5,
1963, 8 p.m.

475. Eyes only Acting Secretary and Ambassador. Secretary McNamara accompanied by Hillenbrand saw Chancellor this morning
for one hour 40 minutes.2 Although Chancellor
wandered considerably over current political scene and back through
history, main points which emerged were:

1. Still has very great difficulties with effect of Test Ban Treaty on
status of Ger, but emphasis, at least in his own mind appears to have
shifted from Articles II and III of treaty to Article IV with its
reference to exercise of “national sovereignty.”

2. While admitting apparent present success for U.S. policy in signing of
partial test ban, he feels it will prove to be essentially a Soviet
success in long run and that ceremonial signing today in Moscow
constitutes a political victory for Khrushchev which will greatly enhance his prestige. On
German adherence, although he was not entirely clear, he apparently
anticipates doing nothing definitive until after Bundestag reconvenes
October 9.

4. He believes American policy suffers from credulousness about Soviet
intentions as well as from being erratic. In this connection, he was
critical both of State Department and his own Foreign Office.

5. With reference to Sino-Soviet dispute, he believes present U.S. tactic
of attempting to exploit it is mistake and that best policy for West
would be simply let Russians and Chinese fight it out among
themselves.

6. According to Chancellor, who cited this as example of Soviet
duplicity, Khrushchev had a few
weeks ago indicated to Germans that he would be willing to pay visit to
Bonn and to negotiate seriously with Federal Republic. (Chancellor
requested that this information be considered as highly
confidential.)

Chancellor began his opening remarks, which lasted 57 minutes, by saying
that he wanted to be considered as belonging to those Allies who always
state the truth and speak frankly. These were the best Allies. In his
recent press conference, President Kennedy had
shown that he was not correctly informed, the Chancellor stated.3
The President had indicated that the language of the Test Ban Treaty had
been on the table for a full year and that now all of a sudden people
seemed to be excited about it. The Chancellor noted that in the Geneva
text there was only one depository. Now, however, there were three
depositories, because one hoped in this way to avoid the GDR recognition problem. What worried the
German Government was Article IV of the treaty, which stipulated that it
was of unlimited duration but that each party, in exercising its
“national sovereignty”, would have the right to withdraw from the treaty
under certain circumstances. This reference to “national sovereignty”
would, upon GDR adherence to the treaty,
clearly constitute an express recognition of the “national sovereignty”
of the GDR. It would create an
unfortunate precedent which could not be repudiated in any subsequent
treaties which might now come from the Moscow talks. Under longstanding
agreements, the U.S. recognized the Federal Republic as the only
government entitled to speak for the German people as a whole, but now
the GDR would be recognized as a
sovereign area.

He could only say, the Chancellor continued, that the U.S. had sold this
great concession too cheaply, much too cheaply. With the signing of the
treaty in Moscow the U.S. “very probably” had a certain success. Some 30
countries had already indicated their readiness to adhere. But such an
initial success was not necessarily a final success.

At this point Chancellor went off on a lengthy excursion combining
references to Bismarck's fear of the Russians on the Elbe, the parlous
state of political situation in Italy and in France (if De Gaulle were to be assassinated or to
die) and his great distrust of the political sense of the late Pope
John XXIII who did not appreciate the nature of
the Communist danger. His conclusion was that, if confidence were lost
in the wisdom and foresight of U.S. policy, Western Europe would be
lost.

He was convinced, the Chancellor said, that these various considerations
had not been brought to the President's attention before the signing of
the Moscow treaty today. He did not believe that Mr. Harriman or Lord
Hailsham 4 (he described
the latter as always living far removed from the Holy Spirit) understood
the significance of what was happening. The Chancellor expressed his
concern that the State Department was not what it had been under John
Foster Dulles, that policy now seemed to be more erratic and not as well
considered. Since contacts were still close between the German and
American Governments, he had a personal feeling that this was the case.
He did not wish to mix in purely U.S. interests, but he felt this was a
matter of common interest. For example, he did not know why the U.S.
seemed to attach so much importance to appearing to the Chinese as a
good friend of Khrushchev. He
thought this was a mistake; Khrushchev could come to an agreement with the Chinese
tomorrow. Basically the Soviets and Chinese were offshoots of the same
tree.

As far as FedRep adherence to the Test
Ban Treaty was concerned, the Chancellor continued, this must be
approved by the Bundestag which was now in summer recess. Its vacation
ends on October 9. To call the Bundestag into special session now would
be inopportune. It would merely cause excitement, and he could not be
sure what its attitude would be on the treaty. He knew that CDU floor leader Von Brentano had the same views as he (the Chancellor).
However, this was not the view of Foreign Minister Schroeder, who in his general judgment
was somewhat softer.

The Chancellor noted that Schroeder, in a letter of August 1,5 had proposed that,
to ease the German accession problem, Secretary of State Rusk should make
a statement in Moscow. Under Secretary Ball had indicated to the German
Charge in Washington6 that this would not be possible
but that such a statement might be made on August 12 before the U.S.
Senate. Here the Chancellor speculated about whether or not the U.S.
Senate would ratify the Test Ban Treaty, and concluded that he didn't
know. In any event, the German Federal Republic would not want to do
anything that would make the position more difficult. However the German
press (here the Chancellor noted a number of papers by name including
the Springer papers) was strongly against German adherence to the Test
Ban Treaty. The Federal Government was being very reserved on the
subject, but could not keep the press quiet.

Apart from the British, no European countries had been consulted in
advance, the Chancellor pointed out. Some would say that to end
explosions in the atmosphere or in outer space was a blessing, but such
explosions would continue underground which was closer physically to
people on earth than explosions behind the moon.

The Chancellor said he feared for the fact that the talks in Moscow would
continue for a week. The Chancellor recounted that on August 13, 1961,
when the wall was built in Berlin, Brandt went immediately to the U.S. Commandant and asked
that something be done to stop it. He had to wait 60 hours for an
answer, and then the U.S. Ambassador in Moscow had said to the German
Ambassador “thank God for the wall, it will help to solve the refugee
problem.” The Chancellor said he had refrained from saying any of these
things publicly to date because of the obvious bad effect it would have.
When he was in Washington late in 1961, he had repeated the remarks
attributed to the American Ambassador in Moscow to Ambassador Grewe. The latter said he was not
surprised since he had heard the same views in the State Department. He
did not believe that the U.S. properly understood the danger of
Communism. He then, somewhat irrelevantly, cited a conversation which he
had had last year with Eleanor Dulles, sister of the late Secretary of
State, who, in response to a query of his as to whether the State
Department had any greater influence over policy than before, had
replied “no more than last year.”

Here again the Chancellor went off on a historical excursion covering the
Mongol invasions of Europe and the 300 years of Turkish occupation of
Hungary and Greece, as a prelude to making the point that, if the hordes
from the East had overrun Europe before, they could do it again. The
U.S. simply did not understand the nature of the danger in Europe. Our
major preoccupation was Latin America, but the danger of Communism existed in the entire world.
He was concerned about the fate of the free world, which included the
U.S., in an era of interrelated interests.

After expressing the great personal prestige which the Chancellor enjoyed
in the U.S. because of his role in creating the Federal Republic,
Secretary McNamara referred to
the President's statement during his recent visit here that the German
border was our border and German freedom was our freedom. We were
willing to risk our cities to protect German cities. This was the
essence of our foreign policy and it was shared by all of the ranking
officials of the U.S. Government, including those in the State
Department. Moreover, the President, more than any other leader in
recent years, has recognized that we must conduct our foreign policy on
the basis of growing military strength. We had increased our military
budget annually by $9 billion, and with all our budgetary deficit and
balance-of-payments problems, had expanded our defense expenditures more
than $30 billion since the present administration had come into office.
This had greatly increased our military strength. It had made it
possible for us to respond as we had in Cuba, and meant that we were in
a better position to defend Europe. As a result of this, Secretary
McNamara continued, we
believe the Soviets were forced to act as they had both with respect to
their relations with the West and Red China. We were putting them under
ever greater pressure, both economically and politically. Our growing
military strength was thus inevitably strengthening the foreign policy
of the U.S. and the West.

The Chancellor commented that we were doing all we could to achieve this
result, but he feared we were too credulous about Soviet intentions.
Secretary McNamara referred to
the alleged remark by Khrushchev
during his U.S. visit that his grandchildren would bury us. His views
remain now what they were then. We had no illusions about this; only the
military power of West could prevent Soviet achievement of its
objectives. He did not believe there was any difference in German or
U.S. ultimate objectives. We thought we could bring pressure to bear on
the Soviets which would deepen the rift with the Red Chinese and force
their policy in a direction more favorable to our objectives. It was in
the Western interest to use this means of leverage.

Here the Chancellor said he wanted to tell Secretary McNamara something on a strictly
confidential basis. A few weeks ago Mr. Khrushchev had informed him that he was ready to come to
Bonn and negotiate with the Federal Republic. This proved he would
negotiate with anyone. He feared that, through the Moscow
agreement,7 we were causing differences among the Allies and not helping to
strengthen their confidence in the U.S. This was regrettable. Some of
the satellites which had recently been showing signs of moving away from
Moscow would not be impressed by apparent American favoring of Khrushchev. The ceremonies in Moscow
today were bound to strengthen the Soviets. Why could we not have
insisted that Mr. Gromyko come to
Washington for the signing, the Chancellor asked. Instead Moscow was
made the center of foreign policy. This was bound to have a lasting and
beneficial effect on the Soviets and cost them nothing. They could claim
that the beginning of a new era took place in Moscow. He considered the
U.S. judgment in this matter as lacking in true appreciation of the
situation as that of Pope John XXIII when he received Khrushchev.

Secretary McNamara said the
Chancellor would surely recognize that the tensions in the Communist
movement worldwide were greater than at any time in past five or ten
years. The struggle for control between Red China and the Soviet Union
was being heightened by the test ban negotiations and signing of the
treaty in Moscow. The Chancellor argued that, on the contrary, he felt
the U.S. was helping Khrushchev
and that this would lessen tensions between the Red Chinese and the
Soviet Union. He asked again why the signing ceremony had not taken
place in Washington. Secretary McNamara observed that we were forcing the Communists
all over the world to take sides between the Red Chinese and the Soviet
Union and that, in practice we now had two Communist Parties in many
countries instead of one. The Chancellor said Mr. McNamara would surely agree that the
Western powers had no interest in giving material support to Khrushchev. The Red Chinese danger was
for the future, the Soviet danger was in the present. Yet the U.S. was
now strengthening Khrushchev's
position. Anything like the Moscow treaty would have been impossible six
years ago.

Secretary McNamara cited the
record over the past 24 months of the increasing nuclear warhead
strength of our strategic alert forces, the increase contemplated in
this category for the next 24 months, and the increase in the past 24
months of warhead strength in Europe. Without waiting for a translation,
the Chancellor again asked why we helped enhance the status of Khrushchev and strengthen the
self-confidence of those who were beginning to doubt in his
entourage.

After a further exchange as to whether our policy was strengthening the
Communists or tending to divide them by forcing them to choose,
Secretary McNamara said that, at
any rate, the Chancellor would recognize the need for agreement on a
continued increase of Western military strength. He was sure the Federal
Republic would continue to move in this direction and encourage other
Allies to do likewise. The Chancellor said his purpose today was to
infect the Defense Secretary
with mistrust of the Soviets. Secretary McNamara commented that we must never mistrust the
purpose and policy of our Allies.

The Chancellor at this point invited Secretary McNamara briefly to give his
impressions of his recent trip to Germany, so that there would be
something which could be told to the press. He did not want to reveal
that the test ban and related matters had been the principal subject of
conversation. After further discussion, Federal press chief Von Hase was
called in and the general line agreed that Secretary McNamara had informed the Chancellor
of the impressions which he had gained during his visit to the Federal
Republic and of the results of his talks with Defense Minister von Hassel. The U.S. Secretary of
Defense had expressed his satisfaction with the results of these talks
and the agreements reached, which were designed to strengthen the U.S.
and German forces. He and the Defense Minister had agreed on the
continuing need to maintain and to increase the defensive strength of
the Western Alliance.

Department please repeat to Moscow as appropriate.

McGhee

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, DEF 18–4. Secret; Priority. Received at 6:15 p.m. and
relayed to the White House. Repeated to Berlin.

2 McNamara was in Europe
visiting U.S. military installations.

3 For a transcript of the President's August 1
news conference, see Public Papers of the
Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 612–619.

4 Lord President of the Council
and Minister of Science for the United Kingdom.

5 A copy of this letter is in Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204.

6 A memorandum of this
conversation on August 3 is ibid., Secretary's Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

7 The nuclear test ban
agreement.

204. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State204. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Moscow, August
5, 1963, 10 p.m.

Secto 14. Secretary accompanied by entire US official party had one hour
meeting with Khrushchev in
latter's Kremlin office at 11 am August 5. Following memcon is uncleared
and subject to revision:

[Here follow 3 pages of discussion of the Test Ban Treaty.]

However, Khrushchev continued,
Sovs believed basic problem was German problem. So long as German
problem remained unresolved, two sides would be like hedgehogs sticking
their needles into each other. German problem was such as made each side
wish have it resolved in its own way. He could understand very well that
if US could resolve German
problem in its own way, i.e., by liquidating social system in GDR and establishing united capitalist
Germany that would be great victory for President, Congress, and those
who supported capitalism. Likewise, if FRG were made part of socialist camp that would be
tremendous victory for Communism. But all this was sheer fantasy, for it
could not be achieved without war. He wondered therefore whether time
had not come when we, mature people who knew life and had seen war,
should try move things from rails of war to rails of peace, namely,
record situation as it existed now and forget about Adenauer and other
people opposing such course. It was not only US who had such allies, for
God had not forgotten USSR either and had given it allies who did not
understand its policy. He believed however all such allies would
eventually realize they had been wrong and unrealistic.

Secretary said US recognized German problem was fundamental and most
important to future of our two countries and of our associates. He said
he was prepared discuss this matter with representatives of Soviet
Government during his stay here in order to see whether some
understanding possible. We on our side recognize that in view past
history what happened in Germany was of great importance to USSR.
Likewise, again for historical reasons, we too were interested greatly
in having peace in Central Europe. US recognized this very well as it
had also been involved in two world wars. Secretary then observed two
sides perhaps differed in their respective interpretations as to what
was happening in that area now. For our part, we believed German people
were prepared put past behind them and become part of peaceful community
of nations. We also believed we must not make situation such as would
deprive German people of opportunity pursue this course or create danger
of war. He reiterated he prepared discuss these matters while here.
Referring to Khrushchev's
hedgehog simile, Secretary said he not sure who were those hedgehogs;
however he had impression that during past few years relaxation had
occurred in Central Europe. FRG's
increased relations with countries to East in such fields as trade,
commerce, and exchange of persons had, in his view, reduced
tensions.

Khrushchev interjected Secretary
had mentioned “countries to East” and apparently did not wish use term
“socialist”, but Sovs would teach us to use this term and, after all,
time was best teacher.

Secretary continued he had been encouraged by this trend over past few
years and believed possibility for peaceful settlement had now improved
as compared to possibility existing two or three years ago.

Khrushchev agreed.

[Here follow comparisons of the social systems in the United States and
the Soviet Union, at first between Rusk and Khrushchev and then between Senator Fulbright and
Khrushchev.]

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, ORG 7 S. Confidential;
Priority. Passed to the White House. Rusk was in Moscow August 3–10 to sign the Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty.

205. Letter From President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer205. Letter From President Kennedy to Chancellor Adenauer1

Washington, August 6,
1963.

DEAR MR. CHANCELLOR: Secretary McNamara has just come back and reported to me his long
conversation with you.2 He has suggested that it might be useful for
me to send you a letter commenting on some of the things which you and
he talked about, and I think his suggestion is a good one. As he reports
the conversation, you talked about two major topics. The larger of them
is the question of the basic policy of the West toward the Soviet Union,
in which, as I understand it, your worry is that the U.S. may be too
easily beguiled by the smiles and tricks of the Soviet Government.

I understand this concern, but I must tell you in all frankness that I do
not think it is justified. It seems to me, in fact, as far from the mark
as the kind of thing I sometimes hear from political groups in this
country who say that it is wrong to trust the democratic commitment and
the loyalty to the Alliance of the Federal Republic. The truth is, in my
judgment, that one of the wisest things our two countries have done the
last fifteen years is to trust each other, and I think the record of the
United States Government as a whole, and of this Administration in
particular, makes it pretty clear that we are not disposed to be taken
in by Soviet duplicity.

I myself believe that it is much too soon to throw our hats in the air
because of a single agreement on a single subject, the limited test
ban—important as that subject is. I believe that we have reached even
this small understanding as much through our strength and resolution as
through the process of negotiation, and I recognize, as you do, that we
are dealing still with a government which has repeatedly posed threats
to the freedom of West Berlin and which, as late as October of last
year, undertook a peculiarly dangerous and reckless act of duplicity in
Cuba. So we are not under illusions about the Soviet Government, and you
may be quite sure that Secretary McNamara, who has pressed so hard and so successfully
for a strengthening of Western defense in the last three years, is not a
man who is likely to be lulled into forgetfulness or neglect of his duty by a single limited
agreement. It is Secretary McNamara, after all, who has been my chief lieutenant in
a process of reinforcement which has added nine billion dollars a year
to our defense budget, and has increased the number of our battle-ready
divisions by forty per cent. It was with Secretary McNamara that I called up 150,000
Reserves at the height of the Berlin crisis in 1961. And he and I feel,
just as you do, that this is not time to let down our guard.

It may be, as you say, that there is some danger of relaxation in Europe,
and you can count on us to work energetically against any such tendency.
That is one reason why Secretary McNamara has pressed so hard in Bonn to find ways and
means of meeting the overseas cost of the great forces which we have
placed in Germany for the common defense.

Our own commitment and alertness, of course, have to be world-wide. If
the Chinese should break out into new acts of aggression, it is only the
United States among Western countries that will have the necessary means
and determination for reply. We are the only Western power fully engaged
in a two-front struggle in the cold war, and I think there is little
reason for any feeling that we are blind to its dangers and demands.

Let me repeat that I do understand and respect your honest concern here,
for I recognize also that in a large and varied country like this one
there will always be people who can bring you reports that this or that
individual or group is spreading dangerous opinions. But such rumors
deserve to be set against the reality of what our Governments have done
together for fifteen years.

As to the particular question of the limited test ban treaty, I am glad
to see both in Secretary McNamara's and in William
Tyler's reports that you do regard it as a success,
although you have some specific questions about its possible impact on
the status of the regime in East Germany. I too think it a success, for
reasons which I stated at length last week and with which I will not
bother you again now.3 I do
not think it matters much where a treaty of this kind is signed or who
claims the credit for it. The point about the treaty is that it makes
sense for the world and that it does not jeopardize the essential
security of either side. That is what makes it possible and useful.

The problem of the status of the East German regime is an important one,
and I fully recognize your special concern with it. In our judgment,
fully adequate precautions have been taken on this point. We do not
think that either as a whole or in its separate parts does the treaty
create any danger of increased recognition or international status for
the East German regime. The use of the term “states,” which goes back a
year, and the reference to
sovereign rights, which is a product of the more recent negotiations,
are both of them standard phrases which do not confer any new standing
upon any regime which adheres to the treaty, and this solid legal
judgment is one which we are prepared to make clear as often as is
necessary. Moreover, we believe that the new process of accession is
distinctly advantageous to us from this point of view, in that the
Federal Republic, which is recognized by all three depository
governments, has an opportunity to deposit its accession without
challenge from any of them, while the Pankow regime will obviously have
to confine its accession to the USSR. Thus the process of adherence
itself will make it clear which regime is recognized by all, and which
is a puppet of one.

Having heard Secretary McNamara's
report, I have asked Dean Rusk to
follow up with a visit in Bonn over this weekend, particularly so that
you may be able to talk with him about the wider problems of our
dealings with the Soviet Union. You will find him both careful and
determined. You may be sure that he commands my full confidence. He won
his diplomatic spurs in the first hard months of the Korean war, and you
may speak to him in full assurance that neither he nor the Government
for which he speaks is less deserving of your trust than any with which
you have dealt in the past.4

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy5

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 15–1 US/Kennedy. Secret. The
source text bears no drafting information. The letter was
transmitted to Bonn in telegram 374, August 6 at 9:58 p.m., with the
instruction that it be delivered as soon as possible. (Ibid., DEF
18–4)

2 See Document 203. The President, Ball, and McNamara discussed McNamara's conversation with
Adenauer at a meeting at
the White House at 5:35 p.m. on August 5, and in a telegram to
Moscow at 9 p.m. that day Kennedy advised
Secretary Rusk that, in view
of the Chancellor's anxiety and suspicion about the Test Ban Treaty,
he should stop in Bonn on the way back to Washington. (Tosec 30;
Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S)

3 See footnote 2, Document 203.

4 On August 17
Chancellor Adenauer thanked
the President for this letter and for having Secretary Rusk stop in Bonn to brief him on
his talks in Moscow. The Chancellor continued that this briefing and
Rusk's testimony before
the Senate on the Test Ban Treaty had allayed the serious
reservations that the Federal Government had about the Moscow
agreement. (Letter to the President, transmitted in telegram 652
from Bonn, August 17; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 W
GER)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

206. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to the Department of State206. Telegram From the Mission at Berlin to
the Department of State1

Berlin, August
6, 1963, 4 p.m.

153. Info SACEUR for POLAD; CINCEUR for POLAD; USNMR
SHAPE for Burns; USELMLO via other
means. Paris also for USRO.

From McGhee. I met for hour and
one-half with Sov Amb to GDRAbrasimov in Sov Emb East Berlin Aug 5.2 Visit,
first courtesy call to Amb as Sov
representative in residual quadripartite matters, had been carefully
arranged. Abrasimov at first
attempted put conversation on broad plane by referring to common Sov-US interests in ensuring FRG adherence to Test Ban Treaty. Abrasimov asked for my views on Bonn
attitude this issue. Since I did not wish to pursue such a general line,
but to stick to Berlin matters, merely said felt confident everyone
would eventually sign except the few states whose views were already
known.

Abrasimov said test ban agreement
showed progress could be made on other issues. If US would accept
Khrushchev's “free city”
proposal and if it would recognize GDR,
Berlin and German problems could be solved easily. I replied that US
after many discussions on this subject over the past several years, was
unconvinced Sov proposals for Berlin offer sufficient guarantees for
maintenance Western vital interests in city. US believes Berlin problem
can be solved ultimately only in framework reunification of Germany on
basis East German people able freely express their will.

Solution Berlin and German problems as a whole are, I continued, large
issues requiring extensive intergovernmental discussion and it appears
unlikely we will be able to make much progress in this meeting. We do,
however, along with our British and French colleagues, have serious
responsibility in minimizing points of friction in day-to-day matters
affecting Berlin. Abrasimov and I
could make useful contribution to good relations between two sides by
ensuring that tensions in Berlin were minimized. Increased tensions
could have serious effects on three-year talks now in progress. I urged
Abrasimov to use undoubtedly
great influence on GDR to this end.

Abrasimov disclaimed authority
for East Berlin. He was empowered to deal only with West Berlin. What we
referred to as East Berlin was part of independent state of GDR, recognized, if not by US, by 14
states. I replied that we did not consider that this did, by any means,
relieve the USSR of its
obligations under the quadripartite agreements of 1944–45. I pointed out
that there was reciprocity involved as between US rights in East Berlin
and Sov rights in West Berlin. If Sovs
disregarded US interests in East Berlin, they could hardly expect US
show regard for their interests in West Berlin.

I then raised following specific points:

(1) GDR June 21 decree on “barred zone”
around West Berlin and June 22 decree on undefined “security zones.”
These measures could in no way affect US rights under quadripartite
agreements. However, they could possibly be source of tension between US
and USSR. I urged Abrasimov to
exert influence on GDR in order ensure
such tension did not arise. Abrasimov said creation security zones was right of
sovereign state. If such zones were, for good cause, erected in West
Berlin, he would not object.

(2) USCOB visit to East Berlin. I
pointed out Soviet general officers visit West Berlin freely, yet USCOB continues be affected by Sov/GDR
measures barring his predecessor, Gen. Watson, from East Berlin. USCOB had not exercised right to visit East Berlin solely
because of US desire avoid incident which could produce tension. US
wished obtain prior Soviet assurances there would be no incidents with
East Germans before USCOB went to East
Berlin. I urged two sides forget Commandant bans and start afresh on
this issue. Abrasimov indicated
understanding for my argument and said he would take matter up with
Soviet military authorities.

(3) Svenson case. I showed Abrasimov message written by Svenson on his immunization
record and given to Italian tourists in East Berlin. (Berlintel 92 Dept,
81 Bonn)3 Abrasimov asked for photostat of
Svenson immunization record (I said we would provide this) and promised
investigate matter with East German authorities. I said if no
satisfactory reply received as to Svenson welfare in light his message
appealing for help, I would recommend matter be taken up formally with
USSR, and there would also possibly be considerable publicity on
case.

Abrasimov raised following
issues:

(1) He said Western Allies had made all of West Berlin closed zone in
sense they did not permit Soviet news correspondents to reside there.
Denial of resident permits inconsistent with Western plea for freedom of
movement in Berlin. I pointed out Soviet correspondents free to go where
they pleased in West Berlin, and issue not comparable to creation
“barred zone” around West Berlin.

(2) Abrasimov protested Allied
action preventing Sovs from refurbishing Lietzenburgerstrasse property.
He said Sovs had been informed US opposition is key factor in issue. I
said Sovs more fortunate in regard Lietzenburgerstrasse property than US in regard former
US Embassy Berlin, which now located within “barred zone.” Abrasimov, facetiously, said he was
sure US could obtain permission if it wished build Embassy in East
Berlin.

(3) Abrasimov protested fact
Sov artists and sportsmen unable
appear West Berlin. He said Sovs would not agree arrange through Bonn
for appearances of cultural performers and sportsmen in West Berlin. I
said I was not fully acquainted with details this issue but would inform
myself and see what if anything could be done.

Abrasimov said he looked forward
paying return call. I said this could be arranged, if agreeable to
Abrasimov, during my next
visit to Berlin in about six to seven weeks. Atmosphere of meeting was
relaxed. At end discussion Abrasimov showed me through various public reception
rooms of Embassy.

No identification difficulties or other problems encountered either
entering or leaving Sov Sector. East
German control personnel did not approach my vehicle at any point but
simply raised barriers as vehicle approached them. As had been agreed
with Sovs, Sov Emb vehicle with protocol
officer provided escort from crossing point to Emb and back to crossing
point.

Dept will use judgment as to relay to Moscow.

Calhoun

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 17 US–USSR. Confidential; Priority. Received at
3:23 p.m. and repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, and Moscow.

2 For an abbreviated account by McGhee of this meeting, based on
this telegram, see An Ambassador's Account, pp. 95–97.

3 Dated July 21. (Department of
State, Central Files, POL 30 US)

207. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State207. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Moscow, August
6, 1963, midnight.

Secto 26. Second session tripartite talks held at Spiridonovka beginning
1545 and ending 1725.2 At
Gromyko's initiative session
was entirely devoted to Germany and Berlin. Following is uncleared
summary subject to revision. Full report follows.3

Gromyko began by stressing need
to reach settlement of German question and on that basis question of
West Berlin. To leave German problem indefinitely unsettled fraught with
danger. Soviet Government attached great importance to German peace
settlement.

Lord Home replied first, stating
as Khrushchev yesterday rightly
pointed out settlement could not be one-sided.4 Khrushchev had added that people
ought to be allowed to decide own destiny. Until system can be found
where German people can express by means of secret ballot their desires
there can be no satisfactory settlement. Knew Soviets cannot agree but
Lord Home said he had
concluded no settlement possible now. Hence this question should be put
aside and we should address ourselves to more modest steps such as test
ban. For instance, if agreement could be reached on observers not only
in US, UK and USSR but also Western Germany and East Germany tensions
would be reduced. He would not say anything about Berlin at moment.

Secretary said he had one or two observations. First, looking at
objective elements of tension, these have shown considerable improvement
in the last one to three years. Some of elements which have caused
tensions between two Germanies and therefore between countries
responsible for Germany have been eased and therefore tensions have
slackened.

There was more normal atmosphere in Central Europe as whole referring to
both socialist as well as capitalist parts that area.

Secretary continued we still believe valid approach expressed in our
March 22, 1962 draft of principles handed Gromyko.5 Asked Mr. Gromyko if he did not think procedures
and approach suggested therein still had significance. We don't believe
matter is urgent or critical unless one chooses to make it so. Expressed
readiness to sit down and discuss ways to prevent tension arising.

Gromyko replied Western powers
quite aware of Soviet proposals, some of them written, regarding access
routes to Berlin which is not at all most important question. Soviet
Union had not received answers. Had received some general statements but
on some proposals no answers at all. Soviets have put forward proposals
for settlement of German question and on this basis question settlement
West Berlin. Important to liquidate remnants Second World War. Recalled
Khru-shchev's statement that
“without settlement of German problem and on that basis question of West
Berlin difficult to contemplate progress in disarmament measures.”

Gromyko continued by recalling
past discussions in Geneva, New York and Washington. We faced most
complicated question because no agreement reached on presence Western
troops. Impossible for Western troops to stay forever. Western powers
should say how they propose to regularize situation in West Berlin. Would not repeat Sov Govt views but USSR proceeds from point
of view that West Berlin ties to rest of world should be unhindered.
Also sovereignty of East Germany must be respected. Called upon
Governments US–UK to make sober evaluation of situation. Elimination
remnant World War II corresponded to interest of powers concerned and to
all other states. Secretary Rusk
had said situation more quiet lately but Soviet Government thinks
situation dangerous and pregnant with uncertainties. Thinks this is
question which must be settled.

Lord Home suggested there was
nothing much better than present machinery of Rusk-Dobrynin
talks though thus far no solution. As regards Mr. Gromyko's complaint Western powers had
advanced no new proposals, Lord
Home pointed out it was Soviets who wished change
existing situation and hence they should come forward with acceptable
proposals. Western interest was only that West Berlin remain free and
access unhindered. Gromyko's
statement concerning unhindered access gave Lord Home some hope. But question was how Soviets would
underwrite this and guarantee with us unhindered access.

Gromyko asked what kind of
freedom existed in West Berlin which is guarded by foreign bayonets.
Main thing was presence of occupation troops. How could this be
justified after so many years. Important draw line under World War II.
Soviet proposals well known.

Gromyko continued, Lord Home had referred to free
elections. This argument reeked of “moth balls.” As to Khrushchev's statement impossible
change situation by either side engulfing the other, why not take
logical conclusion and recognize existence two sovereign German states.
Gromyko then took up
Lord Home's reference to
machinery and said while it was useful and perhaps necessary, still
there was danger of relying only on this machinery. No matter how
capable Secy Rusk or Ambassador
Dobrynin were this could go
on 10–25 or 100 years. He was not referring to them in a personal sense.
There was no known instrument which could detect progress in these
discussions.

Secy said, as he had mentioned to Gromyko in past, question was more of access to what and
this involves presence Western troops in West Berlin. Almost waste of
time to go on if this is not accepted. We ready to explore what access
arrangements are possible. Recalled that Western powers had once talked
among themselves on this problem and story had broken in press whereupon
Moscow Radio had rejected proposals even before receiving them.

Secy emphasized what he had said before—need for genuine reciprocity.
Hard believe few thousand troops in Berlin threatened several Soviet
divisions in East Germany. We have been told East Germany was gone, East Berlin none of our
business and instead all demands were concentrated on diminishing
Western position in West Berlin. We see no reciprocity in this. We
readily concede Soviet Union is great power but so are we. We not
interested on theoretical basis on maintaining remnants World War II but
had living commitment to more than two million people. We should like to
remove remnants of World War II but we do not want this to become seeds
of World War III. Tensions have been reduced in both parts of Central
Europe by developments in last two years.

Secretary commented though his discussions with Dobrynin have become repetitious,
farreaching fundamental problems involved. As responsible powers we
ought to find way to handle peacefully, hence our Principles Paper 1962
tried take into account elements affecting USSR not only in regard to
question West Berlin and access thereto but also concerning no use of
force change borders and question of nuclear weapons, in short, one
small word could transform nature whole problem. This word was
“reciprocity”.

Gromyko replied Soviets do not
fear word “reciprocity”. Soviet proposals took into account common
interests. After repeating Soviet line on presence foreign troops and
status West Berlin Gromyko said
if he mentioned partial measures which ought to be implemented, this
should not be taken to mean they disregarded fundamental measures for
liquidation remnants World War II.

Secretary said would be glad hear anything Gromyko would wish to say while he is here, before or
during GA.

Lord Home suggested they could
talk about partial measures in tomorrow's bilateral Soviet-UK session.
Perhaps Dobrynin and Secretary
could talk again before GA and then
Foreign Ministers could have basic review in New York.

Gromyko then asked if Ministers
had 10 more minutes. He would speak to partial measures though without
prejudice to Soviet belief in urgency settlement main problem of
Germany. These partial measures concerned payment of all services
rendered by GDR for communications
between GDR (not clear whether he meant
West Berlin) and FRG, i.e., it concerned
transit communications. Mentioned (1) new tariffs for passengers and
military transport by rail; (2) tolls for using Autobahns by troops and
military goods by auto transport of Western powers; (3) payment by
occupation troops for use of communication cables going through
territory of GDR to and from West
Berlin; (4) question of air communications. Gromyko said in this regard situation not at all normal
when international companies now using these routes and some West German
cities planning also to use these routes. This was clearly untenable situation. There were also
plans for aircraft bearing mark of fourth country appearing in air
routes between West Berlin and FRG.

Gromyko continued, existing
communications situation discriminatory against GDR.

As last point he mentioned discrimination against GDR in international events such as sports, scientific
conferences, etc. All this was part of NATO campaign against GDR.

Gromyko said he had named only a
few points. There were other practical questions which needed solution
and all these steps should be taken without delay. Even solution these
measures would not affect main problem settlement of German problem and
West Berlin. Soviet Union was not against “fresh look” suggested by
Secretary but present mechanism was squeaking and not working. Called
upon US–UK to consider long-range and basic interests of all our
countries and not quarrel endlessly about West Berlin. Our governments
have many mutual interests other than interests of militarists of West
German circles.

Secretary said we must give further thought practical measures to
increase well-being and prosperity peoples in this area. Rejected
designation of Bonn as militaristic. Soviet Union supported
self-determination almost everywhere except in Central Europe. Germans
want to live in their own country in their own way. This is not
militarism.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL US–USSR. Secret; Operational Immediate; Eyes
Only. Received at 9:07 p.m. and passed to the White House.

2 A report on the first
tripartite session on August 6, which dealt with the Test Ban
Treaty, was transmitted in Secto 20, August 8. (Ibid.)

3 Secto 28, August 7. (Ibid.)

4 Home and members of the
British delegation, like Rusk
and his colleagues, had met with Khrushchev on August 5.

5 Document 20.

208. Memorandum of Conversation208. Memorandum of Conversation1

PitsundaAugust 9, 1963, 10:15 a.m.

US/MC/5

PARTICIPANTS

US

The Secretary

Ambassador Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Richard Davis, EUR

Mr. Akalovsky, ACDA/IR

USSR

Mr. Khrushchev

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Vinogradov

SUBJECT

Part II—Germany and Berlin

Using as a springboard the discussion of the sequence of events leading
to a non-aggression pact, Mr. Khrushchev launched into a discussion of Germany and
Berlin.2

He said the USSR believed it would be useful for our two countries and
for the world at large to resolve the most difficult, and at the same
time the easiest question, because all the difficulties surrounding it
were contrived, i.e., that of a peace treaty with Germany. He thought
this was both a basic and quarrelsome problem. He thought it was
quarrelsome because it reminded him of a story in which some official
was asked whether or not he believed in God; the official replied “not
at the office but at home”. Thus if one asked the US whether it was for
a peace treaty it would reply “in confidence yes, but not in public”.
Khrushchev recalled that in
his conversation with President Eisenhower he had not gained the
impression that the latter was opposed. The same went for De Gaulle, who had only insisted that
West Germany should remain part of the Western alliance. To this, Mr.
Khrushchev said, he had
replied that would be all right and it was West Germany's own business.
As to Germany's division, De
Gaulle had said two parts were fine and three would be
even better. However, De Gaulle
had said things should be left as they were and we should not hurry as
there would be nothing to gain. Yet such a provision could not be
understood by the peoples of the world. Also, as Ambassador Thompson would remember, he, Khrushchev, had asked Eisenhower why
the US was arming West Germany and thus was creating a dangerous
situation. Eisenhower had replied West Germany was competing with the US
in the economic field and therefore the US wanted to make West Germany
spend money on arms. This, he thought, was a straightforward answer by a
soldier. Khrushchev believed it
was paradoxical that De Gaulle
should be the most negative with regard to the negotiations, for it was
De Gaulle who had gone farthest with respect to the
question of borders. De Gaulle
had stated borders should stay as they were, and he had stated publicly
what others only whispered.

Mr. Khrushchev went on to say that
if one looked at the US NATO allies
Adenauer was the only one to
oppose a peace treaty in substance. De
Gaulle agreed in substance but was opposed in form. The
reason for his opposition was that in struggling against the United
States he needed a strong supporter in Europe; therefore, he placed his
stakes on Adenauer. While he
needed a strong state to support him, De
Gaulle had assured the USSR he was against West Germany's
having nuclear weapons and that he did not want war against the Soviet
Union. This course was in effect political speculation, but it could
provoke bloodshed among the peoples of the world. It was also a sign of
imperialist degeneration, but he, Khrushchev, did not wish to get involved in a discussion
of this kind now and would prefer to leave this matter aside for
awhile.

Khrushchev said that as far as
the UK was concerned, the Conserv-atives were in favor but they did not
wish to introduce discord in the Western orchestra. The Laborites agreed
with the Soviet position on this point. Spaak too had said on several
occasions that in those European countries where workers' parties were
in the government the governments were in favor of a peace treaty. Spaak
was also in favor of a non-aggression pact and had stated so in public.
Denmark, Norway, Holland and Luxembourg held the same position. Thus
only West Germany remained, and also France. France was opposed, in the
interest of a struggle for leadership in Europe. France wanted to kick
the United States out of political leadership in Europe and take its
place. However, France was too weak to do so alone and needed West
Germany's support.

Thus Khrushchev believed the
United States' position was the same as that of the UK. If it were not
for such speculations by France, the United States could sign a peace
treaty. Nothing would be lost although the gain would not be great
either, but the cause of peace would benefit and the cold war would be
liquidated. Adenauer has now
become a leading figure in world politics, because he wanted to impose
an aggressive policy on the Western powers; thus victors were now on the
leash of the vanquished.

If one were to analyze the Soviet and the US position, Khrushchev continued, one would see
that all NATO countries, including
Adenauer, had come to the
conclusion that borders could not be changed by force now, and were
prepared to record this publicly but not formalize it. The objectives of
a peace treaty were the same. Ten years after Dulles had spoken of
rolling back socialism eastward, the West had recognized this but was
not prepared to formalize this juridically. Khrushchev said he did not know what would happen ten
years hence, but the USSR and other socialist states might lose patience and sign a peace treaty
unilaterally. The US said this would mean war, but he believed the US
would have more wisdom than stupidity, because wars were waged only when
basic interests were involved. In this case Adenauer's interests were involved, but then Adenauer might be dead by that time for
all of us were mortal.

The Secretary said he wished to comment briefly on the situation. First
he wanted to make two general observations since they had some bearing
on the German problem. He said his deepest impression on this short
visit to the Soviet Union was to see Soviet people at work and pursuing
their daily affairs. He had also driven by automobile between New York
and San Francisco on several occasions and had seen American people at
work. On the basis of what he had seen in Moscow, Leningrad, and during
his very brief stay here in the south, he had no doubt that the Soviet
people, just as the American people, had no greater desire than to work
in peace. Therefore, it was up to our respective governments to ensure
such opportunity to their peoples. Another observation he wished to make
was that, in his view, Mr. Khrushchev and President Kennedy
were perhaps the only people who realized what modern war was. There
were others, of course, who knew about the military and other aspects of
modern war, but it was Mr. Khrushchev and the President who carried the ultimate
responsibility. It was therefore important for the two leaders to find a
possibility of collaborating on as many points as possible. The
Secretary noted that the President had quoted Mr. Khrushchev's remarks on the nature of
modern war. He continued that our two countries had a common historical
background with respect to this situation, although the Soviet Union had
perhaps greater experience because it had suffered so much from Hitler's
Germany. However, it was a fundamental fact that our two countries had
fought together against Hitler and they must not permit this problem to
divide them. A peace treaty as such did not bother us. In 1954, the
Western powers had declared solemnly that they would not seek change of
the borders by force; while the circumstances in which that declaration
had been made were somewhat different, the pledge still stood and this
was fundamental.

The Secretary continued that while Mr. Khrushchev might not agree with what he was going to
say, he hoped Mr. Khrushchev
would take his remarks seriously and accept that we are genuine in our
belief. We believed that any settlements if they were to be secure and
safe had to be related to the wishes of the peoples involved. The
Secretary said he had no sure knowledge of how the East Germans would
express themselves if they were permitted to do so, but he believed that
if the Soviet Union and we separated the Germans without their consent
and then walked away, this would only sow seeds of great danger and
perhaps of eventual conflict in
Central Europe, because the Germans were restless and wished to organize
themselves according to their own desires. We agreed and held the same
view as the Soviet Union that the Germans should not have a national
nuclear capability; indeed we felt very strongly that there were enough
nuclear powers in the world and our strong pursuit of this policy had
resulted in considerable strain in our relations with France. We saw no
desire whatsoever of having West Germany equipped with nuclear weapons,
either through its own efforts or by somebody else.

The Secretary then said this situation should be examined. He believed
that if we allowed things to develop in the proper direction, more
normal relations would be brought about not only between the two parts
of Germany, but also between West Germany and the socialist countries to
the east. He wondered whether Mr. Khrushchev would agree that considerable improvement in
this respect had already taken place as compared to the situation two or
three years ago.

The Secretary also thought we could make some advance in the disarmament
field. There were a number of steps which could in a significant and
practical way bring us closer to the solution of the real problems of
disarmament. Such steps could remove some problems in the relationship
between NATO and the Warsaw Pact. We
believed there were difficulties at this time with respect to sweeping
disarmament but we could take a number of smaller steps to begin the
momentum towards real disarmament. The Secretary hoped that over the
next several months points could be found on which agreement could be
reached, because whatever the arrangements in Central Europe they were
based on the hope for disarmament, and we hoped we could find
disarmament arrangements which would apply to both the capitalist and
the socialist parts of Europe.

The Secretary believed that the governments of today, indeed all of us,
have inherited some problems from the immediate post-war period. Those
problems were difficult and each side had inherited its own
difficulties. As to the United States, we had withdrawn considerable
forces from what was now East Germany and had introduced our forces in
West Berlin. We had done so to abide by the provisions of the agreement
which had been previously reached with respect to Germany. At that time,
some people felt there would be difficulties in connection with our
presence in West Berlin and some had insisted that a territorial
corridor to West Berlin be established. This had not been pressed
because it had been felt that it could be interpreted as lack of
confidence in the Soviet Union. Subsequently, the Berlin blockade
occurred; after access had been restored, the arrangements were again
such as did not reflect lack of confidence in the Soviet Government. Our
two sides must find ways of attempting to increase confidence by moving
ahead on measures in such
fields as humanitarian, trade, and cultural. Steps in these fields would
all increase confidence and strengthen the hopes for the future.
However, at the moment—perhaps Mr. Khrushchev would agree—acceptance of substantial
responsibility by both the Soviet Union and the United States and our
presence in Germany was an element of stability and not instability. For
we did not know who might do what to whom if we were not there and if we
did not accept responsibility for stability and peace in that part of
the world.

Mr. Khrushchev nodded but said a
peace treaty should nonetheless be signed. The signing of such a treaty
was an unavoidable act after any war. He said he agreed with what the
Secretary had said, and the Secretary's remarks contained many
reasonable points. However, the conclusion to be drawn was that a peace
treaty should be signed. In the absence of such a treaty, there would
always be frictions. For example, if one took the GDR, the Western Powers had communications
going through the GDR territory, for the
use of which the Western Powers did not pay. The GDR was obviously discontented and it could break the
cables; what could be done in such a case, for the GDR would have the right to take such
action. Furthermore, the US had encouraged West Germany not to pay
reparations; even plants which were subject to disassembly and transfer
under the Potsdam agreement had not been disassembled or transferred.
While other countries, such as East Germany, Rumania, Finland, Hungary,
etc., had paid their reparations, West Germany, the richest country of
them all and the one most responsible for the war, had not paid and in
refusing to do so had leaned on US support.

Khrushchev said the USSR agreed
that a peace treaty should state that the way for a reunification of
Germany remained open and that each party to the treaty would facilitate
this effort. However, we should stand aside and leave it to the two
German states to resolve the problem. While he said that we should stand
aside, he wished to point out that naturally we had our respective
positions and sympathies: the Soviet Union was for the system in East
Germany. However, the West could not change the system in the GDR, nor could the Soviet Union change the
system in West Germany. It was not as the Secretary had said that the
people of the whole of Germany could decide their destiny; it was a
question of the peoples in the two German states to decide what their
future would be.

Khrushchev continued the West had
corns in the GDR. They should be removed
so that there would be no temptation to step on them. It was Walter
Lippmann who had invented this expression, and it was a wise expression.
So, a peace treaty should be signed.

The Secretary observed this was one of the problems. These corns were
tempting given the geography of the situation. However, it was important to resist such
temptation for it would be hard for us to apologize if our corns were
under someone's foot.

Khrushchev interjected he who
stepped on corns apologized but then stepped again grinding his heel.
The Secretary observed this was not very polite. Khrushchev asked whether it was polite
not to sign a peace treaty and to have corns in foreign territory. The
Secretary said we had withdrawn from Thuringia and Saxony to abide
faithfully by our agreement. Khrushchev said the USSR did not want West Berlin. West
Berlin should be a third German state with a special status to be
respected by all.

The Secretary continued that with regard to the principle of unification,
that was a very important point and the Chairman himself had said on
several occasions that the way should remain open.

Khrushchev commented it was
necessary to leave it open.

The Secretary wondered whether it was really important from the Soviets'
viewpoint to ask the two parts of Germany individually about
unification, rather than to ask the German people as a whole. In saying
this he was not asking that West Germany outvote East Germany, but there
was an important difference here. He was not talking in terms of
short-range problems or tactics, but rather in terms of long-range
problems relating to the Continent. In referring to the Continent, he
had in mind what De Gaulle had
called Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals, i.e., the entire
continental area.

Khrushchev believed this matter
was not subject to discussion, because both parts of Germany had their
governments, their parliaments and elections. The GDR would hold elections in the near
future, elections which ensured the most democratic way of soliciting
popular opinion. There was no question of asking the two States again.
Furthermore, had the US asked the people of Pakistan before it
recognized Ayub Khan, who had dismissed the legitimately-elected
government and used armed force to seize power. Also, in Guatemala
bandits had seized power and thrown out the legitimately-elected
president, and they had done so with the support of the US intelligence
service. He wondered whether the people of Guatemala had been asked
about it. Another example was Diem, who was persecuting the people of
Viet Nam; the United States had recognized Diem without consulting the
people, but if it were to ask the people, both Diem and the United
States would be kicked out. Therefore, we should not dwell on this
matter. He wished to add, however, that the United States had voted with
force: it had used force to kick out the British and it had been right
in doing so. The USSR had done the same; it had kicked out the White
Guards and the US, UK, and Polish interventionists who had been helping
the Whites. Thus, peoples had their own ways of settling their affairs.
He would suggest that we do not get involved in such a discussion,
because that would only lead us
into a jungle. He wished to note, however, that nobody had asked the
Spanish people about Franco; this bandit-like government had seized
power without anybody's consulting the will of the people. There were
many governments like this.

The Secretary pointed out there was substantial difference between
situations where the form of government was an internal matter, and, of
course, we could have a lively discussion about many governments in the
world, and the situation, such as the one under discussion, where the
question was what was the state, who was to live where, and who was to
live together or separately. He believed the people had to be asked
these questions.

Mr. Khrushchev said he wished to
interrupt the Secretary and make an unpleasant point. Under the 1954
agreement all of Viet Nam had to have elections four years later.
However, the US had not allowed those elections. Consequently the US was
interpreting this problem in a mercantile way, namely, it regarded as
democratic everything that was profitable.

The Secretary continued he did not wish to press this point, for he
realized that Mr. Khrushchev had
his own position and that as much as he regretted it, it did not appear
to be possible to resolve this particular point this morning.

Khrushchev agreed and suggested
it would be better to put this matter aside. He did not believe the
Secretary's and his efforts would be sufficient to resolve the problem
and thought history would have to come to assistance.

Khrushchev then suggested that
the discussion should turn to more innocent matters, such as trade
(covered in part III of the memorandum of conversation).3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER. Secret; Eyes Only. The source text
bears no drafting information, but it was approved in S on August 28. The meeting was held at
Khrushchev's dacha. A
summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 53 from Moscow,
August 9. (Ibid., ORG 7 S)

2 In the previous discussion
Khrushchev, after
expressing satisfaction about the signing of the Test Ban Treaty,
said that it would be useful to move ahead on other questions and
added that a NATO-Warsaw Pact
non-aggression pact was a question that could be easily solved.
Rusk then reiterated the
U.S. position that a non-aggression pact should come at the end of
the road after issues like Laos and Berlin had been resolved, but
stated that the United States would discuss the question with its
Allies. (Memorandum of conversation, US/MC/4; Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Khrushchev/Rusk)

3 Part III on trade is printed in vol. V, Document 210; Part IV on Laos is printed in
vol. XXIV, Document 484.

209. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State209. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

Bonn, August 10,
1963, 7:40 p.m.

Secto 60. Eyes only for the President from the Secretary. Following are
results and impressions of talks today with CHANCELLOR, Erhard, and Schroeder individually and in group meetings.2

1. Federal Republic will almost certainly sign test ban treaty. My
information is that decision to sign was practically in the bag but for
reasons obscured in local politics, fact of my visit seemed to provide
an occasion to button it up. Federal Republic has already briefed press
that decision to sign is taken and that Cabinet meeting on Monday will
attend to details. US Embassy and Chayes 3
have done excellent job in sorting out many points of detail with the
Germans which were being used more as pretexts than real reasons.
Apparently the Von Brentano
assault on Schroeder has been
repulsed for the time being.

2. In private talk Chancellor went about as far as his personality would
permit in expressing regret for “misunderstandings” which might have
arisen from his talk with McNamara. He claims that what he meant to convey was
that Soviet position is getting weaker and that we should not rush to
bail them out through agreements which strengthen Khrushchev's hands. Thanking him for
his clarification, I took advantage of chance to tell him why the
“misunderstanding” had caused us deep concern along the lines of your
letter to him, your cable to me.4 I am under no illusion my effort effected a cure but
it might last for at least a few days.

3. Again in private talk Chancellor was quite emotional about withdrawal
of six hundred troops from West Berlin.5 He claimed it would be interpreted as a political
gesture to Khrushchev, that it
would undercut the effect of your visit to Germany and Berlin, and that
political consequences were far more important than numbers of troops
involved. I gave him full line of arguments but did not succeed in persuading him. I told him that
I would of course report his views to you but made no commitment about
reviewing the position or changing the decision. We may hear from him
again on this but if West Berlin takes it in stride my guess is that he
will not press it unduly, particularly since he is going to Lake Como on
the nineteenth for extended vacation.

4. Chancellor was entirely cordial personally, looked in fine health and
was most agreeable at dinner tonight with Government and Parliamentary
leaders. There was not even any nostalgia expressed for the good old
John Foster Dulles days.

Other matters will be reported in Embassy telegrams.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2290. Secret; Operational
Immediate; No Other Distribution. Drafted and initialed by Rusk.

2 Secretary Rusk was in Bonn August 10–11 after he left the
Soviet Union. Memoranda of the conversations with Adenauer and Schroeder, US/MC/8 and 9, are ibid.,
Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Sectos 57 and
58, August 10 and 11, also reported on Rusk's conversations in Bonn. (Ibid., Central Files,
POL US–USSR and ORG 7 S)

3
Abram J. Chayes, Legal Adviser of the Department of State.

4 Document 205 and footnote 3
thereto.

5 During July the United States had reorganized its Berlin garrison,
reducing the number of troops by about 600, but increasing its
weaponry.

210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany210. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, August 15, 1963, 2:36 p.m.

475. Paris also pass USRO. Ref: Deptel 462.2 Subj: Practical Measures on
Berlin.

1. We can at this point only speculate on what lay behind Gromyko's references on August 7 to
“practical measures” to Secretary and Home. We note, however, that these follow Khrushchev threat to step on Allied
“corns” to Spaak. They also follow Ulbricht July 31 speech to Volkskammer,3 in which he complained
regarding Allied access to east Berlin, use of air corridors by civil
airlines, and TTDs. All these appear to
be directed toward enhancement status GDR.

2. These statements could also be related to GDR moves related to IZT.
We note in this regard apparent GDR
effort move discussion “political” questions out of IZT framework (Bonn 546).4

3. Soviets may, therefore, be trying to shift focus on Berlin from Allied
troops to Allied access. Coupled with effort to increase Soviet presence
in west Berlin, this could be designed pursue Soviet objectives through
step by step approach which kept pressure on but minimized risks.
Practical measures may also have been raised to serve notice on West
that continued lull in Berlin cannot be taken for granted.

4. It remains to be seen whether Soviets intend pursue question
“practical measures” with us, will allow GDR see what they can do, or will use combination Soviet
and GDR efforts. We are also not yet
clear as to how Soviets propose relate “practical measures” on Berlin to
NAP and partial disarmament
measures.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Confidential; Limit Distribution.
Drafted by Ausland; cleared by Ambassador at Large Thompson, Valdes (SOV), and Baraz (INR/SOV); and approved by Davis. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow,
SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak,
CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

2 Telegram 462, August 14, summarized the practical measures that
Gromyko had outlined to
Secretary Rusk on August 6
(see Document 207). (Department of State,
Central Files, POL 28 Berlin)

3 For text of this speech, see Dokumente zur
Deutschlandpolitik, 1963, pp. 587–600.

4 Dated August 10. (Department of State, Central
Files, FT 4 E GER-W GER)

211. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany211. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, August 20, 1963, 1:04 p.m.

522. Eyes only for Ambassador. Following, for immediate delivery, is text
President's reply to Chancellor's letter of August 17:2

“Dear Mr. CHANCELLOR:

Thank you for your thoughtful letter of August 17. I am pleased that we
are moving together on the test ban treaty.

I am sure that the Federal Republic's decision to sign the test ban will
be to its advantage. As I said in my letter of August 6,3 not only has every
precaution been taken to avoid giving the Soviet Zone regime the
political recognition and prestige it does not have and will not have;
but the deposit of your instrument of ratification with all three
depositories will demonstrate in an unmistakable way that the Federal
Republic can and does speak for the German people.

Secretary Rusk has talked to me
about his visit to Bonn. I thank you for the courtesy extended him and
for your frank and cordial conversations with him. He said you were concerned about the possible
effect of the reorganization of our Berlin garrison. As he pointed out,
this action is but a part of a world-wide reorganization of the United
States Army. A small reduction in the total number of U.S. troops in
Berlin will result, but more United States soldiers will remain there
than were present prior to August 1961. In addition, our Berlin garrison
will now have additional equipment and weapons which will increase its
combat capability and make it a substantially stronger force than it
was.

I fully agree that it is important that our Governments maintain the
closest contact on future problems of mutual interest. In this regard,
we are about to begin consultations on issues affecting East-West
negotiations in the NATO Council and
the quadripartite Ambassadorial Group. I believe that our officials
should maintain, in addition, close bilateral contacts both in
Washington and Bonn.

Recently I looked into the way your Government was consulted on the
Berlin garrison reorganization and on other matters. While there was
contact between our officials regarding the reorganization plan, the
consultation was not done in sufficient time. I have instructed our
officers to make a special effort to maintain the closest cohesion in
the foreign affairs of our two countries and I hope there will be no
more problems of this kind. If there are, please let me know
immediately.

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy”

Ball

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, DEF 18–4. Secret; Operational Immediate. The source
text bears the notation “Text rec'd from White House.”

2 See footnote 3, Document
205.

3 Document 205.

212. Memorandum for the Files by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)212. Memorandum for the Files by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)1

Washington, August 22,
1963.

12:57 p.m.—Thursday, August 22, 1963

The President telephoned me to inquire what our response is to be to the
Germans on the peace plan.2

I said a meeting was held this morning with Mr. Bundy, Nitze and others. One result was that it was suggested
that the Secretary write a letter to Schroeder trying to
divert him into making a speech instead of putting forth the plan.
Another suggestion was that either Mr. Bundy or Ambassador Thompson call on Schroeder under cover of consulting with other
allies.

The President inquired whether the German proposal had been put before
the NATO Council. I said reference to
the German proposal had been made in the Council. What we would like
them to do is to discuss it in general terms and not put forward the
specific terms.

The President inquired as to what the French say about it.

I said they supported it in the first place and will now, probably. I
said this matter was discussed at length this morning in Mr. Bundy's office and it was decided that
we should try to get them to put it in the form of a speech, which would
give more flexibility. I said it was a pretty bad thing and could
provoke the Russians into taking some action. I mentioned Home's talk with Schroeder in which the latter explained
what they had in mind. He said the British are pretty unhappy about
it.

The President inquired how it went in NATO on observation posts, and asked whether the “New York
Times” story3 was
accurate. I assured the President that it was not and that discussion
had gone well.

LEThompson 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 21.
Secret.

2 When Secretary
Rusk had briefed Schroeder
on August 10 about his conversations in Moscow (see Document 209), Schroeder had given him the text of a German peace
plan. A copy of the plan is attached to a memorandum from Klein to Bundy in the Kennedy Library, National Security
Files, Countries Series, Germany.

3 Presumably reference is to a
story on page 10 of The New York Times, August 21, 1963.

4 Printed from a copy that bears
this typed signature.

213. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany213. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, August 27, 1963, 7:30 p.m.

607. Following for earliest convenient delivery is text of letter from
Secretary to Schroeder:

“Dear Gerhard:

Thank you for your letter of August seventeenth.2

I share your satisfaction that the Federal Government has signed the Test
Ban Treaty. As you may have observed, the Treaty is being subjected to a
thorough and careful examination by our Senate, but I am confident that
it will be approved by a very substantial majority.

Since the President has written to the Chancellor3
about the general question of consultation, I shall limit myself to
saying that the Department of State, our Embassy in Bonn, and I are all
anxious to maintain the closest liaison on questions of mutual
interest.

Judging by the reports I have seen on the discussions thus far in the
North Atlantic Council, they are likely to go into the questions of
observation posts and nonaggression arrangements very thoroughly. We
have not ourselves arrived at any final conclusions as to our own views
on these subjects. Nor will we wish to do so, pending our learning more
of your views and the attitudes of the other members of NATO.

I must confess that I am concerned about a recurring dilemma in the
process of NATO consultation. Quite
naturally we wish to take fully into account the views of our allies in
the shaping of our own attitudes on important questions. On the other
hand, it frequently is not possible to get the views of other
governments except as a reaction to specific proposals or points of view
from the American side. It seems to me that we should work toward a
process of genuine consultation in which governments, in the first
stage, are ready to put in provisional or tentative views for the
consideration of the other allies in order that these views can be taken
into full account by all of us in reaching conclusions.

You raised one specific question regarding observation posts—how the
Soviet Zone of occupation could be included in such an agreement. So
far, the Soviets appear to be linking their proposal on observation
posts with unacceptable conditions. If, however, an agreement on this
subject should prove negotiable, there is no question but that the
problem of including the Soviet Zone of occupation would become one of
the key questions. I would think that, from a military point of view,
you as well as we would want arrangements affecting surprise attack to
include an area in which there are more than twenty Soviet divisions in
direct contact with NATO forces. We are
examining various alternative solutions, but have not yet come to any
conclusions. If you have any suggestions, I should be glad to hear
them.

Although not mentioned in your letter, I should like to refer to your
proposals concerning your draft of a Revised Peace Plan. I appreciated
your raising the subject with me in Bonn before coming to any conclusion
and am gratified to learn that you decided to consult in the
Ambassadorial Group rather than proceeding direct with the publication.
I have more difficulty with the
timing and procedure of your proposals than with their substance. As you
know, this plan has a long history. I believe that the textual
differences between us are not insurmountable and could be overcome if
the necessity arose.

As to timing, I think we are agreed that your proposal would not now be
negotiable. As you know, the Sino-Soviet quarrel is now in an acute
stage and the Soviets have been accused by the Chinese of not defending
the interests of the so-called GDR.
Moreover, the Soviets appear to be sensitive to articles in the Western
press suggesting that because of their differences with the Chinese,
they are obliged to turn to the West. In these circumstances, I fear
that putting forward your plan as a concrete proposal at this time may
precipitate Soviet actions, particularly in Berlin, designed to
demonstrate the firmness of their position.

My greatest concern, however, relates to the proposed procedure of the
German Government publishing an exact text of a proposal submitted to
its allies in the absence of any prospect of serious negotiation upon it
with the Soviet Union. This would have the disadvantage of focusing
public attention upon even the most minor change which might be made in
the plan should negotiations upon it become possible at some time in the
future. Moreover, it would give the Soviets ample opportunity to attack
and discredit the plan and possibly take a position which would make it
difficult for the four of us to put it forward at an appropriate
time.

I am, however, in full sympathy with your desire to keep attention
focused upon our common objective of reunification, and I wonder if a
better way to do this could not be found. For example, could you not
make a major address in which you would outline your views on the
questions dealt with in the Peace Plan, particularly the problem of
reunification? If you would advise us in advance of what you were
planning to say, we could be ready to comment in a constructive way.

Although we will probably be discussing these questions when we see each
other in New York, I should appreciate any reactions you might have
before then to these suggestions. I think it most important that our
Governments keep in step, and I hope that we can arrive at an early
agreement on how best to proceed.

With warm personal regards, I am

Sincerely, Dean”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Confidential. Drafted by
Rusk and Thompson and cleared by Bundy.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

3 See Document 211.

214. Memorandum of Conversation214. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 19,
1963.

SUBJECT

United States-German Relations

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Ambassador George C.
McGhee

I met with the President today. We were alone. The discussion lasted for
approximately one-half hour.

The President asked whether I considered that his recent visit to Germany
had proven helpful, and in particular whether it had been of any
assistance in overcoming the recent issues faced with the FRG over the
Test Ban Treaty.

I replied that the visit had, from every viewpoint, been a very positive
factor in our relations with Germany. It has given us a reservoir of
good will and confidence, both in the President and our country, which
will last for a long time to come. We had, however, drawn some bit on
this credit during the recent Test Ban Treaty as a result of what the
Germans considered to be a lack of full consultation. It was my hope
that such a situation would not reoccur.

I asked the President if he had an opportunity to read my telegram of
September 18 to the Department, which covered my meeting with Foreign
Minister Schroeder following his
return from discussions in Paris with Couve
de Murville, the French Foreign Minister.2 Since the President had
not, I gave him a copy and he read it. He seemed particularly impressed
by the negative attitude displayed by the French on almost every
issue.

He commented briefly on the current German resistance to the negotiation
of East-West treaties which might have the effect of producing a
detente. Adenauer had consistently
opposed agreements with the Soviets and efforts to relax tension. Would
he ever change? Would other German leaders share his views? There was
some discussion as to whether relaxation of tensions would be more
likely to lead to achievement of Germany's objectives of reunification
than a continuation of tension. I presented the view, which I believe
the President shared, that a better case could be made for the
former.

I advised the President of two matters which Vice Chancellor Erhard had raised with me.3 First was the question
of a visit to this country, which he wished to make as soon as possible
after he comes into office, which would presumably be about October 15.
Erhard suggested November. The
Department had proposed that he be invited as a Presidential guest.

The President agreed that the necessary arrangements should be made.

The second point that Erhard asked me to raise concerned his sketchy
thoughts concerning an increase in German trade, presumably requiring
credits, with the USSR. I mentioned that this seemed to fit in with the
latest thinking in the United States Government to the effect that it
might be desirable to increase our own trade with the USSR. Since
Erhard seemed to be in favor
of a considerable German effort in this regard, the President's meeting
with him might provide the impetus for a common effort. Erhard believed that the Western nations
should concert in their approach to the Soviets on trade matters and
should offer similar terms. Erhard
also, of course, hoped that we could get a suitable quid pro quo. From
the German standpoint, this would be something affecting East Germany or
Berlin or reunification. The President indicated he did not wish any
German effort in this regard to appear to be something the Germans owed
the Soviets.

I referred to the forthcoming visit to the United States of Berthold
Beitz, plenipotentiary of Krupp, and Axel Springer, the newspaper owner.
I said that I hoped the President could see both of them. Each was of
great importance in the German picture. The President had met both of
them at the dinner he gave in Bonn and had indicated that he probably
would be able to see them. The President said he would like to see both
of them if his schedule permitted.

I raised the question of troop relocation, pointing out the rumors that
United States forces in Germany might be reduced. I pointed out that
this would not result in any saving if we have confidence in the
continuation of the off-set arrangement and would pose a great
difficulty for us at this time in our relations with the Germans. I
pointed out what this would mean to Erhard at the time he would be coming into office. The
withdrawal of troops would in effect constitute a vote of no confidence.
It would greatly weaken his position.

The President said he had decided against any force reductions in
Germany, although there would be reductions in service troops in
France.

I raised the question of the observation posts negotiations, pointing out
that I felt there was no insurmountable problem on the German side
provided we could find a solution to the points raised by Schroeder in the telegram which the
President had read.

I advised the President that the Germans were very firm on their plans on
the MLF. The President replied we were
equally firm. We, as well as the Germans, are willing to go ahead even
without the British. He asked what the German reaction was to our
proposal that we initiate mixed manning exercises in the near future. I
replied that their preliminary reactions had been good.

I advised the President that, in my opinion, we should work out a
compromise on the poultry questions. Perhaps we could get agreement that
the Commission be given a mandate to negotiate a new regulation. The
Germans, for their part, did not like the present regulation and would
be quite happy to go to some quota basis, which is what we proposed in
Geneva. The President asked me to talk with Mr. Herter 4 about this.

[1 paragraph (5 lines of source text) not
declassified]

The President asked why we were not able to give up all our reserved
powers in Western Europe. I pointed out that most of the remaining
powers outside Berlin would only come into effect in emergency
situations, at which time we would grant our authority to the German
Government, which does not have similar authority. Until legislation is
passed authorizing the FRG to act in an
emergency, the Western Allies probably should retain its rights so that
we can enable the FRG to act in an
emergency. I saw no reason, however, why we shouldn't be willing to
offer to give up these rights once the Germans had obtained the
necessary emergency legislation. We would look into this.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany. Secret. Drafted by McGhee on September 25 and
approved in the White House on October 1.

2 Telegram 1006 from Bonn transmitted Schroeder's account of his meeting
with Couve de Murville on
September 17. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 W GER)

3 Erhard had raised these issues
in a conversation with McGhee on September 6. (Telegram 884 from Bonn,
September 7; ibid., INCO-Poultry US)

4  Christian A. Herter, former Secretary of State,
was the U.S. Special Trade Representative.

215. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany215. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, September 24, 1963, 9:39 p.m.

867. Following for FYI only is summary of
FRG Foreign Minister Schroeder's visit to Washington based on
uncleared memoranda of conversation, which subject amendment upon
review. Memcons will follow.

President met with Schroeder for
hour September 24. Subjects discussed were 1) status of East-West
discussions, 2) MLF and 3) troop
reductions.2 1) President and Schroeder agreed that measures reducing
danger of war are useful and provide better atmosphere as regards
Berlin, even though there is no agreement in prospect which would
improve possibility of German reunification. Schroeder said atmosphere of tension affords no prospect
of progress toward German reunification, but stressed need for clear and
frequently repeated understanding of Western objectives re Germany and
Berlin to prevent feeling in Germany that German problem being ignored.
After discussion of Test Ban Treaty, President said important thing as
regards future consultation is that FRG
receives our views as soon as formulated and vice versa. 2) On MLF President said we should proceed
vigorously and should get one mixed-manned ship to sea as soon as
possible with US, German and Italian personnel. Early action would have
effect of encouraging UK participation. Schroeder agreed. Re French statement (Habib Deloncle at
Strasbourg Sept 23) suggesting UK join with French in European nuclear
effort, Schroeder said this seemed
more like tempting offer for future than concrete offer for present but
reinforced need to proceed with MLF. 3)
On troop withdrawals President said there would for present be no
withdrawals from Germany other than previously announced from Berlin.
Schroeder stressed
desirability of advance consultation and preparation of public opinion
before any future reductions.

At Sept 20 session Secretary and Schroeder first met for 35 minutes without advisers or
interpreters and discussed inter alia extension of Test Ban Treaty to
Berlin.3 Highlight of conference during remainder
first hour and subsequent two-hour working lunch was Schroeder's exposition on subject German
attitudes toward Western initiatives with Soviets.4 He cautioned that pursuit of
Western policy to move ahead from problems at periphery to major
problems at the center could be effective only so long as we kept
constantly in sight (a) basic Communist objectives and (b) Western
objectives on the problems at the center. Relaxation of tensions on the
basis of progress on peripheral issues ran risk of consolidating status
quo on central issues. From German perspective, every arrangement with
Soviets which did not have effect of improving German situation would
create problems for German public opinion. Constant reiteration of basic
Western aims and purposes would reassure Germans these were being kept
in mind and would make it easier for Germans to support initiatives with
Soviets. Schroeder expressed
particular appreciation in this context for President's positive
reference in UN speech to need for German
reunification.5

In subsequent luncheon discussion Secretary commented on Schroeder's earlier remark re danger
that relaxation of tensions would lead to consolidation of status
quo.6 Secretary, observing this
not necessarily so, said postwar experience indicated rather that
tension has had a tendency to lead to consolidation of status quo as
concerned division of Germany. As we move into more completely nuclear
world, this tendency will increase. Secretary noted our commitment to
German reunification; said question was how to achieve. Achievement
unlikely through increase in tension; after all, since 1945 we have not
moved one inch toward reunification. Schroeder agreed but said tension perhaps had advantage
of keeping the question open. If tensions relaxed, people would tend to
think of present situation as normal and to consider Germans as obstacle
to understanding if they keep raising question of reunification.

Other subjects discussed with Secretary were MLF (Secretary expressed strong feeling of President that
we must proceed with MLF and stated US
belief UK will join if MLF gets under
way) and FRG sale of F–86s to Pakistan
(to Schroeder inquiry whether
delivery 80 aircraft, which MOD “in
generous moment” had promised Paks, might be accomplished through US,
Secretary replied he saw no advantage in middleman role for US, which
would not only transfer problem to US but “make it 10 times worse”).
Other subjects briefly touched on were trade with Soviet Bloc, general
NATO problems, European
agricultural policy and GDR status with
Olympic Committee.

Schroeder's other meetings
included appointments with Bundy
and Sorensen, stag dinner hosted
by Knappstein including
Fulbright, Murrow, Foster,
McGhee, Tyler, Nitze, Rostow,7 appearances at Steuben Day parade in NY Sept 20, lunch
hosted by Amb McGhee at
Middleburg Sept 22 including Ball, Murrow, and Lippmann, visit to SAC Sept 23, and lunch at Senate Sept 24 hosted by
Fulbright.

Schroeder scheduled meet with
Secretary and Lord Home in NY
morning of Sept 27 and return to Bonn Sept 28 or 29.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2315. Secret. Drafted by
Creel, Finn, and Stalder
(GER) and approved by Tyler. Repeated to Paris, Rome,
London, Berlin, and USUN for
Secretary Rusk.

2 Memoranda of conversation on
these topics are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany.

3 No other record of this meeting
has been found.

4 A memorandum of this conversation is in Department
of State, Central Files, POL US–USSR.

5 For text of President
Kennedy's September 20 address before the General Assembly, see
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp.
693–698.

6 A memorandum of this conversation
is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 W EUR.

7  J. William
Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee;
Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA;
and Walt W. Rostow, Counselor
and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, Department of
State.

216. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State216. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of
State1

New York, October 3, 1963, 1 a.m.

Secto 55. Following is brief resume conversation at Gromyko's dinner Oct 2.

In addition to matters discussed tete-a-tete between Secretary and
Gromyko, following subjects
were discussed in post-dinner conversation on which entire group sat
in:

[Here follows discussion of Laos.]

2. Gromyko then changed subject
and raised Germany and Berlin along familiar Sov line, but without using acrimonious or excessive
language. Expressed interest in what US meant by “possible interim
arrangement” and by possibility of taking “fresh look” at problem. Noted
question presence Western forces West Berlin had been stumbling block in
last year's discussions during which, he contended, both sides had been
very close to agreement on many other points then discussed. Stressed
Sovs could not agree to indefinite presence Western forces. Secretary
replied forcefully Sovs had agreed to such presence under existing agreements and now seeking
reduce Western position West Berlin with no reciprocity, and this of
course unacceptable to us. Questioned possibility reach final solution
German problem now in view Sov position
on reunification, but expressed view in meantime perhaps some
arrangements could be agreed upon to improve security both sides in that
area. Noted no such arrangement should be at expense our Allies.

3. Gromyko then asked about NAP. Secretary asked in return whether an
NAP would apply to West Berlin, with
Gromyko taking usual line
that reference to Berlin in an NAP would
“drown” NAP and that NAP would provide for peaceful settlement
all issues without exception.

Full memcon will follow.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Secret; Limit Distribution.

2  SecDel/MC/93,
October 4. (Ibid., POL GER)

217. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State217. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, October 3,
1963, 8 p.m.

1215. I met for an hour today with EconMin Erhard. He opened by saying that I would probably read
press reports of the Cabinet meeting of yesterday to the effect that he
intended to assume an antagonistic attitude toward the Soviets. He
assured me that this was not the case—that he was opposed to putting
pressure on Khrushchev at this
time. Khrushchev now faces both
the threat of 700 million hostile Chinese and the demands of his own
bourgeois community for a higher standard of living, which are together
beyond his capacity to meet. In order to meet them he must build up his
economy.

Erhard commented that everyone
seems to agree to this, but different interpretations are drawn as to
what should be done about it. Some feel that we should take advantage of
Khrushchev's present weakness
by allowing his situation
to deteriorate to the point where is more amenable. He (Erhard), on the other hand, believes
that we should not act as though Khrushchev were weak, but should attempt to negotiate
with him.

Adenauer made a statement last
evening to the effect that he is opposed to the current wheat sales to
the Soviets. Erhard said he
approves such sales if they are needed to feed the Russian population.
He would not, on the other hand, be in favor of them if they are
intended to build up war reserves, as some say, but which he does not
himself believe. He wanted to reassure the President on these
points.

I told Dr. Erhard that I was sure
the President would appreciate hearing his views. I described that
results of the talks between FonMinSchroeder and the President and
Secretary2 on the question of negotiations with
Soviets and reduction of tensions as being very much along the same
lines and quite satisfactory to our government. Dr. Erhard said that the German public
insists on linking progress in East-West relations with the German
problem. There is no distrust of the United States, but we must not give
the appearance that the status quo is acceptable.

I advised Dr. Erhard that I had,
since our earlier conversation, been authorized by the President to
suggest one of two dates for his consideration for his proposed visit to
Washington after his inauguration: November 11–14 or November 25–27
(Deptel 920).3 We were
for the moment keeping the matter of his visit entirely out of German
Foreign Office-Embassy channels and contemplated that no public
announcement would be made until after he assumed office. He indicated
approval of this procedure and said he would consider the two dates and
let me know his choice at the earliest possible moment.

Dr. Erhard continued that he was
anxious to talk with the President about the tactics of dealing with
Khrushchev. He felt that the
economic pressures on Khrushchev
are not just for wheat but against his whole economy. If the West and
the Soviet Union intensify their trading relations, thereby easing
Khrushchev's position, the
West must at the same time obtain certain concessions on the political
side. Otherwise, Khrushchev will
take their help and once it is no longer needed, will resume his rigid
position. The possibility for trade with the Soviets on a payments basis
is limited. Their currency is not convertible, which means that all
trade must be on a barter basis. They want everything from Germany but
cannot give anything in return that a highly developed country like
Germany can use. If the Germans extend 5–10 year credits, they would be faced with renewing
them indefinitely since the Soviets would not be able to pay.

For this reason, any assistance Germany gives must be in the form of
grants as a price for reunification. The Germans would, in his judgment,
be willing to make a very considerable sacrifice in this regard if they
were assured of positive progress toward reunification. His thinking was
that the Germans would contribute industrial installations for the
development of Siberia over a period of 10–20 years. In return,
Khrushchev could promise a
complementary “phased program” involving the wall, reunification,
self-determination, and freedom for Germany.

Erhard feels that it would not be
appropriate for Germany to suggest such a program, since this would run
counter to Russian prestige. It would be better if the U.S. would
propose that the Russians be assisted, suggesting that, at the same
time, the Russians must show respect for self-determination. To gain
this self-determination, the Germans themselves would make the necessary
sacrifice, which has up to this point largely been borne by the US. They
would convince the Soviets that Germany is not desirous of continuing
the cold war.

I said that I had mentioned to the President4 Dr. Erhard's preliminary views on this
subject, which he had expressed to me before I left for Washington. The
President looked forward to discussing this matter further with Dr.
Erhard when he visits the US.
Dr. Erhard's views on increased
trade and assistance to Russia would be of particular interest in the
light of the recent Canadian wheat sale and the rapidly changing public
attitude in the United States toward trade with the Soviet Union. I did,
however, say that the President had suggested that it would be better
not to portray German assistance to Russia as something that they owed
the Soviets, or something that was in expiation for the war. Dr.
Erhard agreed.

I queried Dr. Erhard as to whether
he had given any thought to the amounts that might be involved. He
replied that this would be dependent on what the Soviets would offer in
return, which should amount to something more than a vague hope. He
admitted the difficulties of getting any concrete agreement from the
Soviets on a phased program for reunification. Khrushchev would maintain that the
GDR is a sovereign state and that he
could not interfere in its affairs. It was, however, necessary for the
Germans to obtain something concrete, if they are to be asked to make
the necessary sacrifice.

In response to my query, Dr. Erhard
said that he naturally expected to visit Paris after his inauguration.
He did not specify the date and I did not press him. He did say,
however, that he would not discuss with General De Gaulle the question of German
assistance to Russia which he had just raised with me.

Comment: Erhard's heart is in the
right place, but he displays considerable political naivete in the drift
of the foregoing conversation. I think we have an opportunity to help
him at this stage, and that he will be especially influenced by his
conversations with President and other Washington officials.

I do not believe we should discourage Erhard from using his economic tools as means improving
atmosphere for East-West negotiations. We should, however, attempt to
dissuade him from his tendency to think in predominantly economic terms,
and try to get him to look at the Soviet-Western confrontation in
broader political and strategic terms.

McGhee

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret;
Limit Distribution.

2 See Document 215.

3 Telegram 920, October 1, recommended that no formal
invitation to Erhard be issued
until he actually became Chancellor, but added that the White House
preferred November 11–14 or 25–27. (Department of State, Central
Files, POL 7 W GER)

4 See Document 214.

218. Memorandum of Conversation218. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 7, 1963, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Relations with Germany

PARTICIPANTS

French

Foreign Minister Couve de
Murville

Ambassador Alphand

M. Charles Lucet, Director of Political Affairs, Foreign
Ministry

M. Pierre Pelen, French Emb.

U.S.

The Secretary

Ambassador Bohlen

Mr. William R. Tyler

Mr. Johannes V. Imhof, WE

M. Couve de Murville said that
the chief French concern with regard to the current talks with the
Soviets was the impact which these talks could have on Germany. France
considered it essential that Germany remain firmly tied to the West. This was one reason why
France concluded the Treaty of Collaboration with Germany. The talks
with the Soviets could awaken in Germany a spirit of neutrality. The
very basis of French policy in Europe was to prevent this.

M. Couve de Murville said that he
felt certain that on this there was agreement in principle between the
U.S. and France (though not necessarily with the UK) and that the
differences concerned the question of tactics. Germany was a divided
country, basically unhappy and extremely sensitive to changes in the
relationship between the West and the Soviet Union. Nobody can assure
the Germans that their problems—especially reunification—will be dealt
with soon, not to speak of a settlement.

The Secretary said that we strongly support German reunification. The
Oder-Neisse Line was another matter. M.
Couve de Murville noted that France was the only Western
country which had made a declaration on the Oder-Neisse Line. Ambassador
Bohlen observed that this
declaration had not been reiterated recently. M. Couve de Murville said France would
gladly reiterate its declaration as soon as we made a declaration.

The Secretary said that despite our strong support for German
reunification, we have not moved an inch closer toward realizing this
goal. East-West tension has, therefore, not advanced the cause of
reunification. On the other hand, a lessening of tension might advance
this cause. In general, a detente was bound to work in favor of the West
and ideologically the Chinese Communists were probably right in opposing
peaceful coexistence as harmful to the Marxist-Leninist system. New
opportunities might open up if Soviet controls over Eastern Europe were
further loosened. For example, a change of regime in East Germany might
advance the cause of reunification.

M. Couve de Murville said that he
shared the view that a detente in the long run would work to the
advantage of the West. The problem was what would happen in the short
run. It was essential that this detente is not reached on the basis of
agreements which might hurt Western interests. M. Couve de Murville illustrated this
point by referring to his recent talks with German Foreign Minister
Schroeder. He had told
Schroeder that the best one
might expect from the current series of talks with the Soviets was that
they would not change the status quo. Even a crystallization of the
status quo (through a non-aggression pact for instance) would be a
change for the worse. Couve said
that Schroeder had not agreed with
him and had instead advanced the concept of “movement” in East-West
relations. Couve indicated that
he considered this concept harmful and that it could lead to a bitter
German disillusionment. The Secretary referred again to the possibility
of improvements in the Soviet satellites which could improve the
situation. Couve remarked that such a development would
be most welcome and would in itself represent the beginning of a
detente. If such a development came about, he thought it would occur not
as a result of talks or agreements but because of changes in the
situation and in power relationships.

The Secretary said that the Sino-Soviet split had changed the situation
in favor of the West. However, we must not count on this because it
always remained in the realm of the possible that this trend might be
reversed and that the Soviets and the Chinese might patch up their
differences. Couve asked whether
there was anything that we could do to prevent this. The Secretary said
that we could see to it that the ball was kept in the game and that the
talks with the Soviets be continued.

Couve took exception to this view
which he said was advanced primarily by the British and which he
considered dangerous. He said that from a Western point of view and
particularly from a European point of view, the Soviet-Chinese split was
a most encouraging development. Europe, for a long time, had felt
threatened by the Soviets and Soviet involvement with the Chinese
lessened Soviet pressure on Europe. It would be a mistake, however, and
most harmful, to argue that because of this situation the West should
“help” Khrushchev. We should, on
the contrary, take fullest advantage of this split. The Secretary agreed
but pointed out that we must take no action that would discourage the
split from continuing. Couve felt
that the best way to keep the split in exist-ence was not to interfere
nor to intervene. The Secretary asked what Couve understood by “intervention”. For example, would
an agreement to sell wheat to the Soviets be regarded as “intervention”?
Couve said that such a sale
would not constitute intervention. On the other hand, to conclude
agreements simply for the sake of reaching agreements would constitute
intervention. Mr. Tyler asked
whether, under this definition, we should overlook an improvement of the
situation in Germany through Soviet action. Couve said we should not overlook such an improvement
but he believed it unlikely that it would occur. The Secretary said that
there was perhaps one chance in a hundred.

M. Couve de Murville then
referred to the widespread feeling in Germany that they were being
confronted with a choice between the U.S. and France. He said that this
was also a dangerous development. It would lead the Germans to question
their relationship with the West which is neither in the U.S. nor in the
French interest. The uncertainties created thereby could also set in
motion a trend toward neutralization. Couve said that Britain favored a neutralized Germany
and the British therefore saw this problem from quite a different angle.
The Secretary said that Germany may become an issue in the British
elections. He said he would like to discuss the relationship with
Germany in greater detail. A harmonization of U.S.-French policies would
automatically dispose of this
problem. One of the causes of concern in Germany was France's reduced
role in NATO.

Couve agreed that this problem
should be discussed in greater detail. He said that defense was one
aspect of it; another, perhaps even more important aspect, was the
general question of European policy, the status of European countries,
and their relations toward each other. Mr. Tyler added that the relationship of the European
countries to the United States was another very important part of this
problem and Couve agreed.

The Secretary said that we were not at all interested in any rivalry over
Germany. Of course, we had wanted to be consulted on the inclusion of
Berlin in the French-German Treaty of Collaboration because of our
interests and responsibilities in Berlin. It was probably unavoidable
that as long as policy differences between Washington and Paris existed
they would be reflected to some extent in the relations with third
countries. There certainly should be no need for a “choice”. Couve agreed and said that France had
never posed a choice for Germany but “they” (i.e., the Germans) were
being told “every day” that they had to choose.2

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved in
S on October 13. The source text
is labeled “Part 3 of 6 parts.” Couve de
Murville was in the United States to attend the 18th
session of the U.N. General Assembly. In addition to Germany, the
Foreign Ministers discussed NATO,
East-West relations, and French-U.S. relations.

2 On October 8 Rusk and Couve de
Murville continued their discussion of Germany,
focusing on agricultural and military aspects of Germany's role in
Europe. A memorandum of this conversation is ibid.

October-December 1963: Convoy Incidents and Chancellor Erhard's Visit to the United StatesOctober-December 1963: Convoy Incidents and Chancellor Erhard's Visit to the United States: Document List

Document 219: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington,October 10, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Gromyko/Kennedy. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on October 16 and in the White House on October 21. The meeting was held at the White House. Gromyko was in the United States for the 18th session of the U.N. General Assembly. The participants also discussed bombs in orbit, the Test Ban Treaty, a non-aggression pact, observation posts, military budgets, the MLF, U.S.-Soviet relations, disarmament, and Cuba. Memoranda of all these conversations are ibid.

Document 220: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, October 11, 1963,10:07 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Limited Official Use; Immediate. Drafted and approved by Davis. Also sent to Bonn, London, Paris, and Berlin and repeated electronically to the White House.

Document 221: Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington,October 11, 1963,12:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, Berlin Convoy Incidents. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

Document 222: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union

Washington, October 11, 1963, 2:31 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin Convoy Incidents. Top Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Thompson and approved by Rusk. Repeated electronically to the White House.

Document 223: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, October 11, 1963, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Immediate. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London, and Paris. A notation on the source text states that it was received at 7:10 p.m. and relayed to the White House at 7:47 p.m., but it must have been available earlier since it is referred to in the meeting with the President at 5:30 p.m.; see Document 224.

Document 224: Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, October 11, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, Berlin Convoy Incidents. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 225: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 11, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Thompson.

Document 226: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, October 12, 1963, 3 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Flash. Received at 10:33 p.m. on October 11 and relayed to the White House, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and the CIA at 11:20 p.m. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, Paris, and London.

Document 227: Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Foreign Minister Gromyko

October 12, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 36 GER. Secret. Drafted by Rusk on October 14.

Document 228: Memorandum From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations

Washington, October 15, 1963,7:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Immediate. Drafted in the Berlin Task Force and cleared by Ausland, Davis, G/PM, and the Department of Defense (ISA). Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London, Paris, Moscow, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, SHAPE, USAFE, and CINCLANT.

Document 229: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, October 18, 1963,11:40 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Ausland on October 17; cleared by Clay, Rusk (in draft), Tyler, Klein, the Department of Defense (ISA), L, and GER; and approved by Davis. Repeated to Paris, Berlin, London, Moscow, U.S. Element Live Oak, SHAPE, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

Document 230: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington,October 21, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Convoy Procedures. Secret.

Document 231: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, October 21, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Convoy Procedures. Secret. Drafted by David Klein and William Y. Smith.

Document 232: Memorandum for the Record

Bonn, October 25, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on November 7. A summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 2 from Bonn, October 26. (Ibid., Central Files, ORG S)

Document 233: Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Kennedy

Washington, October 26, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 234: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington,November 4, 1963,1:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Flash. Drafted and initialed by Ausland and approved and initialed by Thompson. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

Document 235: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, November 4, 1963, 11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Immediate. Received at 6:58 p.m. and passed to the White House at 7:50 p.m. and to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the CIA at 8:03 p.m. Repeated to Berlin, Moscow, Paris, London, USAREUR, CINCEUR, and U.S. Element Live Oak.

Document 236: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington,November 5, 1963,8:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Davis and approved and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, USAFE, and USUN.

Document 237: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, November 7, 1963,7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Priority. Received at 2:52 p.m. Also sent to USAREUR and CINCEUR and repeated to Paris, London, Moscow, and Berlin.

Document 238: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, November 7, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential; Priority. Received at 6:50 p.m. and repeated to Berlin, Bonn, London, and Paris.

Document 239: Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington,November 7, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Autobahn Crisis. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

Document 240: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, November 12, 1963,8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Passed to the White House and repeated to London, Moscow, Paris, and Brussels.

Document 241: Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, November 14, 1963,7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2339. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bonn and Paris.

Document 242: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 26, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Drafted and initialed by Creel and approved in U on December 3 and in the White House on January 8, 1964. The meeting was held in the White House.

Document 243: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington,December 3, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, Bundy, Chron. No classification marking.

Document 244: Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, December 11, 1963,2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 36 GER. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, and Moscow.

Document 245: Memorandum of Conversation

December 15, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Ausland and approved in S on October 26. The Foreign Ministers were in Paris for the NATO Ministerial Meeting December 16–18. A summary of this conversation was transmitted in Secto 13 from Paris, December 16. (Ibid.)

Document 246: Memorandum of Conversation

December 18, 1963, 8–10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, NATO 3 FR (PA). Secret. Drafted by Lampson and approved in S on December 24. The meeting was held at 1 Carleton Gardens. Rusk stopped in London December 18–19 following the NATO Ministerial Meeting.

Document 247: Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 24, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, Bundy, Chron. Secret. Another memorandum from Bundy dated December 27, containing talking points for Erhard's visit, is published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 471A.

Document 248: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas,December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by the White House on January 14, 1964. The Chancellor visited the Texas White House December 28–29.

Document 249: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by the White House on January 14, 1964.

Document 250: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by the White House on January 14, 1964.

Document 251: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by the White House on January 14, 1964.

Document 252: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL E GER-W GER. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Creel and approved in S and U on January 1, 1964. A summary of this conversation was transmitted in Secto 1 from the Ranch, December 29. (Ibid., POL 36 GER) For McGhee's account of the conversation, see An Ambassador's Account, pp. 129–130.

Document 253: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963,3:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 149. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Finn, approved by the White House on January 8, 1964, and by S and U on January 17.

Document 254: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 29, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by the White House on January 14, 1964.

Document 255: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 29, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 Berlin. Secret. Drafted by Creel and approved in S on January 1, 1964.

Document 256: Memorandum of Conversation

LBJ Ranch, Texas,December 29, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354. Secret. Drafted by Creel and approved in S on January 1, 1964.

219. Memorandum of Conversation219. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington,October 10, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

The German Problem and West Berlin

PARTICIPANTS

US

The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Assistant Secretary Tyler

Mr. Akalovsky,
ACDA/IR

USSR

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Sukhodrev, Foreign
Ministry

What were these steps [following the Test Ban Treaty]2 in the view of
the Soviet Government? First, there was the German problem. As before,
the USSR attached great importance to it. There was no need to speak at
length about this, because Mr. Khrushchev had spoken in a rather detailed manner about
this problem in Vienna, and this made his, Mr. Gromyko's, task that much easier.
However, he wished to say that the USSR still believed that this problem
was not only important but also acute. Why was it acute? Everybody knew
that certain measures had been taken in connection with borders. The
situation was better, and there was less tension now around, and in
connection with, West Berlin. However, from the standpoint of European
security and of eliminating the possibility of German aggression in the
future, the Soviet Union believed that the German problem and the
question of the German peace treaty must be resolved. The Soviet Union
believed that on the part of the United States Government there was a lack of appreciation of the
acuteness of the question of a German peace treaty from the standpoint
of the prospects for lasting peace.

Mr. Gromyko continued that the US
and the USSR had exchanged views on different aspects of the question of
a German peace treaty. There was no need to go into those aspects now as
the President was surely familiar with them. On some, and even many, of
those aspects, the position of the two sides either coincided or the
differences had been narrowed. However, when the question of the
presence of Western forces in West Berlin had been reached, the US and
USSR disagreed and parted. He had believed that in New York and now in
Washington the two sides could proceed from where they had stopped last
time. However, he had unfortunately noticed that now the US Government
appeared no longer to believe that this was an urgent matter. In this
connection, he wished to repeat that the USSR attached great importance
to the German problem and particularly to the problem of a German peace
treaty. Mr. Gromyko said he would
appreciate the President's comments on this matter so that the Soviet
Union could acquire a deeper understanding of the US position and so
that he could report the President's views to Mr. Khrushchev.

The President said we knew the priority Mr. Khrushchev attached to this matter. He had discussed the
problem with Mr. Khrushchev and
every time he had met with Mr. Gromyko. As far as the US was concerned, we would be
glad to discuss this problem. However, the question was whether the
interests of both sides could be incorporated in one agreement. The
problem was of concern to both sides, and it was not a matter of desire
to reach agreement but rather whether we could reach it. One of the
major problems was of course that of troops, i.e., the composition and
how long they would stay. Another major problem was the question of the
status of West Berlin. As far as access was concerned, it appeared to be
somewhat clarified and perhaps agreement could be reached on that point.
The President noted that the situation had eased de facto in the last
months and expressed the hope that it could be maintained that way. In
any event, he did not wish to create the impression that we were not
interested in discussing the problem.

Mr. Gromyko recalled the
President's remark at the meeting last year3 about the
possibility of some legal adjustments in the status of West Berlin. In
this connection, he noted that he had asked the Secretary what the US
meant by temporary arrangements. The USSR was interested to know what
the US view was on legal adjustments in the status of West Berlin and on
the meaning of the term temporary arrangements. He wondered what the expression
“temporary arrangements” meant in terms of time because arrangements
covering one, or two, or three, or ten, or twenty years would be of
course quite different things. He said he would appreciate a more
detailed exposition of US views on this point.

The Secretary commented that we were concerned by the use on the part of
the USSR of the term “permanent”, which created the impression that we
wanted to keep our troops forever. In this connection, he recalled his
remark to Mr. Gromyko in New
York4 that all existing arrangements were temporary,
and that there were two things wrong with the Soviet proposals regarding
troops in West Berlin. The first point was that the Soviet proposal
provided for intermingling other forces with Western forces, and this
only in West Berlin and not throughout Berlin. The second point was that
the Soviet proposal provided for a time limit, something like five
years, without agreement as to what would happen afterwards. What we
meant when we used the term “temporary” was “pending final settlement”.
If the USSR were to say now that it would agree to the stationing of
Western forces in West Berlin pending a final and definite settlement of
the total German problem, then we could see how stability could be added
to access and to internal arrangements. In other words, we had to agree
on the full scope of the problem in the final analysis. The US was not
thinking in terms of permanency but in terms of temporariness pending a
final settlement. Meanwhile we could see what we could do to stabilize
the situation.

Mr. Gromyko commented this was not
much of a fresh look.

The President observed that perhaps things were better than they looked.
Over the past several months we had done a considerable amount of
pulling and hauling in our country, and considering the internal and
external difficulties of both of our countries they had done quite well.
He said he was rather more optimistic than pessimistic. In this
connection, he recalled the 1961 unamimous resolution by Congress
against trade with the Soviet Union and noted that now a big wheat deal
had been made, which was a change in US policy. The Test Ban Agreement,
the understanding regarding weapons in outer space, and the Civil Air
Agreement were all signs of an improvement in the situation.

Mr. Gromyko said the President was
right that the atmosphere had improved, but noted that unresolved
questions remain unresolved questions. In any event, he thought it was
his duty to raise this matter and to try to convince the US Government
and the President personally that both countries should seek
possibilities for resolving it. He wondered whether he could tell the
Soviet Government and Mr. Khrushchevpersonally that the President
still attached importance to the German problem and that the United
States Government would continue efforts to seek a solution with the
USSR and the other parties concerned.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, USSR, Gromyko/Kennedy. Secret; Eyes
Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and
approved in S on October 16 and in the
White House on October 21. The meeting was held at the White House.
Gromyko was in the United
States for the 18th session of the U.N. General Assembly. The
participants also discussed bombs in orbit, the Test Ban Treaty, a
non-aggression pact, observation posts, military budgets, the MLF, U.S.-Soviet relations,
disarmament, and Cuba. Memoranda of all these conversations are
ibid.

2 Brackets in the source text.

3 See Document 135.

4 See Document
216.

220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union220. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1

Washington, October 11, 1963,10:07 a.m.

1155. Secretary summoned Ambassador Dobrynin at 9:00 a.m. October 11 and described the
situation at Babelsberg check point where eighteen U.S. vehicles are
being detained by Soviet armed forces.2 Secretary pointed out this is same convoy which
was held up at Marienborn check point yesterday and which after being
detained for several hours was finally permitted to proceed on autobahn
eastward. Pointed out that this was a unilateral attempt by the Soviets
to change well-established procedures and the use of force to do
so.Commented it sets back all the efforts we have been making to solve
issues between us.

Expressed hope that seriousness incident would be brought to personal
attention of Khrushchev.

Dobrynin disclaimed any knowledge
of most recent incident but commented message had gone out to Moscow
last night regarding first incident that everything was in order.

Secretary again reiterated our great concern at the direct use of force
to change well-established and existing procedures and asked Dobrynin to inform Foreign Minister
Gromyko immediately as well
as Moscow.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Limited Official Use; Immediate. Drafted
and approved by Davis. Also
sent to Bonn, London, Paris, and Berlin and repeated electronically
to the White House.

2 Convoy U.S. 27 had arrived at the Marienborn checkpoint at 8:59
a.m. on October 10. It was held up for nearly 24 hours because the
Soviets demanded that all passengers dismount for a head count.
After being released just after midnight on October 10, it was again
detained at the Babelsberg checkpoint and surrounded by Soviet
APCs with loaded and uncovered
machine guns. A detailed chronology of this and related incidents,
October 9–13, was transmitted in telegram 478 from Berlin, October
13. (Ibid.)

3 At 10:46 a.m. the Department of
State advised the Embassy in Moscow that Kohler should see the Acting Soviet Foreign Minister
or highest available Foreign Ministry official to repeat and
underline the representations that Rusk had made to Dobrynin. (Telegram 1177 to Moscow, October 11;
ibid.)

221. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy221. Memorandum of Conference With President
Kennedy1

Washington,October 11, 1963,12:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

General Taylor

Ambassador Thompson

Assistant Secretary Nitze

Deputy Assistant Secretary Richard
Davis (State)

General Clifton

Mr. David Klein

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. Bromley Smith

Secretary Rusk reported to the
President that Russian Ambassador Dobrynin had been told of the holdup of the U.S.
convoy.2 The Russians were told that hours were of
great importance in resolving this question. Both Dobrynin and Gromyko appeared to be upset on hearing
of the blocking of the U.S. convoy.3

Secretary Rusk said we should go
ahead and assemble the tripartite Free Style forces4 but he believed that a larger allied force should
also be brought to a state of readiness. He favored a unit as large as
that called Trade Winds.5 He said the four Ambassadors
would meet again at 3:00 PM to report on their governments' views as to
actions to be taken to end the existing situation.6

General Taylor noted that it
would take eight days to assemble Trade Winds.

Secretary Rusk recommended that we
ask our allies to approve the immediate assembly of Free Style forces.
He also recommended that we ask
the British and French to send in convoys for the purpose of building up
allied forces blocked by the Soviets. The President doubted that we
should increase the number of forces blocked, believing that the one
U.S. convoy now blocked was sufficient. Secretary Rusk said we must consider all
explanations of the current Soviet action in blocking our convoy. We may
be heading for a major crisis with the USSR. Possibly we are coming to
the end of a major Russian deception program although he personally
doubted that the Russians had been attempting to deceive us by agreeing
to a limited test ban treaty and by offering to purchase U.S. wheat. The
Soviet action may be a reflection of divided councils in Moscow. It may
be an effort to show off Soviet muscle for the benefit of the Chinese
and before the forthcoming international Communist conference. The
action may be the result of a local Soviet commander's unauthorized
action which, for prestige reasons, Moscow has backed up. No one
explanation is sufficient. If there are divided councils in Moscow, we
should play out our resistance which might provide enough time to the
Russians to get them back into line.

Secretary Rusk said our first
effort should be to align our allies with us. They would be asked to
join us in a protest note to the Russians. In response to a question as
to whether the tripartite protest would be made public, Secretary
Rusk said he felt that public
opinion would move very fast if the convoy were not released promptly.
He referred to the public position of Senator Goldwater and foresaw an
immediate effect on the wheat negotiations if the present situation is
not immediately clarified. If our troops have bivouacked, it is possible
that the Russians would permit them to mount their trucks in the morning
and pass on through. If the Russians acted this way, we would need to
send immediately another U.S. convoy to make clear our right of access
to Berlin.

Ambassador Thompson recalled that
we had never told the Russians the dividing line between convoys which
dismount and those which do not. We have never told them the specific
numbers which we use to decide which is a dismounting convoy and which
is not.

In response to the President's question as to how the Soviets knew what
our procedures are, Mr. Nitze
said the Soviets have learned on the basis of long experience with our
convoys. The reason we have not told the Russians exactly what we do is
because our position is that they have no right to restrict our access
in any way. The President read the attached report of the Soviet
commandant's conversation with an American colonel.7 He said it sounded as if the
Russians had a final position. It did not sound as if they would be
changing their view, i.e. that
we have changed our procedures, thereby justifying their action in
blocking the convoy.

General Taylor said we should
never have started the practice of dismounting troops in the Berlin
convoy. The first dismounting had been a mistake. The practice had been
continued and it was now expected by the Russians.

The President expressed doubt that we should keep piling up troops at the
blocking point. Secretary Rusk agreed we should not so act today.

Secretary McNamara asked that
both U.S. convoys be kept in place, the small one which is blocked and a
larger one which is nearby and has been cleared to proceed but is not
leaving the scene until further ordered to do so. He recommended that
additional large dismounting convoys be sent in both directions.

The President asked how the Soviets could extricate themselves from this
situation. He thought that the only way would be for them to permit the
convoy to proceed.

Secretary Rusk expressed concern
that the U.S. helicopters which are flying above the blocked convoy
might create an incident. The President instructed that these
helicopters stay high above ground, fly over for the sole purpose of
taking pictures, and then leave the scene. Secretary Rusk and General Taylor reported that we have received
no information of any kind about Soviet troop movements toward the
autobahn.

Ambassador Thompson, referring to
the meeting of the Ambassadors in the morning, said the British were
interested in knowing whether anything unusual had taken place between
the Russians and the Americans prior to the blocking of the convoy. He
asked that we have our officers in the field report whether any incident
took place before the Soviets announced their refusal to permit the
convoy to proceed.

General Taylor agreed that the
big convoy, not now blocked, should stay where it is to meet the
possibility that we may need additional troops on the scene. Secretary
Rusk agreed with General
Taylor, adding that if the
big convoy left it might appear that we were abandoning the smaller
convoy.

In response to the President's suggestion that a large convoy be sent to
Berlin, Secretary McNamara said
such a convoy could leave today from West Germany, dismount in
accordance with established procedures, and proceed to Berlin unless
blocked by the Russians.

Mr. Nitze asked why we should not
now order the assembly of the forces called Back Stroke.8 This force is tripartite and assembles in Berlin.
It moves from Berlin to the
autobahn in an effort to get to West Germany. Mr. Nitze thought we might need to use this
force. Secretary Rusk replied that
it would be all right to assemble this force in Berlin, but not at the
checkpoint. If it appeared at the checkpoint, it might appear to the
Russians to be a menacing threat with which they would have to deal for
prestige reasons. Secretary McNamara said the Back Stroke force could be assembled
in eight hours. The purpose of assembling it would be to add pressure
against the Russians.

The President asked whether it was believed that if a tripartite group
was allowed to pass by the Russians, other convoys would be allowed to
go through.

Secretary Rusk suggested that the
U.S. commandant in Berlin talk to the Soviet army official in East
Germany, telling him that the blocked convoy had to go through. If the
Russians have anything about allied procedures they want to discuss,
they would be asked to do so. The approach to the Russians would be not
to negotiate the release of the convoy, but rather to find out what the
Russians are seeking to accomplish. The conversation with the Russians
on allied procedures would take place only after the blocked convoy was
released.

General Taylor suggested that it
would be possible to send out armed U.S. bulldozers with instructions to
remove the barriers blocking the convoy.

Secretary Rusk raised again the
importance of a tripartite note of protest which would reflect allied
agreement on how to deal with the Soviet blocking action.

Secretary McNamara commented that
we need badly a face-to-face local meeting with Soviet military
officials. He thought the commanders should meet at the checkpoint. We
do not know how the Soviet commanders would react if confronted with a
personal protest by the U.S. commander.

Secretary Rusk noted that Soviet
Foreign Minister Gromyko had
delayed his return from here to New York until noon in order to send
messages to the Foreign Office.

The President summarized the actions which are to be taken immediately. A
copy of these actions is attached, along with a more detailed list of
actions sent to our commanders in Paris.9

The President was shown a copy of the report of the Berlin commandants'
meeting.10 General
Taylor added that General
Lemnitzer, who was in the U.S. on vacation, is now
in the Pentagon and would normally return to Paris at once.

The President said that if we were asked what our position was now on the
wheat negotiations, we should say nothing. We could say that Secretary
Rusk had seen Ambassador
Dobrynin in Washington and
Ambassador Kohler had made
protests to the Foreign Office in Moscow.

Secretary Rusk agreed that we
should brush off any questions as to what effect the blocking of the
U.S. convoy would have on our wheat negotiations. He noted that the
Soviet trade mission to the U.S. will not leave Moscow for several
days.

Mr. Bundy said that we should play
the wheat card in private with the Russians before we make any reference
to it in public. The President's view was that the wheat deal wouldn't
mean much to the Russians if they were set on blocking our access to
Berlin. Secretary Rusk added that
if the incident continued to the point where we took it to the UN Security Council, then we would use the
wheat sales as a major point, including efforts to persuade the
Canadians not to go through with their wheat shipments to Russia.

Ambassador Thompson said he
believed the incident on the autobahn had not been intentionally
planned. He could not believe that the Russians would simultaneously
seek to reach agreements with us and seek to block access to Berlin.
Secretary Rusk agreed and
commented again that Gromyko,
when told of the autobahn situation, acted like a man upset. The
incident may have been part of an effort to embarrass Gromyko at the exact moment when he was
talking with the President. Mr. Nitze commented that the incident reflected the use of
force to change existing procedures.

The President asked that the group meet again with him later in the
day.

Bromley Smith11

Attachment12

RECORD OF ACTION OF MEETING WITH THE PRESIDENT

October 11, 1963, 12:30 P.M.

1. Send to Berlin U.S. dismounting convoy as soon as possible.

2. Instruct General Baker to ask
General Ariko for meeting as soon as possible to tell Soviets blocked
convoy must be allowed to pass but if Soviets want to talk about general
convoy procedures apart from this special case, we are prepared to hear
his views.

3. Until further decision, keep large U.S. convoy (27) bivouacked at
checkpoint.

4. Seek prompt U.K. and French approval of draft tripartite note of
protest to Moscow.

5. Urge U.K. and French approval of assembly of Free Style forces.

6. Urge U.K. and France to send dismounting convoys from West Germany and
non-dismounting convoys from Berlin.

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings
with the President, Berlin Convoy Incidents. Secret. Drafted by
Bromley Smith.

2 See Document
220.

3 This
reference and ones later in the memorandum indicate that Gromyko had been apprised of the
convoy incident. Presumably this happened at the dinner Rusk gave for Gromyko at 8:15 on October 10, but
no conclusive evidence has been found to determine when Gromyko was informed.

4 A platoon-sized probe from Helmstedt to
Berlin.

5 A battalion-sized
probe from Helmstedt to Berlin.

6 Thompson had chaired a
meeting of the Ambassadorial Group at 9:30 a.m. to review Rusk's conversation with Dobrynin during the morning and a
conversation with Gromyko on
the previous day. He suggested to the Ambassadorial Group that a
Free Style probe be assembled. (Telegram 1033 to Bonn, October 11,
12:57 p.m.; Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–8)

7 Not found.

8 A platoon-sized probe from Berlin to
Helmstedt.

9 The
more detailed list is not attached, but the instructions were
transmitted in JCS 3023, October 11,
2:55 p.m. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and
Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President, Berlin Convoy
Incidents)

10 ASBCS/499/63, October 11.
(Ibid.) The meeting was held at 1 p.m. Berlin time.

11 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

12 Secret.

222. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union222. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1

Washington, October 11, 1963, 2:31 p.m.

1160. Eyes only for Kohler from
Secretary. I am puzzled by the timing and motivation of Soviet action in
convoy holdup on autobahn. Following possibilities occur to me:

1. That we are heading for a major crisis and that Soviet efforts in
recent months were part of a huge deception effort.

2. That there has been a split in the regime in Moscow.

3. That Khrushchev, beset with
other difficulties, has felt it necessary to demonstrate a forceful
policy in a manner which he did not consider too dangerous, and

4. That Soviet military in Germany are trying to precipitate difficulties
for one reason or another, such as preventing possible cutback in Soviet
military.

Suggest you be alert to report promptly any signs that may develop in
Moscow which would throw light on this problem and let me have any
thoughts you have on the subject.

Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin Convoy
Incidents. Top Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Thompson and approved by Rusk. Repeated electronically to the
White House.

223. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State223. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, October
11, 1963, midnight.

1233. Subj: Detention American convoy at Babelsberg. After some delay, I
was able to see Zorin at 2000
local time, after he returned to Foreign Office for purpose. (We were
told yesterday Kuznetzov “out of
town”.) I repeated to him Secretary's instructions as received by phone
from Davis,2 stressing: serious nature situation; unacceptability
Soviet attempt change established procedures unilaterally and by force;
effect in jeopardizing efforts improve relations; and incompatability
with Gromyko statements to
President. I asked matter be brought personal attention Khrushchev soonest.

In reply to Zorin's request for
details, I said I was not yet fully informed present situation, but
apparently it was similar yesterday's in which Soviet officers demanded
our convoy dismount in contravention customary procedure.

Zorin said Dobrynin telephoned half hour before to
report Secretary's statement,3 but Zorin had no further details present situation Babelsberg. Concerning
Marienborn incident he said convoys would not comply with usual
inspection procedure, thus causing delay; when convoys complied they
were allowed proceed. Zorin
pointed out there is good deal of convoy traffic at present time, most
convoys complied with established procedures but these did not. He said
this situation represented nothing new from Sov side, but merely a
refusal by US troops to meet usual demands. Zorin, in accordance with my request, would check into
situation and asked us check facts as well. Khrushchev was not in town but Zorin would deliver message those
acting his stead.

I pointed out that our reports on situation differed. I said my
understanding was that Marienborn convoys were released without
dismounting. In any case Sov function was to facilitate US passage—not
grant, deny or control. I again stressed urgency of situation, saying
convoys now blocked by armored cars, and publicity bound be harmful.
Finally I noted that when questioned by correspondents today I said I
doubted that this situation had arisen as a result of deliberate Soviet
policy to cause crisis. Zorin
agreed and stressed that Sov side had no intention create difficulties
and that if this true of US side, all would be well.

Since my call on Zorin bound to
come to attention local American correspondents, I have felt it best
course to inform them without details that purpose of call was to
protest, on instructions, detention of convoy by Sovs at Babelsberg.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Immediate. Repeated to Bonn,
Berlin, London, and Paris. A notation on the source text states that
it was received at 7:10 p.m. and relayed to the White House at 7:47
p.m., but it must have been available earlier since it is referred
to in the meeting with the President at 5:30 p.m.; see Document 224.

2 No record of this conversation has been
found.

3 A record of
this Rusk-Dobrynin conversation is in the
Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany,
Berlin, Autobahn Crisis.

224. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy224. Memorandum of Conference With President
Kennedy1

Washington, October 11, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Ambassador Thompson

Assistant Secretary Tyler

Assistant Secretary Nitze

Assistant Secretary Manning

General Clay (JCS)

Mr. Bundy

Mr. Salinger

General Clifton

Mr. David Klein

Mr. Bromley Smith

Assistant Secretary of State Tyler
opened the meeting by summarizing the Kohler/Zorin
conversation in Moscow.2 Zorin had left the impression
that the Russians had no intention of causing real trouble over Berlin
access and that they were not seeking to change established convoy
procedures. Mr. Tyler also
summarized a conversation with French Ambassador Alphand3 who, after receiving instructions from Paris, had said
that the French approved of assembling Free Style forces, of sending
additional convoys, including their own, to Berlin, and of sending a
protest to Moscow immediately. In a meeting in Paris with Lyon, both
Lucet and Laloy4 said the French Government
is anxious to cooperate closely with its allies in all matters and to do
everything possible to show a solid allied front.

The President asked whether it was believed that this was a significant
test of our intentions. Ambassador Thompson replied that he did not believe it was a
deliberate attempt at the top to cause trouble. He said minor incidents
of the past few days may have stirred up lower Soviet officials who
responded by blocking the convoy. He recalled that we had never given a
copy of our convoy rules to the Russians. He speculated that the
Russians may be trying to find out exactly when we are willing to
dismount and when not. The timing of the current incident indicates,
however, that someone may be stirring up trouble.

The President pointed out that the Russians say there are sixty-six men
in the blocked convoy while we say there are thirty. The difference is
that we subtract a driver and assistant driver for each of the eighteen
vehicles in the convoy.

Ambassador Thompson called
attention to the draft tripartite note which had been agreed to by the
British and the French.5

The President asked why we should not instruct our commander to tell the
Russians that they must release the blocked convoy but that we were
prepared thereafter to talk about existing convoy procedures. Secretary
McNamara replied that we had
already instructed ourcommander, General Baker, to do just this.

Secretary Rusk asked whether it
would not be wise for Ambassador Thompson to discuss thecurrent situation with Dobrynin again, telling him the details
of our convoy dismountingpractices. Mr. Nitze pointed out the difficulty of explaining allied
practices which vary. He said that we must not get in a position of
negotiating about procedures because our right of access if not
negotiable, i.e., it arises out of our conquest of Germany.

Ambassador Thompson reported that
the French had agreed to the assembly of the Free Style forces and the
British Ambassador said he had sufficient authority to do so without
reference to London.6

The President asked whether the allies think the situation serious and
whether they believe our position is justified. Ambassador Thompson replied that all agree the
situation is serious, that it has been planned for, and, therefore, we
should go ahead as had beenagreed earlier.

The President commented that the longer the situation goes on the more
serious it becomes. He believed we should make one attempt to straighten
out any misunderstanding about numbers with the Russians. In the
meantime, we should avoid sending convoys which fall within the disputed
area.

The President instructed Ambassador Thompson to ask Ambassador Dobrynin to tell Zorin toinstruct the Russian commander to meet with
General Baker as soon as
possible to discussdismounting procedures. Secretary Rusk said Ambassador Thompson should tell Dobrynin of the numbers we use and
explain why we are not now changing the procedures, adding thatweare
ready to talk procedures as soon as the convoy is released.

The President asked whether the tripartite protest could be made public.
Secretary Rusk expressed the hope
that the entire situation would be cleared up before the note was
published.

The President agreed to Secretary Rusk's suggestion that Free Style forces be assembled
first thing tomorrow rather than during the night. Secretary McNamara questioned whether we should
assemble the Free Style forces. If the Russian action was the result of
a mistake, the assembly of the Free Style forces would complicate Soviet
efforts to correct the situation. The President said that if it takes
two days to assemble the forces, he believed we should begin now to
bring them together, and he instructed that the assembly begin
tomorrow.

[1 paragraph (4–1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings
with the President, Berlin Convoy Incidents. Top Secret. The source
text bears no drafting information.

2 See Document 223.

3 No record of this conversation has been
found.

4 A record of this meeting was
transmitted in telegram 1768 from Paris, October 12. (Department of
State, Central Files, POL 38–10)

5 A copy of the note
was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 1169, October 11, 6:44 p.m.
(Ibid.)

6 Thompson had chaired another
meeting of the Ambassadorial Group at 3 p.m. during whichthe British
and French made these statements. (Telegram 1052 to Bonn, October
11, 8:52 p.m.; ibid., POL 38–8)

225. Memorandum of Conversation225. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 11,
1963.

SUBJECT

Holdup of US Convoy on Autobahn

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F.
Dobrynin, USSR

Llewellyn E. Thompson,
Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State

I had the Soviet Ambassador come in at 7:00 p.m. and informed him of
Ambassador Kohler's conversations
with Smirnovsky and Zorin2 on the holdup of our convoy on the autobahn. I
said our position was that our right of free access to Berlin meant that
we had no obligation to give notification or dismount troops in convoys,
but that in order to facilitate the movement of convoys certain
practices had grown up. I said Mr. Zorin seemed to be confused as he had mentioned that we
dismounted whenever a convoy consisted of more than five vehicles. I
said this had never been the case and he was apparently confused by the
fact that we often gave the checkpoint prior notification when the
convoy was larger than five vehicles. I explained what our actual
practice was with regard to dismounting and gave him a factual account
of what had happened in the last few days.

When the Ambassador asked what I wanted him to do, I urged that he
explain the facts to Mr. Zorin
and urge that our convoy be allowed to proceed. At first the Ambassador
was very reluctant, and did not seem convinced by my arguments.

At this time, General Clay
telephoned me and gave me a list of the dates of our convoys of similar
size since May first, including number of vehicles and number of men
involved. I pointed out that only two had been held up and these for
short periodsof time.

The Ambassador seemed impressed by this list and particularly the fact
that similar convoys had been passed on August twenty-sixth and
September thirtieth.

I also pointed out that the Soviets now knew that the information we had
given them concerning the number of men in the disputed convoy was
accurate and there was, therefore, no longer any reason to hold it
up.

He said of course that the question of principle and procedure was now
involved, but agreed to send a message to Zorin promptly. He indicated that he and Gromyko had been quiteupset over this
incident and the attention being given to it inthe press.

I also referred to the difficulty which this caused us and the setback to
our efforts toimprove relations.

As he was leaving, he said it was incomprehensible to him how this could
have happened.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10.
Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Thompson.

2 Regarding the conversation with Zorin, see Document 223; the conversation with Smirnovsky has not been further
identified.

226. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State226. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, October
12, 1963, 3 a.m.

1234. Zorin summoned me to FonOff at 10:30 pm local time to inform
me that after my earlier demarche2 Sov authorities had made thorough
investigation of Berlin situation and had ascertained that situation
described by me did not correspond to facts.3

According to Zorin, facts were
that early this morning convoy consisting of 18 vehicles, 61 men,
appeared at checkpoint, refused comply with established procedures and
was held up. Such refusal, said Zorin, was clearly in violation of agreed understanding
that personnel in convoys of more than five vehicles were obliged to
dismount. Shortly thereafter a second convoy consisting of 27 vehicles
and 140 personnel complied with existing procedures and thus was cleared
by Soviet authorities. Thereupon a US Army major appeared on the scene
and informed Sov officer in charge at
checkpoint that convoy which had already been cleared would not proceed
until other convoy also cleared. When Sov officer in charge refused to accede to US officer's
demand latter ordered the second convoy to stand in place and as result
both convoys remain at checkpoint. Thus, according to Zorin, it is crystal clear from carefully checked facts that there
has been no violation of established procedures on part Sov authorities, that hold up is result of
deliberately planned maneuver of US military authorities in Berlin who
have themselves attempted unilaterally to change existing procedures and
establish new ones. It is obvious to the Sov Govt that the US military authorities in Berlin have
incorrectly informed the US Govt of the situation at checkpoint and have
deliberately acted in such a way as to complicate situation.

Zorin continued that Sov military authorities are under strict
orders to carry out established procedures; if US authorities should
abide by such procedures then there would be no problem. Appropriate
instructions, therefore, should be given to US military authorities to
comply with procedures and to avoid complicating situation in Berlin.
With regard to general Sov policy,
Zorin said Sov Govt stands for peace, has no intention
of doing anything to worsen existing relationships. For reasons he had
stated Zorin said Sov Govt could not accept protest which I
had made in earlier meeting.

In reply I questioned Zorin's
statement with regard to what he referred to as an agreed understanding
that convoys of more than five vehicles were subject to the dismounting
procedure. I said that in my long experience with Berlin problems I had
never heard that such an agreement existed. My understanding was that
the principal requirement was that Sov
authorities should be in a position to estimate the number of personnel
in a particular convoy and if for this purpose dismounting should be
required then it would be so ordered by the convoy commander. Meanwhile
I could assure him that our military authorities had strict instructions
to comply with established procedures but also were obliged to insure
that existing procedures were not changed unilaterally by Sov authorities. Obviously then our
military authorities regarded the requirement to dismount in this case
as a deviation from standing procedures on the part of Sov authorities and thus they had refused
to comply. While I would, of course, report Zorin's remarks immediately to my govt, I hoped that
current situation could be liquidated and convoys permitted to proceed.
If the problem had arisen as a result of disagreement between us as to
what size convoy should be subjected to the dismounting procedure, then
perhaps this was a question which should be discussed between us
later.

Zorin countered with a
reiteration of his argument that the present crisishad arisen because of
the refusal of one convoy to comply with the procedure with which
similar convoy had complied. He could see no logic in this. He pointed
out that from time to time our military authorities have deliberately
created incidents which complicate the situation in Berlin; the last of
these took place in May when a convoy was also delayed for several
hours. In his view, if US military authorities would complywith existing procedures in every
case then there would be no incident.

I again told Zorin that in my view
there was clearly a difference between us as to what constituted normal
practices and procedures. So far as I was aware there existed no
agreement as to what size convoy should be subject to the dismounting
procedure; our authorities followed the practice of dismounting only to
facilitate a determination by Sov
authorities as to number of personnel in the convoy. In all honesty and
contrary to his assertion, we had had the impression that the Sov military, to use a phrase I had
sometimes heard, were trying to “tread on our corns”.

Zorin said he could not agree. It
was perfectly clear from the facts of the situation that Sov authorities had not introduced nor did
they intend to introduce any change in existing procedures. On the other
hand, it was equally clear that our military authorities wished
precisely to do this. In Zorin's
view, refusal to comply with existing procedures was a deliberate act on
the part of our military authorities.

I again assured Zorin I would
report his remarks and once more expressed the hope that the present
tension could be removed. Subsequently we could discuss in the proper
forum what was an obvious disagreement as to established procedures.
Meanwhile I could assure Zorin
that neither the US Govt nor US military authorities had attempted to
change what we understand as established procedures.

Zorin concluded the conversation
by expressing the hope that our military authorities would be given
instructions to comply with existing procedures.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Flash. Received at 10:33 p.m. on
October 11 and relayed to the White House, the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, and the CIA at 11:20 p.m. Repeated to Bonn,
Berlin, Paris, and London.

2 See Document 223.

3 Shortly before noon October 12, the Soviets removed the vehicles
blocking Convoy U.S. 27 and processed the convoy into Berlin.

227. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Foreign Minister Gromyko227. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State
Rusk and Foreign
Minister Gromyko1

October 12, 1963.

While I was in Cincinnati at the Hebrew Union College on Saturday,
October 12, Mr. Gromyko called me
from New York. His mood was friendly and he used my first name
throughout.

He opened by saying that he had received additional information from
Moscow containing details from their military in Germany, in which he
expressed confidence, to the effect that United States military in
Germany had attempted to change existing procedures on the autobahn. He
emphasized (a) that it was not the Soviet intention to change existing
procedures in any respect and that it was important for both sides (and
he repeated bothsides) to adhere meticulously to existing arrangements;
(b) he wished to underline strongly what Mr. Zorin had told Ambassador Kohler, namely, that the Soviet Government did not wish
to create any incidents with respect to Berlin which might increase
tensions; (c) he was most anxious that the recent incident on the
autobahn not be interpreted as limiting or cutting across what Mr.
Gromyko had said to
thePresident about Soviet general policy during his visit at the White
House. He asked me personally to look into the recent incident to see if
I would not agree that our own military had attempted to change existing
procedures.

I told him that I had looked into these procedures in considerable detail
but that I would review it again. I said that our view was that our
military had indeed complied with procedures well established by
practice and that the incident arose because of what seemed to us to be
a unilateral effort by Soviet military to interfere with such
existingprocedures. I told him that some misunderstanding might have
been possible because the Soviets may not themselves be clear as to our
own procedures. I said that we could not accept any limitation of our
rights of access by agreements on procedures that in any way limited
such access but that Ambassador Thompson had talked about our practice with Ambassador
Dobrynin and I felt that this
could help to clarify the situation. I also expressedappreciation for
what I felt had been the effort made by Mr. Gromyko and Ambassador Dobrynin to get the recent incident resolved as quickly
as possible. He indicated his unhappiness about the recent treatment of
the autobahn incident in the American press, and I told him that we were
attempting to help the press to keep the matter in perspective and hoped
their people would do the same.

With regard to a General Assembly resolution on bombs in orbit, I told
Mr. Gromyko that Ambassador
Stelle and Mr. Foster would be
available in New York, beginning on Monday, and that Ambassador Stelle
was in New York over the weekend if he were needed for any points of
clarification. He indicated that hewould probably not take up the matter
before Monday.

DR

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 36 GER. Secret. Drafted by Rusk on October 14.

228. Memorandum From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations228. Memorandum From the Department of
State to the Mission to the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations1

Washington, October 15, 1963,7:43 p.m.

Topol 481. Ref: Polto 441—NAC
Agenda—Berlin.2
Paris deliver Durbrow 8 a.m. October 16. US Rep should convey following
to NAC October 16 as Department's
preliminary assessment Soviet motives and conduct in Autobahn
incidents.

Our review of probable Soviet motives suggests that delay US convoys
Autobahn October 10 to 12 did not mark any shift in Soviet policy either
with respect Soviet efforts to secure general easing of international
tensions or with respect to continued Soviet efforts to press for small
unilateral advantages on Berlin scene.

On basis our preliminary reconstruction events, we believe USSR did not
intend to bring about major confrontation last week, and train events
may have been set in motion by no higher ranking a person than
Marienborn checkpoint commander. His move was supported by his superiors
and apparently also at ministerial level in Moscow. Higherlevel Soviet
authorities may not have been fully informed concerning US criteria in
accordance with which troops are dismounted from vehicles as a matter of
courtesy. Release of convoy at Babelsberg on Saturday may well have been
result of Presidium-level intervention when it became apparent that
broader foreign policy goals were in jeopardy.

This interpretation of events does not, however, absolve Moscow from
responsibility for continuing Soviet efforts to erode Western rights in
Berlin and on access routes. So long as day-to-day practice calls for
making attempts at nibbling away at Western rightsand imposing tighter
controls, possibilities will exist that further serious incidents may
occur on Autobahn or other routes to Berlin and in City.3

In event NATO Reps inquire under what
circumstances troops are dismounted from convoys you may inform them
that principal criterion is number of troops in convoy; in general, we
dismount convoys which include 31 or more personnel in addition to
driver and assistant driver of each vehicle (we also informed Soviets of
above 31 figure during the course of the discussions which took place at
the time of last week's crisis). We did not and do not concede that
Soviets have any legal or other right to demand dismounting of more than
30-man convoys. We exercise this action at our own initiative as a
matter of simple administrative procedure to facilitate processing
through checkpoints. Smaller groups clearly do not require dismounting
since number of men in group can be quickly and easily calculated.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Immediate. Drafted in the Berlin
Task Force and cleared by Ausland, Davis, G/PM, and the
Department of Defense (ISA).
Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London, Paris, Moscow, U.S. Element Live
Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, SHAPE, USAFE, and
CINCLANT.

2 Polto 441, October 11,
transmitted the agenda for the October 16 North Atlantic Council
meeting. (Ibid., NATO 3–1)

3 The Mission at Berlin and the Embassy in Moscow
evaluated the events quite differently. In telegram 479 from Berlin,
October 13, Hulick concluded that theSoviet action “was deliberate
and had both important tactical and political motives.” It seemed
clear that the Soviet Union had the “aim of stepping on corns as
general and overriding goal from the beginning.” The convoy was
released only when it became clear that the United States would not
change its Autobahn procedures and after the crisis had escalated
sufficiently to constitute a serious issue for the UnitedStates at a
high political level. (Ibid., POL 38–10) In telegram 1253 from
Moscow on October 13, Kohler
reported his conviction that the Soviet Government had not intended
to provoke an incident at that time. He speculated that mid-level
Soviet authorities in Germany had initiated the incident, possibly
after a routine check with Moscow, and concluded that there was
probably considerable confusion on the Soviet side about U.S. convoy
procedures, a fact that contributed to the problem. (Ibid.)

229. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany229. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington, October 18, 1963,11:40 a.m.

1130. Paris also for USRO. Ref: Berlin
504, Bonn 1378.2 Subject:
Allied Autobahn Convoys.

1. Possibility exists we may be faced with Soviet challenge on autobahn
in effort to impose new convoy procedures, this despite Gromyko's categorical assurances
to Secretary that Soviets were not trying to change procedures or cause
incidents. Therefore, planning should proceed on this assumption.

2. Soviets have been trying for some time to alter established procedures
for Allied autobahn convoys, as they relate to advance notification and
dismounting. They have alsobeen trying to get US to adopt British and
French practice of lowering tailgates on request, although US vehicles
are so constructed as to make this unnecessary.

3. Question of advance notification has had checkered career over the
years, with practices varying widely. In recent past, however, Soviets
have sought to demand that the checkpoint be informed in advance of all
convoys of more than five vehicles. Although notaccepting this
requirement, Allies have so composed their convoys as to avoid
issue.

4. So far as we are aware, dismounting to be counted is relatively new
practice, introduced by US convoy commander for first time when US
augmentation battle group sent to Berlin in August, 1961. Soviets
apparently took liking to practice and it became standard part of convoy
ritual. Allied practices have varied from timeto time, and Soviet
desires have never been entirely clear.

5. During 1962 Allied authorities in Bonn and Berlin unsuccessfully
attempted to reach agreement on standard procedures. This attempt
apparently failed because US and French were unwilling to adopt UK
procedures. These went too far to meet Soviet demands, which USand
French deemed unreasonable. British were unwilling to adopt US
procedures since to do so would require them in effectto engage in a
roll-back vis-à-vis the Soviets.Bonn Embassies recommended to
governments that they agree to disagree on procedures but to back each
other in case of trouble. UK Foreign Office approved this recommendation
and declined our (bilateral) proposal to consider question in
Ambassadorial Group.

6. Recent Soviet actions have focused attention again on procedural
differences. Three Commandants in Berlin have suggested common
procedures to Live Oak and recommended that Soviets not be informed of
differing Allied procedures until attempt made to agree on common
procedures (Berlin 504). Quadripartite Bonn Ambassadorial Group (Bonn
1378) has recommended to governments and Washington Ambassadorial Group
that Soviets be informed ofAllied procedures in such a way as to
preclude negotiations on procedures. It has also recommended that this
should be done independently of harmonization but that subsequent
attempt be made to harmonize procedures in such way as to avoid
weakening our position.

7. We propose now to take up following questions on urgent basis in
Ambassadorial Group:

a. Should Allied governments make another attempt to agree on harmonized
procedures?

b. Whether procedures are harmonized or not, should Allies inform Soviets
of their procedures?

c. If so, in what form and where?

In view opportunity presented by recent incidents, we believe we should
make serious new effort harmonize procedures. We are mindful, however,
that convoy procedures, even on three disputed questions, are
complicated, and it may not be easy to work out agreed formulae. We are
now awaiting General Lemnitzer's recommendations (Berlin 504).

9. Whether we can agree on procedures or not, we are also inclined
support recommendations of Commandants and Bonn Ambassadors that we
inform Soviets. (We have already given Soviets certain information on
dismount procedure in connection recent convoy incident.)

10. Our attitude toward locale for informing Soviets will depend on
whether Allies agree on procedures. If we do, we would favor
aide-memoire delivered in Moscow. If we do not, we would favor
capitals.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential; Immediate; Limit
Distribution. Drafted by Ausland on October 17; cleared by Clay, Rusk (in draft), Tyler, Klein,
the Department of Defense (ISA),
L, and GER; and approved by Davis. Repeated to Paris, Berlin, London, Moscow,
U.S. Element Live Oak, SHAPE,
CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

2 Dated October 16, telegram
504 from Berlin reported that at their meeting on that day, the
Berlin Commandants agreed that the only way to settle Autobahn
harassments was to make convoy procedures “cut and dried” and convey
them tothe Soviet Union at a high level. (Ibid.) Telegram 1378 from
Bonn, also dated October 16, summarized a meeting of the Bonn
Quadripartite Ambassadorial Group that day, which discussed a
British convoy that was being held up by the Soviet Union. The Group
agreed that convoy procedures should be harmonized and the Soviet
Union notified about the agreedprocedures. (Ibid.)

230. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy230. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy1

Washington,October 21,
1963.

SUBJECT

Agenda for Meeting on Berlin (Military Convoys) at 5PM
Today

1. Soviet intentions in autobahn incidents of last week. (John McCone is prepared to lead
off.)

2. Notifying the Soviets of our procedures. (Secretary Ball will lead
off.)

(a) There is a consensus that the Soviets ought to be notified. Only
General Lemnitzer
disagrees.

(b) The proposal is that notification should take the form of a letter
from General Freeman, USAREUR, to his Soviet counterpart. A
copy of such a letter is attached as Tab A.2

(d) There is agreement that this step should be supplemented by a meeting
between theSecretary of State (or Ambassador Thompson) and Dobrynin informing the Soviet Ambassadorof the Freeman letter and stressing the
seriousness with which we view the autobahn incidents of last week. My
own view is that this one should be done first, to give the Soviet
political leadership control of the matter from the start. You may not
want to decide this until Thompson returns from Turkey. (He'll be back later
tonight.)

3. Scheduling future convoys. (Bob McNamara or General Taylor will lead.)

(a) There is State-DOD agreement that a non-dismount convoy should be run
lest the option for such convoy be lost by disuse.

(b) The next non-dismount convoy is scheduled for Friday, Oct. 25. This
probably will not run on schedule. The consensus is that this convoy
should go after the Soviets are notified. A proposed timetable for
notifying the Soviets and running the next convoy is attached as Tab
B.

Note: At this juncture, the British are prepared to go along with our
notification procedure. The French do not agree but will not obstruct
notification.

McG. B.

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Convoy
Procedures. Secret.

2 Neither Tab A nor Tab B was attached to the source text, but copies
of the letter and the timetable (scenario) are attached to a
memorandum from Tyler to
Rusk, October 21, which
outlines the questions to be covered during the meeting with the
President, and concludes that the United States should be under no
illusion that harmonizing procedures and explaining them to the
Soviet Union would avoid future incidents. It would, however,
maximize Allied unity on access and put the West in the best public
relations posture. (Department of State, Central Files, POL
38–10)

231. Memorandum for the Record231. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, October 21,
1963.

SUBJECT

Meeting with the President, Monday, October 21, 5:00 p.m., in the
Cabinet Room—Berlin Convoy Procedures

PARTICIPANTS

The President

State

Under Secretary George Ball

Mr. William Tyler

Mr. Richard Davis

Mr. John Ausland

CIA

Director John McCone

Mr. Janney

Mr. Whitman

Defense

Secretary Robert McNamara

General Maxwell Taylor

Mr. Paul Nitze

Brigadier General Lucius
Clay, Jr.

White House

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. David Klein

Lt Colonel W. Y. Smith

After discussion on the recent convoy problems with the Soviets, the
President decided:

1. The Soviet Union should be informed of US convoy procedures.

2. The US procedures—harmonized with UK but not involving visible change
in US position2 —should be passed to Ambassador Dobrynin to give the Soviet political
leadership rather than the military authorities control of the matter
from the start.

3. The Soviets should be advised of existing national convoy procedures.
Nevertheless, the Allies should attempt to achieve de facto
harmonization of these procedures.

4. The next non-dismountable US convoy should be scheduled after
Ambassador Dobrynin has been
informed of the procedures, with the exact timing of the convoy to be
decided later.

DK WYS

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Convoy Procedures. Secret.
Drafted by David Klein and
William Y. Smith.

2 This phrase was added by
hand, apparently by Bundy.

232. Memorandum for the Record232. Memorandum for the Record1

Bonn, October 25,
1963.

SUBJECT

U.S.-German Relations

East-West Relations

PARTICIPANTS

United States

Secretary Rusk2

Ambassador McGhee

Germany

Chancellor Erhard

State Secretary Westrick

Dr. Osterheld, Office of the Chancellor

The Secretary of State met with Chancellor Erhard October 25. There were present, in addition to
myself, State Secretary Westrick
and Dr. Osterheld from the Chancellor's Office. The Chancellor welcomed
the Secretary and expressed the pleasure it gave him to be able to
receive Mr. Rusk. He reiterated
that Germany would continue to be loyal to the NATO alliance and to the United States. He was glad to
report that the opposition had, up to this point, received favorably the
policy statement he had made upon assuming office with his new
Government. The Secretary said that he in turn wished to congratulate
the Chancellor upon his new position. The Chancellor's policy statement
had received a very favorable response in the United States. Both the
President and he looked forward to the Chancellor's visit to the United
States. In the meantime, Under Secretary Ball would be visiting Bonn and
could go over with him the various matters which might be the subject of
discussion in Washington.

The Chancellor said that when he was in Washington he would reaffirm the
understanding that existed between the two countries. There is, he said,
complete confidence in the U.S. on the part of the German Government and
members of the Bundestag. However, public reaction is more volatile.
There is “a lingering fear in the public mind that troops will be
reduced in the future.”

The Secretary reassured the Chancellor that he would deal with this
matter in his Frankfurt speech.3 He said he wished to emphasize in this connection
the burdens that the U.S. had borne in the post-war period. For example,
the United States has since 1945 sustained 100,000 casualties in the
cold war, and has casualties every day inSouth Viet-Nam.He was afraid
that expressions in the German press of distrust toward theUnited States
had caused a bad reaction in our country.

The Chancellor said that the German questions about retention of United
States forcesand continuing interest in Germany should be considered as
a “mark of respect”for the United States. Germans are dismayed at the
possibility of “getting out of touch” with the United States. There is
no possibility for the defense of Germany unless America is “in on it”.
The public reaction was not altogether rational, but it was a factor
which had to be taken into account. He sometimes felt that theGerman
people panic into too high a state of excitement in the face of an
uncertainty. This happened during the recent autobahn incidents.
Erhard said he would make his
own position perfectly clear when he was in the United States.

The Secretary agreed that both governments should be mindful of one
another's public opinion problems. He asked the Chancellor what the
reaction of the German people wouldbe if they knew how much actual
atomic strength presently existed in Germany in U.S. custody.

Chancellor Erhard said the people
were advised on this point, but there would be no adverse reaction if
they had even more information.

The Secretary said that he was struck by the great opportunity which
leaders such as the Chancellor and President
Kennedy had at the present time. Very great
historical changes were in progress. Any such situation had its risks
but also offered opportunities.

The Chancellor said that he too felt that the speed of change in the
world was greater than ever before. The West should be firm with regard
to principles, but not rigid tactically. He hoped to talk with the
President about a number of things. There were a number of questions in
his mind. What had motivated the Russians in the recent autobahn
incident? Was it to show strength in the face of a possible suspicion of
weakness or was it to build up bargaining points to use in later
negotiations?

The Secretary replied that several explanations could be offered for
Soviet actions on the autobahn. One, which he had considered, was that
the people on the spot had probably suspected that we were trying to
tighten up our dismount procedures and reacted without advice from Moscow. He was convinced that
neither Dobrynin nor Gromyko knew of the incident. Once they
were apprised of it, they had attempted to iron matters out. There was
certainly no evidence that Moscow had originated the incident.

Erhard said a new uncertainty
would be added to the situation if, in addition to Khrushchev's power, there was some
independent military power in the Soviet Union.

The Secretary said that he did not believe that Khrushchev himself had stimulated the
autobahn incident. If he had done so, it would in all probability have
been more serious. The Soviet representatives at the checkpoint would
not in the end have accepted our existing procedures. He pointed out
that our own bureaucracy sometimes gets into the same sort of situation
as the Russian representatives on the autobahn did. Admittedly, however,
the subsequent incident affecting a UK dismount convoy lookeddifferent.
He was not surethat the explanation of the first convoy incident still
held good for the second.

Chancellor Erhard asked if there
were any other suggestions which were being considered for discussion by
the United States with the Soviets.

The Secretary said that prospects for further discussions were not very
good. He wanted to make it clear that there was at the present time no
detente. There was, so to speak, only a hunting license for a detente.
The nonaggression pact was dead because the Soviets would not come clean
on Berlin. The observation post negotiations were dead becausethe
Soviets associated them with nuclear free zones. The question of
agreement on non-dissemination of nuclear weapons was dead because the
Soviets linked it with MLF. There was no
agreement on Cuba or Laos.

It was possible that we might make a limited agreement in the field of
civil aviation exchanging one or two civil flights a week. There might
be some increased trade with the Soviets, but not much, because there
was not much that Americans wished to buy from the Soviet Union. The
Soviets had proposed to decrease defense budgets. However, this was
unacceptable to the United States in the absence of inspection. The big
problems with Russia still remain unsolved.

The Secretary said that in his opinion complete agreement with the
Soviets will take a long time and will be achieved only through small
steps. There is no possibility of moving rapidly to a detente. At the
same time there is danger of people thinking there is a detente which
does not exist.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on November 7. A summary of the
conversation was transmitted in Secto 2 from Bonn, October 26.
(Ibid., Central Files, ORG S)

2 Rusk visited Germany
October 25–27 for ceremonies connected with the dedication of a
memorial to General George C. Marshall.

3 For text of
Rusk's address on October
27, see Department of State Bulletin, November 11, 1963, pp.
726–731.

233. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Kennedy233. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Kennedy1

Washington, October 26,
1963.

SUBJECT

United States Policy Toward German Proposals to Buy Reunification
Through Economic Assistance to Soviet Union

Approaching political problems as a retired professor of economics,
Chancellor Erhard is preoccupied
with the thought that West Germany might buy an agreement
forreunification from the Russians through the use of their industrial
capability. While the idea is apparently still in an inchoate state, the
general scheme would be to offer the Soviet Union grants or long-term
loans of perhaps $2.5 billion a year for ten or more years in
consideration that the Soviets agree to a phased program of
self-determination for Germany. This proposal has been reflected in
telegrams from George McGhee
reporting conversations with Erhard, Axel Springer (the publisher), and Westrick (Erhard's assistant).2 A similar idea was
suggested in Rostow's talk with Muller-Roschach.3

Chancellor Erhard has now indicated
that he plans to discuss this proposalwith you during his visit next
month. Prior to Erhard's visit,
Ambassador Thompson and I are
planning to have preliminary talks with him and other members of his
Government so as to make sure that his first visit will be substantively
fruitful.

The Erhard proposal springs, I
think, from the healthy feeling that Germany should itself make some
contribution toward bringing about reunification. At the same time, the
Germans fear that the United States might reach agreements with the
Soviet Union that would have the effect—intentionally or otherwise—of
consolidating the status quo, including the division of Germany. In
these circumstances we must be careful in dealing with any Germany
initiative not to contribute to that fear.

With this in mind, I would propose that Ambassador Thompson and I should take the
following line in talking with Chancellor Erhard:

1. We should express the readiness of the USG to examine with great careand seriousness any German
proposal.

2. We should express the opinion that there is almost no possibility that
the Sovietswould seriously consider such a deal at the present time.

3. We should state that any arrangement involving self-determination for
Germany would raise broad questions of European security as the Soviets
would certainly insist upon security provisions such as the
denuclearization of Germany, withdrawal of foreign troops and bases,
etc. If the Germans, therefore, wish to pursue their ideas they should
comeupwith a complete plan which would show how they would plan to deal
with these problems.

4. Any settlement of this nature would involve United States, British,
and French interests and we, therefore, believe that the Germans should
approach all three Powers at the same time.

5. Our general purpose should be to discourage such a German initiative,
at least in itspresent half-baked and unrealistic form. At the same time
we should avoid discouraging the Germans from working at the problem and
trying to find fresh approaches under which the Germans could themselves
make a major contribution.

6. The attached talking points might be useful in this connection.4

George W. Ball

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. Top Secret. The
source text bears no drafting information.

2 McGhee reported on his
conversation with Springer in telegram 1278 from Bonn, October9.
(Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 EUR-W GER; summarized
in An Ambassador's Account, pp. 99–100) He described his
conversation with Ludgar
Westrick in telegram 1481 from Bonn, October 21.
(Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER)

3 A memorandum of Rostow's conversation with Herbert
Muller-Roschach, Head of the Planning Staff of the German Foreign
Ministry, on October 8, is ibid.

4 Not printed.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany234. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington,November 4, 1963,1:47 p.m.

1344. Paris also pass USRO. Subject: US
Autobahn Convoy.

1. Secretary called in Soviet Charge (Kornienko) at 11:30 am Washington time. He said that he
wanted to see Kornienko on a
serious matter which involved a US convoy which was being held up on the
autobahn.2 The Secretary said he was
astonished by this in view of the background of the past few weeks.
Following October 10 convoy incident Gromyko phoned Secretary in Cincinnati3
and assured him Soviets were not trying to change existing procedures
and that it was important that both followed existing procedures. In
order to avoid any misunderstanding we had informed local Soviet
military authorities in Germany last Tuesday of procedures which in
substance were those we had followed for years.4 Present convoy was well
within non-dismount limits set forth in our procedures. Secretary then
recounted discussion at checkpoint regarding dismounting and lowering
tailgates. Latter request had been rejected because tailgates of
vehicles in question were under height established by our procedures.
Procedures in question were for convenience of both US and Soviets. US
convoy commander had in fact first (in 1961) ordered his troops to
dismount in order to facilitate processing. This problem did not arise
with small convoys. Since we are not trying to change procedures and
Gromyko and Yakubovsky had said they were not
trying to change them we are puzzled as to why incident arose. Secretary
said he need not remind Kornienko
of why we attached importance to question of convoy procedures. In
addition, these incidents hamper effort to reach agreement on one or
another matter since incident of this sort attracts world-wide
attention.

Kornienko said that he had no
information on this incident. He understood that Soviet military
authorities had made no change in their requirements. If these are
complied with there will be no trouble. Kornienko also suggested that there had been an
agreement to dismount from convoys of more than five vehicles. The
Secretary said that the five vehicle figure was related to advance
notification.

Thompson reminded Kornienko of the information he had
given Dobrynin regarding previous
small convoys.5

Secretary asked Kornienko to
inform Moscow promptly. He also asked Kornienko to inform Dobrynin since Secretary may wish to speak to him in
near future.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Flash. Drafted and initialed by
Ausland and approved and
initialed by Thompson.
Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, and USAFE.

2 On November 4 the Embassy in
Bonn had, in a Flash telegram received in the Department of State at
5:02 a.m. that day, reported that U.S. Convoy T–1 was being detained
at Marienborn due to Soviet insistence that the men in the back of
the trucks dismount. (Telegram 1651; ibid.)

3 See Document 227.

4 On October 19 General Lemnitzer had transmitted his recommendations for
harmonizing Western procedures for convoys on the Autobahn. (SHLO 9–00085; Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Autobahn
Crisis) These recommendations were discussed by the Washington
Ambassadorial Group and approved by the four Western governments,
subject to a few changes, on October 24. (Telegram 1233 to Bonn,
October 14; Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10) The new
procedures were explained to Soviet authorities on October 29; see
TheNew York Times, November 7, 1963.

5 See Document 225.

235. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State235. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, November
4, 1963, 11 p.m.

1677. Paris also for USRO and Burns;
USAREUR and CINCEUR for POLADs. Autobahn convoy.

1. If, despite approach to Sov Charge and
setting of time limit,2 Sovs continue block passage of convoy, I
believe we should follow two-pronged course designed (a) to put maximum
pressure on SovGovt from point of view its relations with US and (b) to
intensify confrontation on Autobahn (withoutany threat of resort to
arms) to point where Sovs realize we not
likely to back down and Sov posture of
detente placed in jeopardy.

2. To do this I would suggest following:

A. US Charge in Moscow should be instructed make urgent approach
highestavailable level emphasizing serious impact Autobahn harassments
could have on our efforts find areas of accommodation with USSR.

B. As soon as possible thereafter non-dismount convoy, of approximately
same makeup as US–2, should be dispatched from Berlin westward. If held
up publicity, and pressure on Sovs,
certain to mount.

C. Agreement of other governments should be sought to authorize Live Oak
to order Free Style assembly.3 Word of
this will undoubtedly reach Moscow, particularly in light recent
activation, and would make Sovs realize
they face more intensified tripartite action.

D. British and French Govts should be requested make supporting demarches
in Moscow, emphasizing Sov interference
with Berlin access is matter of most serious joint concern.

E. If no progress made in 48 hours some form of tripartite convoy should
be launched, clearly in non-dismount category. Some modification of Free
Style might be used for thispurpose. Important point would be to emphasize tripartite nature of
exercise. If passageprevented, Sovs will
stand in defiance all three govts and should by then be under most
serious pressure both in terms of worldwide publicity and prospects of
imminent deflation of their peaceful coexistence posture.

3. I believe approach along above lines would have good chance of success
without serious danger of exchange of fire. If it fails, then we would
be clearly in second phase of contingency plans with invocation of
further diplomatic pressures, non military countermeasures, and
preparatory military and precautionary measures.

4. NATO should, of course, be kept fully
informed.

5. Foregoing has been discussed over KY–9 with Gen Polk who concurs. Suggest
Lemnitzer may also wish
comment directly to Washington.

6. If Department approves course of action suggested, it may wish to
alert Allies in Washington today,4 or
authorize us to do so here where we have time advantage.5

McGhee

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Immediate. Received at 6:58 p.m.
and passed to the White House at 7:50 p.m. and to the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and
the CIA at 8:03 p.m. Repeated to Berlin, Moscow, Paris, London,
USAREUR, CINCEUR, and U.S. Element Live
Oak.

2 Regarding the
approach to the Soviet Charge, see Document
234. At 10 p.m. the U.S. Provost Marshal with the convoy
had delivered a 2-hour time limit ultimatum for release of the
convoy; at midnight, when the time limit ran out, the convoy
attempted to move forward, but was blocked by Soviet APCs. (Telegram 621 from Berlin,
November 5; Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–10)

3 At 7:30 p.m.
Washington time, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a Flash message,
ordered the assembly of a Free Style probe. (JCS 3399 to CINCEUR; Kennedy Library, National Security Files,
Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Autobahn Crisis)

4 The
Department of State informed the Washington Ambassadorial Group
along these lines at a meeting at 10 p.m. (Telegram 1353 to Bonn,
November 4; Department of State Central Files, POL 38–10)

5 At 3 a.m. on November 5, the Mission at Berlin
transmitted its strong endorsement of this course of action.
(Telegram 610 from Berlin; ibid.) 3 4

236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany236. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in Germany1

Washington,November 5, 1963,8:15 p.m.

1364. Paris also pass USRO. After Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin's call on
Under Secretary re inclusion West Berlin in test ban treaty, Secretary
saw Dobrynin to inquire whether
he had any reply to make to representations Secretary had made November
4 to Kornienko, Minister Soviet
Embassy.2 Dobrynin replied in negative and
disclaimed any knowledge of incident. He asserted however that US convoy
must have been expecting trouble since they were equipped with sleeping
bags, rations, etc.

Secretary expressed astonishment at Soviet action in view of information
we had passed to local Soviet military authorities in Germany on October
29 of procedures which we had followed for years. Secretary mentioned
other considerations as taken up with Kornienko and reported in Deptel 1344 to Bonn. Dobrynin had nothing to add.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by
Davis and approved and
initialed by Rusk. Repeated to
Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, SHAPE, U.S. Element Live Oak, CINCEUR, USAREUR, USAFE, and USUN.

2 The meeting with Dobynin took
place at 6:10 p.m.; regarding the meeting with Kornienko, see Document 234.

3 At about the same time that Rusk and Dobrynin were meeting, the Soviets agreed to release
the convoy without the troops dismounting or lowering the tailgates
of the trucks. (Telegram 641 from Berlin, November 6; Department of
State, Central Files, POL 38–10) Despite this release the Washington
Ambassadorial Group agreed that a protest note to the Soviet Union
should be sent by each of the three Western powers. For text of this
note, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985,
pp. 857–858; for text of the Soviet reply, November 21, see ibid.,
pp. 858–859.

237. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State237. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, November
7, 1963,7 p.m.

1735. Paris for USRO and USELMLO; USAREUR and CINCEUR for POLADs.
Subject: Autobahn convoy harassment.

1. Khrushchev's comments
yesterday2 make unmistakably clear that
Autobahn convoy harassments receiving highest level attention in Moscow.
We must realistically assume that they may continue, at least
intermittently, for some time to come. Khrushchev's direct involvement has quickly raised level of political
concern in Germany and is being viewed as confirmation of widely held
German belief that from beginning Autobahn incidents have been planned
Soviet policy.

2. In case of Oct 10–12 incident and subsequent stoppage of British
convoy, general reaction locally was satisfaction over victory of
Western firmness in face of Soviet “power tactics”. US clearly gained
prestige at expense of Sovs.

In most recent incident, reaction so far has been similar to extent that
all recognize and commend US firmness and Allied solidarity. There has
been wide recognition that stoppage of small US convoy is direct threat
to Berlin and thus US maintenance of principle of free access is of
vital importance to all Germans. No credence whatever given to Sov contention that US convoy conformed to
Sov requirements and was then
allowed to pass. New element in reaction compared to Oct 10–12, however,
has been evidences of doubt as to whether firmness on spot is sufficient
to handle threat implied by interference with convoys. This is true both
of press and knowledgeable Germans to whom we have talked.

3. Die Welt for example concludes long front-page article on Autobahn
today with statement “firmness in specific cases of intense harassment
is not enough; freedom of Berlin access must henceforth be given a more
central place in the political strategy ofthe West.” Deputy SPD Chairman Wehner reflected same feeling
in statement to press yesterday on subject. SPD, he said, welcomes firmness shown by US and has been
impressed by Allied solidarity. He feared Sovs would shortly make further difficulties, however, and
wondered if, in the long run, it would not be better to settle the
control procedures through a written agreement (Vertraglich). Such an
agreement should in no case, he added, confirm Sov thesis that Sovs alone
determine control procedures.

4. Reinkemeyer (Deputy Director
FonOff Division II) commented last night that he still felt Autobahn
harassment was evidence of Soviet “stupidity”. Sovs completely
misestimated Western reaction and thought they could tighten hold on
Berlin while pursuing strategy of relaxation elsewhere. Their action had
served to stiffen Western resistance and encourage Allied cooperation.
Reinkemeyer felt that in event
of further stoppages (which he considered likely) some different method
would be needed to deal with situation since, while Allied firmness
admirable, future stoppages would tend to highlight Allied impotence in
face of SovAPC's.

5. Procedure which has been utilized successfully so far in handling
convoy stoppagesis likely more and more in future to convey impression
of Allied vulnerability to Sov
harassments. Local reaction, which is now almost entirely positive,
could change rather quickly to concern that US unable prevent Sovs
from interfering with convoy access. We should think one thing that
might be helpful would be to reach prior Allied agreement on protest to
be delivered jointly in Moscow as soon as any case of Sov interference with convoy access occurs.
This would quickly make clear to Sovs
and to German public that Allies not viewing incident in isolation from
other aspects of relations with Moscow and thatwe not relying solely on
local firmness to resolve situation.

6. To facilitate governmental coordination, we are recommending to CINCEUR and to USCOB that non-dismount convoys
henceforth be dispatched at mid-day rather than early morning so that if
interference occurs, allowing for time difference, four-power
consultations in Washington can be quickly arranged.

7. We hope discuss entire problem with Amb Thompson on 11th and may have additional recommendations
to submit thereafter.

McGhee

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Secret; Priority. Received at 2:52 p.m.
Also sent to USAREUR and CINCEUR and repeated to Paris,
London, Moscow, and Berlin.

2 For extracts from Khrushchev's conversation with U.S.
businessmen in Moscow on November 6 during which he claimed that the
United States had yielded to Soviet procedures and intimated that
the incident might have touched off anuclear war, see The New York
Times, November 7, 1963.

238. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State238. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, November
7, 1963, noon.

1598. At Kremlin reception tonight (Nov 7) I had chance to protest first
to Kosygin,2 then to
Gromyko about Soviet actions
on Autobahn, concern about which had brought me back to Moscow. Kosygin
deprecated seriousness of incident relative to other problems, insisted
Sovs were for [not] seeking change
rules onaccess. When I stressed serious effects on public opinion and
resulting impediment to improvement of relations and progress toward
solution other problems, he admitted “soldiers sometimes too eager
fulfill instructions” and expressed hope incidents would not recur.

Gromyko took similar but harder
line, insisted elements in Pentagon tryingchange rules and provoke
incidents and US Govt not accurately informed by US military, which I
vigorously denied. Toward end of reception he sought meout to bring up
subject again and I invited UK Ambassador Trevelyan to join us. This
time Gromyko referred to
agreement concluded between Allied military in Germany in 1945
specifying that military authorities should establish access procedures
to be followed.3 He also referred to specific
communication sent in 1958 by Soviet Commanding General in Germany to US
Commanding General regarding Autobahn.4 These were basis of established practices
respecting Autobahn traffic.Soviets were not changing them one iota but
they must be “obeyed” (in English) by Allied forces if troubles were to
be avoided.

When Trevelyan and I denied knowledge any such “agreement” as he alleged
and referred to our own effort to avoid misunderstanding by our
communication on procedures of Oct 29,5 he
said he would be informed. When I cited record of scores of
convoyssimilar to or larger than recent one which had passed in past
months, as Thompson had informed
Dobrynin, Gromyko said occasional courtesies,
especially in conditions of inclement weather, should not be taken as
change in rules. I said dismounting by our own convoys had never been
practiced at all until large groups went through two years ago, and that
dismounting of any convoys was purely courtesy on our part. Conversation
terminated inconclusively on this note.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 38–10. Confidential; Priority. Received at 6:50
p.m. and repeated to Berlin, Bonn, London, and Paris.

2  Aleksei N. Kosygin, First
Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers.

3 For a record of the June 29,
1945, meeting at which this agreement was reached, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. III,
pp. 353–361.

4 In a
memorandum to Rusk on November
8, Assistant Legal Adviser for European Affairs Kearney speculated
that Gromyko was referring
toa letter dated July 17, 1958, from General Zakharov to General
Hodes on the movement of troops and supplies to Berlin. A copy ofthe
letter was attached tothe memorandum. (Department of State, Central
Files, POL 38–6)

5 See
footnote 3, Document 234.

239. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy239. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara to President
Kennedy1

Washington,November 7,
1963.

SUBJECT

Proposed Delay of Soviet Ships in the Panama Canal

Soviet blockings of Berlin autobahn convoys in the last month make it
useful to considercounteraction to vary the one-sided pattern of tension
and release by a demonstrationoftripartite or U.S. potential in similar
harassment of the Soviet Bloc.

Early opportunities for such counteraction will occur on 8 November and
11 November when Soviet freighters bound from Vladivostok to Montreal
are scheduled to begin transit of the Panama Canal. (An average of two
Soviet ships per month use the Canal.) By “administrative” and
“procedural” delays, which are subject to precise U.S. control, transit
of Soviet ships through the Canal could be delayed for periods well in
excess of delays of the last blocked U.S. convoy (about 42 hours).

There is a small-scale precedent for such counteractions in periodic
detainment by U.S. forces of Soviet vehicles in West Berlin in
retaliation for Soviet detainment of U.S.vehicles in East Berlin. On the
other hand, we have in the past avoided focussing on restricted
waterways in low-level countermeasures on grounds that the U.S. is so
dependent onfree maritime movement around the world. In this connection,
a year ago during the Cubancrisis, for both policy reasons and treaty
obligations, we defined the blockade line so as to exclude the Panama
Canal itself.

Since our objective is to signal that the proposed action is related to
autobahn harassments, the way in which we handle the matter with the
Soviets and publicly is a key element. The most appropriate alternatives
seem to be:

1. To hope that the Soviets will make the connection by themselves and
take no positive action to communicate our motive, except perhaps by
making the period of detention identical with that of the convoy.

2. To await a Soviet protest before allowing the ships to proceed and to
then make an appropriate “unofficial” comment, while holding to the
official explanation that the delays are purely administrative.

Which of these will govern will depend on the circumstances.

We think it unlikely that it will be necessary to leak the detention to
the press, particularly if the ship is [not?] detained very long.

Conceivable Soviet counters to our action might include, for example,
vigorous protests on interference with freedom of the seas, suggestions
that the friends of the USSR might restrict U.S. or allied freedom of
maritime movement elsewhere, furtherBerlin access delays, and no further
reduction of Soviet troop strength in Cuba.2

If such measures were ordered at the Panama Canal, the Canal operating
authorities would be given guidance as to the nature, timing and exact
total duration of the delays desired. The actions which could be taken
are derived from Canal transit procedures and would be applied by Canal
authorities as appropriate under circumstances and guidance. Some combination of the following
actions could delay a Soviet ship for 42 hours (or longer):

1. Ordering vessel to anchorage before entering Canal and report no
pilots available. Plausible delay: 5 or 6 hours.

2. Boarding vessel with admeasurers (individuals utilized to calculate
tonnage for toll payment). Meticulously measure every part of cargo
space. Plausible delay: 12–36 hours. Note: Most Soviet Bloc vessels on
this route have been previously measured which would make this tactic
obvious.

3. Having detailed security inspection for dangerous materials. Delay:
2–4 hours.

4. Having pilot board vessel, report difficulty in steering and anchor
vessel for inspection by divers. Delay: 12 hours.

5. If vessel has any cargo, requiring removal for security inspection.
This would require docking the vessel and give rise to the question of
stevedoring and other dock charges since this has never been required
before. (No grain storage exists at either end ofthe Canal.) Delay: 3–5
days.

6. Delaying providing tugs to move ship from dock to Canal. Delay: 2–4
hours.

7. Establishing priority of movement through Canal from Pacific to
Atlantic or Atlantic to Pacific in opposition to movement by Soviet Bloc
vessel. Delay: 8–10 hours.

8. Simulating mechanical difficulty with the locks. Delay: 4–6 hours.

The Department of State's view of this countermeasure is that while it
offers usadvantages, there are also certain risks which we should be
aware of. The principal benefit of this action, in the Department's
view, is that it would serve as a signal tothe Russians of our concern
about their actions on the autobahn. Furthermore, in contrastto our past
attempts to devise suitable countermeasures to Soviet harassment, which
wereinvariably frustrated by lack of appropriate options or
administrative problems, this measure represents a present opportunity
which can be carried out on quick notice by the U.S. side alone. (The
State Department does feel, however, that our French, British and German
Allies should be consulted, prior to implementation of this measure.) On
the otherhand, the State Department perceives the following
disadvantages:

1. The action involved is so far removed from the autobahn that it might
be regarded by the Soviets as a sign of weakness. This could, however,
be obviated, by continuing topursue a firm course of action on the
autobahn.

2. The action represents a limited parallel, in view of the
disproportionate use of the autobahn by the Allies and the Canal by the
Soviets.

3. The action could invite counteraction on the Soviets' part. For
example, if we hold up the Soviet vessel on November 11, this could provide the Soviets an excuse
forholding up our convoy scheduled for November 12.

The Secretary of the Army, as your representative for the supervision of
Canal Zone affairs, could implement delaying tactics on very short
notice if you so direct.

We recommend that the Secretary of the Army be directed to take the
necessary, but not publicly noticeable, preparatory actions to permit,
when so directed, effective transit-delaying tactics of the kind
described above against the Soviet ship scheduled to use the Panama
Canal on 8 November, or if time does not permit, the ship now expected
to arrive on 11 November.

Dean Rusk
Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Kennedy Library,
National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany, Berlin, Autobahn
Crisis. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting
information.

2 At this point in the source text there is an asterisk and at the
bottom of the page the following handwritten notation by U. Alexis Johnson: “They also might
move against the Berlin barge traffic.”

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State240. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, November
12, 1963,8 p.m.

1783. Paris also for USRO. From Ball for
Secretary Rusk, McGeorge Bundy and Ambassadors.2

Under Secretary Ball met with
Chancellor Erhard on Nov 12 for
one and a half hours. He was accompanied by Ambassadors McGhee and Thompson, and Kaysen. Westrick
was present on German side.

Ball opened the discussion after
the usual courtesies by saying that it was his desire to explore those
matters which the Chancellor wished to discuss in Washington. In
response to the Chancellor's question, Ball said that the first topic which we considered
important was to reach a common judgment on the situation in Eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union and a common policy line on the basis of
this judgment. It was clear that there was a rapid development of events
in the Communist bloc which presented us with both dangers and
opportunities.

Erhard agreed that the situation
was a changing one. He was under no illusion that large changes in
East-West relations were now feasible. However, he thought it important
to remain in contact with the Soviet Union, to continue conversations,
and to make such arrangements on smaller matters as would prove
possible. He was happy to observe that Mr. Ball and the US share his view on the dangers of the
extension of long-term credits to the Soviets by the West. It was unwise
for us to help Khrushchev build
up his long-run strength.

Ball said that the question of
credits was urgent. We have a fair basis for judging Soviet reserves of
gold and foreign exchange. We estimate that they will be paying some
$800 million to $1 billion for wheat purchases this year and next, and
we estimate their gold production at from $200 to $300 million per year.
The Soviets had obtained credits in the past which are now coming due,
and the amortization of these credits was about equal to the new credits
they are obtaining. Khrushchev
has stated that the Soviets intend to spend some $3 billion a year over
seven years for chemical fertilizer plants. It was clear that their new
land venture has been a failure and that they are taking these steps to
solve their continuing agricultural problems. We estimate that about 40
per cent of this would be machinery and equipment, which they might try
to purchase abroad. This investment program posed difficult choices in
resource allocation and it seems certain that they will have to cut back
on military expenditures and possibly on troop strength. This should
dispose them to be more interested in measures of arms control and
possibly even disarmament. This situation of resource pressure could
also constitute a potential bargaining lever on political questions and
thus it was important for the West to achieve a common position on
long-term credits. Ball thought it would not be easy to achieve a common
position on long-term credits in NATO.
The Italian position was ambiguous, as was the Canadian; the UK appeared
to desire to extend long-term credits; and Norway would probably take
the same position. He said he would be seeing Mr. Heath 3 and
probably Foreign Minister Butler
in a few days and would discuss the matter with them before it was taken
up in the NATO Council.

Erhard responded that he shared
Ball's estimate of the Soviet
situation. Trade alone would offer the Soviets very limited
opportunities, since they had little to supply to the West. Therefore,
credits were the central problem in Soviet economic relations with the
West. He also shared Ball's
skepticism on the position of the UK. Germany, of course, would support
the US position very strongly. It was his judgment that France would
also support this position since it was consonant with De Gaulle's general views on relations
with the Soviets. It was less clear what the others would do. Germany thinks it equally
undesirable to extend long-term credits to the satellites, but does wish
to improve trade relations with them to change the somewhat rigid
position which had previously governed their relations.

Ball agreed in general, but
thought it useful to make a distinction between the Soviet Union and the
Eastern European countries. There was a growing divergence between these
countries and the Soviets which we should do our best to encourage. He
quoted Khrushchev's statement to
Harriman that the Soviet satellites were now too big to spank.

Erhard asked whether Khrushchev would see improved trade
relations between Germany and Eastern European countries as hostile to
the Soviet Union.

Thompson responded that while
Khrushchev would not be
particularly pleased, he could hardly object.

[Here follow extensive discussion of wheat prices and France's role in
Europe.]

At Ball's request, Thompson made some observations on the
Soviet situation.

The Chancellor asked Thompson
whether we had a reliable and full explanation of the Soviet motives in
blocking the convoys recently.

Thompson thought that the impulse
had originated in the Soviet armed forces. It was clear to him that when
Gromyko was calling on the
President, Gromyko was ignorant
of what was happening on the Autobahn. Khrushchev would not have ordered an interruption at
that moment. If he had wished to have one, he would have done it earlier
or waited for Gromyko's
return.

The Chancellor observed that this might be a sufficient explanation for
the first incident, but asked how it bore on the second.

Ambassador Thompson pointed out
that once the prestige of the Soviet military was engaged, Khrushchev had to support them. He
naturally desired to try to push us when he readily could, and he was
not free to ignore pressures from the army. These, of course, were
matters of conjecture; we could not speak with certainty on them. As for
the Soviet economic situation, it was clearly difficult but not
desperate. An increase in the supply of fertilizers alone would not
solve the agricultural problem. Present supplies are being wastefully
used, partly because of poor distribution and partly because of peasant
ignorance. The allocation of resources would continue to trouble the
Soviets, and while industrial output grew, agriculture would be a
problem for some time.

Erhard asked two questions. First,
how strong was the embourgeoisement of the Soviet people; and second,
how deep were the differences between the Soviets and Communist
China.

On the first point, Thompson said
he thought this had gone very far indeed. He gave as examples the
inability of the government to suppress the artists and poets whom they
had criticized, the toleration by Khrushchev of jazz to the point of his appearance at an
American concert, and the great interest of the ordinary citizen in
Western dress. Nonetheless, the Communist Party and not the people ran
the country, and the influence on policy of these changes in attitudes
was not clear. On the second question, Thompson said that Soviet-Chinese conflict was
irreconcilable, as long as the present leadership ruled in the two
countries. The immediate question was how far the struggle would go in
the Communist Parties all over the world; whether there would be an open
break within these parties and their front organizations. As far as
state relations between the Soviets and Chinese went, he did not expect
a formal break, although continued frontier fighting conceivably could
lead even to this.

Erhard inquired whether we had any
specific intelligence on military movements on the frontier.

Thompson said we had some reports
of military reinforcements on both sides and some rumors of fighting. It
was possible that fighting could take place without our knowing about
it.

Chancellor Erhard closed the
conversation by observing that he would not be bored in Washington and
that there would be plenty to talk about and do.

The discussion lasted about an hour and a half.

McGhee

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 7 US/BALL.
Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Passed to the White House and
repeated to London, Moscow, Paris, and Brussels.

2 Ball was in Bonn on the first
stop on a trip to Germany, the United Kingdom, and France for talks
on economic questions.

3  Edward Heath, British Lord Privy Seal.

241. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State241. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet
Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, November
14, 1963,7 p.m.

1653. Paris for USRO. I believe Embassy
Bonn's 1650 and 1756 to Department2 place Adenauer-Erhard
proposals re possibility of using trade with Soviets to obtain political
concessions in proper perspective. While there is a significant degree
of Soviet dependence on trade with West which can be exploited by purposeful use of trade
to obtain indirect political benefits, I feel that idea of utilizing
trade deals to wrest political concessions of major importance from
Soviets is entirely false concept. We would delude ourselves if we
expected that Soviets would sacrifice what they regard as vital
political or security considerations for economic aid, regardless of how
difficult their economic situation may appear to be.

While thus disagreeing with underlying concept, I believe it might well
be useful to encourage Germans to consult in NATO regarding their proposals. If this is done, it would
be essential in my view to attempt to concentrate discussions on credit
problem, which is becoming increasingly serious and urgent (cf Embassy
telegram 1652).3

I was glad to note from Bonn's 17834 that Erhard highlighted credit problem in his
meeting with Under Secretary and apparently backed away from his concept
of using trade to obtain political concessions from Soviets.

Kohler

1 Source: Department of State,
Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2339. Secret; Limit Distribution.
Repeated to Bonn and Paris.

2 Dated
November 2 and 9 respectively, both telegrams developed the theme
that the Soviet Union was dependent on the West for various goods
and also needed Western financing to develop key areas of its
economy. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1652, November 14,
outlined the credits that had been extended to the Soviet Union,
breaking them down country by country. (Ibid., FN 11–1 USSR)

4 Document 240.

242. Memorandum of Conversation242. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 26,
1963.

SUBJECT

German-US Relations

PARTICIPANTS

Germans

Federal President Heinrich Luebke

Chancellor Ludwig Erhard

Foreign Minister Gerhard
Schroeder2

Ambassador Heinrich
Knappstein

Herr Weber, Interpreter

Americans

The President

Under Secretary George W.
Ball

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler, EUR

Mr. Robert C. Creel,
Director, GER

Mr. Arnold Lissance, Interpreter

Following a brief meeting in the President's office, where the President
presented to Chancellor Erhard on
behalf of the late President Kennedy a large gilded
silver cigar box (which had been procured originally in anticipation of
Chancellor Erhard's scheduled
official visit), the meeting adjourned to the Cabinet Room for further
discussions.

President Luebke said the German delegation was extremely grateful for
this opportunity to meet with President Johnson. It
was obviously impossible under the circumstances to have the full
exchange of views which had been contemplated when the Erhard visit was scheduled, but he
wished to mention briefly a few German national problems. First, we had
to recognize that there were indications there might be some new attacks
on the communications lines between the Federal Republic and Berlin, and
this situation would bear watching. There were several other pending
problems which had already been discussed,3 and there was no
need to repeat the German position here. It would be important for the
German people to be reassured that the US attitude on all these matters
remained unchanged. Luebke was convinced personally that our two
governments were agreed on fundamentals and that there were no basic
problems between us.

The President said he heartily concurred with this view. He wanted at the
outset to express his appreciation to the German delegation for honoring
us with their presence on this occasion. He was glad that the President,
the Chancellor and others could be with us in this sad hour to show
their respect for our late President.

President Luebke replied that it was entirely understandable that the
Germans should wish to express their sympathy. The Germans had received
so much support from the US that they wished to stand together with us
in this tragic hour. The reason the Germans had been able to build up
their country again was largely due to American help. They wished to
continue to work together with us. He mentioned in particular the matter
of aid to underdeveloped countries.

The President said this attitude was very much appreciated.

Chancellor Erhard commented that he
had already been scheduled to be here with Foreign Minister Schroeder, although under entirely
different circumstances. The
German objective had been to redefine and strengthen the relationship
between our two countries following Erhard's taking over the chancellorship. It would have
been a good time to do so after his visit with De Gaulle in Paris. There were common
problems facing us he had wished to discuss—the Atlantic Alliance,
European integration and the Kennedy Round, among
others. Now, after the tragic death of President
Kennedy, he felt there was a need to give new
impetus to all the objectives we shared together. We should avoid the
impression there was any kind of hiatus. He was therefore anxious to
have these talks as soon as possible, maybe in early January. After that
he would have to go to London on an official visit. He reiterated there
was a real need to give a new impulse to Atlantic cooperation and to
show the peoples of Europe that there would be no interruption in the
progress toward our objectives.

The President replied that we were anxious to reschedule the Erhard visit as soon as possible. He
would ask the State Department to look over the schedule and see what
specific dates could be worked out. Since Erhard had been scheduled to be here right now, the
President would want him to be the first, or at least one of the first
on the list. Meanwhile, there were many decisions which had to be made
by the new American Government. He was going before a joint session of
the Congress tomorrow morning and developments in Congress might have
some effect on his own schedule. But he agreed that the visit should
take place and take place soon. He was fully aware of the value of our
relations with the Federal Republic. We appreciated the Federal
Republic's support in the causes of Atlantic partnership and European
unity. We shared a number of things in common. For example, his own
mother's family had come to America from Germany in 1848. Both he and
Erhard were starting new
administrations.

Erhard replied that he was aware
that President Johnson knew Germany. He had gone to
Berlin at an historic hour after the Wall was erected in August, 1961.
He was happy to hear that the President was of German ancestry and
commented that 1848 was the year the best Germans had left Germany for
the US. He felt the transition we were now undergoing both in Germany
and in the US should be a smooth one. We had a basic identity of
viewpoint, and Germany had the fullest confidence both in the US and in
President Johnson personally.

The President replied it was comforting to hear these sentiments. There
were several points he wished to make: We were determined to preserve
our rights in Berlin; as he had himself said in Berlin, we intended to
stay there.4 We would keep the military forces in Europe necessary
to meet our commitments. We
supported the right of the German people to self-determination. The
President looked forward to working together with the new Chancellor and
the German people. He also looked to Erhard as a famous economist and a
leading advocate of expansion of world trade to make the coming trade
negotiations a success. President Kennedy had “put
everything on the line” for the Trade Expansion Act. The President
considered TEA as one of the outstanding achievements of the
Kennedy Administration in the search for world
peace. While he did not want to relieve Mr. Ball of his responsibility as our expert in this field,
the President would also look to Chancellor Erhard to help make these talks next spring successful.
He had just himself returned from the Benelux countries and knew that
everyone there was very concerned over the outcome of the
Kennedy Round. Erhard should know that if possible President
Johnson felt even stronger on this subject than
had President Kennedy. It was imperative to have a
flow of goods if we were to have a flow of understanding.

Erhard replied that on the German
side they would do their best to make the Kennedy
Round a success. They were aware of the need of the peoples of Europe
and America to feel that they formed a unity, quite apart from military
or political considerations, in their everyday life. Erhard recalled that he had been with
President Kennedy when the trade expansion bill had
been sent to the Hill and that he had also been there when the bill had
been passed. He therefore had a personal interest in the success of the
Act. It would not be easy within the EEC
to negotiate the agricultural problem, which had a definite relationship
to the Kennedy Round. The matter of grain prices
was a particularly difficult problem. President Luebke, Foreign Minister
Schroeder and he were all
agreed that they must move ahead in Germany on these matters and that
changes would be needed. He was happy to learn that President
Johnson attached such importance to this
problem. While in Paris he had also discussed the question of
disparities with De Gaulle, who
wanted to eliminate this problem. Erhard felt that it was not possible to settle these
problems individually and in isolation, but that they should all be
considered together.

The President commented that other common ground he shared with the
Germans was that there was a large German population in Texas and that
the American Ambassador to Germany was from Texas. In connection with
agricultural problems he recalled an incident recently in Texas where
large quantities of chicken salad had been bought by the Governor with
funds which were not authorized. The ensuing difficulties had had a very
divisive effect in Texas and the injuries from the chicken salad case
were still with us. He looked to Chancellor Erhard to see to it that a few little chickens would not
cause similar enduring difficulties between the US and Germany.

Mr. Ball commented that he hoped
we could finally settle this problem.

The President then inquired as to what time in January or early February
might be best for an Erhard visit.
He pointed out we would be faced with a number of problems in early
January—Congress would be reconvening, there was the State of the Union
message, the Budget message, and so on.

Mr. Ball asked when Erhard was going to London. Erhard replied January 15–16, adding
that it would be highly desirable if he could visit here before going to
London.

The President said we were anxious to settle this point in accordance
with the Chancellor's wishes and asked Mr. Ball to try within the next few days to work out a
date.

Erhard asked what he should say to
the press after the meeting should they inquire about this point.

Mr. Ball suggested he state that
it had been agreed the visit should be rescheduled at the earliest
possible time. He could indicate that this meant as soon as possible
after January 1. We would try to work this out within the next day or
so.

President Luebke said another factor in favor of early January was that
later in the month they would be holding a big agricultural fair (Green
Week) in Berlin. There would be many agricultural experts there and it
would be good if some of the agricultural problems could be worked out
prior to the meeting.

Erhard said that from the
standpoint of “atmosphere” it would be highly desirable if it could be
made absolutely clear that there would be continuity of US policy. It
was also important to demonstrate that personal contact had been
established between the two administrations.

Mr. Ball said he could give
complete assurances regarding the continuity of US policy and our desire
to continue to work very closely with the Germans toward our common
objectives.

The President said he wished to stress that he had been a part of the
Kennedy Administration and had personally taken
part in shaping its policy. He was deeply committed to its objectives.
On the Erhard visit the Chancellor
could say to the press that we regretted the tragic circumstances
requiring the postponement of the visit and that we would reschedule it
shortly after January 1.

The President asked if there were any further comments. President Luebke
said there was one additional item on his mind. He had recently come
back from a trip to Iran, Indonesia, Japan and the Philippines. He had
been particularly struck by the problems in Indonesia, a country of 100
million people but in very poor shape economically. It was this latter
factor which tended to push the government and people of Indonesia toward Moscow. He was convinced
it was necessary for all of us in the free world to hold Indonesia. He
believed Sukarno had no personal tendency toward Moscow and would go in
that direction only if there were no alternative. He himself had not
particularly wanted to go to Indonesia to start with but had asked the
British and Americans for advice. Both had said he should go, and he was
glad he had done so. He wanted to stress that Sukarno was ready to
establish closer ties with the West than with the East bloc. He felt
that the decision of the US Senate on foreign aid was a factor of great
importance in this picture. He therefore hoped the President would give
his personal attention to this problem.

The President replied that he was aware of this problem and appreciated
President Luebke's interest. He assured him that his views would be
taken into account.

In conclusion, President Luebke said he had been gratified to hear what
had been said about the continuity of US policy. He wanted to thank the
President for these statements.

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Drafted and initialed by Creel and approved in U on December 3 and in the White House on
January 8, 1964. The meeting was held in the White House.

2  Luebke, Erhard, and Schroeder visited Washington for President
Kennedy's funeral.
Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on
November 22.

3 A
memorandum of the conversation at the Department of State at 2:30
p.m. on European integration is in Department of State, Secretary's
Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

4 add “as long as our presence was
required.” [Footnote in the source text added at a later
time.]

243. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson243. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington,December 3,
1963.

The British have been having some high-level bilateral exchanges with the
Soviets, on the relation between a non-aggression pact and the
Berlin-Germany problem, and it is time now for us to weigh in with them.
Here is the situation and Rusk's
recommendation, in which I concur:

The Germans have violently opposed a non-aggression pact which did not
bring real improvement in Berlin or Germany. Khrushchev has now suggested to Douglas Home that a non-aggression pact
might be accompanied by a unilateral Soviet declaration opposing the use
of such force for such problems as Germany and West Berlin.

This is not nearly enough for the Germans or for us, and the UK has
suggested that they might propose an amendment which would require the
Soviet Union to state that it would refrain from any unilateral action
affecting the situation in Berlin or Western access to that city.

We think this is not good enough, plainly because it would be regarded as
weakness in Germany and because British bargaining in particular arouses
suspicion on the Continent.

So our plan is to tell the British that we prefer to have them fend off
this Soviet ploy (which is all it seems to be right now) but that if
they insist on going forward, they ought to check directly with the
French and the Germans, rather than to put the matter in the North
Atlantic Council.

I have watched this one carefully, because the Department tends to be
more rigid on these matters than President Kennedy
wanted, but in this case their recommendation seems right. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

McG. B.2

1 Source: Johnson Library,
National Security File, Aides File, Bundy, Chron. No classification
marking.

2 Printed from a copy that
bears these typed initials.

244. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State244. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany
to the Department of State1

Bonn, December
11, 1963,2 p.m.

2086. Reference: Embtels 2064 and
2079.2

1) Joint German Bonn and Berlin decision to treat with GDR state reps if necessary in order to
settle Christmas pass issue involves fairly significant new departure.
It is in fact a potential “quantum jump”, from which extensive
consequences could flow aside from those connected with mere pass issue
alone.

2) As noted reftel 2064 we do not
consider that primary Allied interests are involved in choice of level
for negotiating pass question, but that these interests are mainly engaged by form,
location and mode of operation of pass offices in West Berlin. Our
option to pass on this will presumably satisfy our requirements.

3) For Germans, however, level of negotiation is matter of principle
which affects more issues than pass question. It has always been
possible that Germans (as well as Allies) might achieve numerous
specific gains re access and freedom of travel if they were willing to
deal with state authorities designated by GDR. In past FRG has
invariably declined to do so except through IZT and certain technical channels, which have largely been
limited to post, rail and waterways, i.e., to areas where something like
all-German regimens still exist. Germans seem to maintain rationale for
pass talks that only “technical contacts” are still involved. Although
this may satisfy public, it does not alter transaction.

Basic fact is that Erhard and
Brandt have sanctioned type of
approach which, if modified, could go long way toward satisfying
substance as well as form of GDR demands
on other outstanding past questions, such as (a) FRG 1962 credit offer (which involved access to East Sector
for West Berliners), (b) intra-Berlin mail and (c) Hof Bridge.

4) In part decision about passes seems to reflect Mende's new influence (Embtel 2079) and perhaps more pragmatic
than legalistic mentality of Erhard. Brandt's
influence is major underlying factor. CDU Deputy Gradl last week commented to EmbOffs that CDU had absorbed lesson of Feb Berlin
elections, which seemed to amount to popular endorsement for Brandt's initiatives toward East without
fuss about formalities. Present move seems to involve some Bonn
coordination with Brandt and
following of his lead as occurred last summer on Waltersdorfer Chaussee
crossing point. Pattern seems on way to establishing itself.

5) So long as formal Allied competence is unaffected, to which we must
always be alert, there seems to be no call for us to define German
interest in dealings with GDR. Indeed in
past we have foreseen conceivable advantages in some such dealings,
although Germans have always balked at idea.

6) East Germans could spoil pass opportunity by excessive inflexibility,
but with care they could achieve optically attractive gains as well as
maneuver FRG into position of
negotiating disadvantage. GDR, for
instance, could offer to prolong pass issuing indefinitely as pressure
on FRG to make greater concessions on
oil prices, or as basis for demanding partial fulfillment of credit
offer. FRG willingness to talk on passes
might harden GDR resolve to press for
more state-to-state contacts.

7) In sum, new turns could lead to changes in conduct of FRG-GDR
relations, and channels used. Downgrading of IZT Treuhandstelle (Leopold) may be first result, and this
is bound to lead to proliferation of channels. New approach could settle some problems, and
create others by projecting entire new dimension of relationships.

8) Such development need not per se be disadvantageous, but it could pose
associated problems for Allies:

a) We would have to be particularly alert that results do not infringe on
our primary Allied authority in Berlin;

b) There could be increased difficulties in coordinating and keeping
ourselves informed;

c) We would have to guard against German Bonn-Berlin cooperation
developing into internal axis of decision-making which could prejudice
capability of Allied representatives in Berlin to influence and, when
necessary, control actions of Berlin government.

McGhee

1 Source: Department of State,
Central Files, POL 36 GER.
Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, and Moscow.

2 Telegram 2064, December 9,
summarized a briefing by Carstens of officials from the three Allied
Embassies on the events leading to the discussion between East and
West Germans on the Berlin Christmas passes. (Ibid.) Telegram 2079,
December 10, reported on oil discussions between the two Germanies.
(Ibid., FT 4 E GER-W GER) On December 10, in response to
telegram 2064, the Department of State informed the Embassy in Bonn
that it welcomed the developments leading to visits to East Berlin
by West Berliners. (Telegram 1688; ibid., POL 36 GER)

245. Memorandum of Conversation245. Memorandum of Conversation1

December 15, 1963.

SUBJECT

Quadripartite Working Dinner

PARTICIPANTS

(See last page)2

US/MC/11 Paris

BERLIN AND GERMANY

Foreign Minister Schroeder opened
the discussion by saying that he would like to discuss Berlin and
Germany. He said that the Soviets had made it clear that they are not
prepared to include Berlin and Germany in a detente. Recent incidents on
the autobahn and statements by Gromyko in the UN made
this clear. The Soviet Union instead demanded a peace treaty and a free
West Berlin. The aim of the Soviet Union was to separate Germany from the Alliance. Recently
Pankow (the headquarters of the East German regime) was increasing its
agitation. An example was the question of Christmas passes. This
apparently is the beginning of a ten point plan. The East Germans have
not made clear what the other points are but the passes are a beginning
which are supposed to run over ten points.

Schroeder then turned to the
points under discussion between the East and West. He noted that all
considered the Khrushchev
proposal for a declaration on Berlin in connection with a nonaggression
arrangement unsatisfactory. The Federal Republic believed that a
nonaggression arrangement should be the end of a process not the
beginning. Schroeder said he did
not want to go into detail about the question of observation posts. He
did wish to note, however, that Soviet opposition to the MLF in connection with nondiffusion is
instructive. Germany believes that any further comments on nondiffusion
should only be made after an MLF has
been achieved. Schroeder then said
he wanted to raise the question of whether there is a requirement for a
Western initiative on Germany. He then reviewed the history of the
revised Peace Plan in the Ambassadorial Group and the general contents
of the revised Peace Plan. Schroeder then referred to the proposal on Germany
prepared by the Kuratorium on Indivisible Germany.3 Schroeder said he did not want to
commit himself to any or all of this proposal at this time but would
like to introduce it for discussion. He felt we should at least prepare
a Western initiative in the event it should be necessary to offset an
initiative from the East.

Couve de Murville said that as he
understood it, Mr. Schroeder
wanted in effect to prepare a new peace plan which presented the case
for the unification of Germany.

Schroeder again reviewed the
history of this question. He said it had been discussed last year at the
working dinner in Paris, that the Ambassadorial Group had sought to
reach agreement on a revised Peace Plan but were not successful. In
August the Germans raised the question again.

Couve said that Schroeder's remark raised three
questions: is it a good idea to have a new peace plan; should such a
peace plan stress East-West German contacts or Four-Power
responsibility; and finally what would we do with the peace plan when it
was finished? He said he found
no harm in preparing a new peace plan and was agreeable to the
Ambassadorial Group working on it.

Secretary Rusk remarked that he
found Schroeder's suggestion
attractive. He felt that the West is not sufficiently active in
presenting our solution to the German question. He did not know whether
we would make any progress but we should do preparatory work. Any study
should examine the question of German reunification and European
security. Economic concessions might contribute to a powerful package.
Conceivably we might offer a package which would engage Soviet
interests. The Secretary said that we have two objectives: German
unification and to get the 22 divisions out of East Germany. It was
possible that the Ambassadorial Group might be able to prepare a fresh
approach. He welcomed, therefore, the German proposal.

Butler said we have previously
been studying the peripheral issues. These questions were becoming
tedious. He remarked he had only handled them two months and was already
tired of them. In his reply to Khrushchev the British Prime Minister will take care of
the question of the MLF and will make it
clear that the Soviet position is completely unsatisfactory. There was,
however, some possibility of progress on observation posts, although
there was the unacceptable link to troop withdrawal. With regard to a
nonaggression arrangement, the reply will say nothing but that the
British are discussing the subject with their Allies. It looked
therefore as though it would be difficult to make progress with
peripheral issues, with the possible exception of observation posts, at
Geneva. Butler said it was
agreeable with him for the Ambassadorial Group to examine the German
proposals. He then asked Mr. Schroeder what economic inducements he had in mind.

Schroeder referred, in reply, to
proposals for an increase in swing (or credit) within the context of the
Interzonal Trade Agreement. The East Germans are however sensitive to
political conditions. Perhaps if economic concessions were advanced
within a Four-Power group, the Soviet interests could be mobilized.

The Secretary then asked if Mr. Schroeder was quite certain that if a secret ballot were
held in East Germany, the East Germans would vote for reunification.
Schroeder said this was the
risk the West Germans must run if they believe in self-determination.
They are however confident that the results would be favorable. This was
the reason the Soviets opposed a plebiscite.

The Secretary said that Khrushchev
had said that in 1953 Malenkov and Beria had wanted to get rid of East
Germany. We should now look to see if there are factors more important
to the Soviets than 17 million Germans. If a few people in the Soviet
hierarchy had wanted to get rid of East Germany, there might be more
now.

Schroeder remarked that in a trade
agreement with the East the satellites have accepted their application
to Berlin, although this is not liked by the Soviets or the GDR.

The Secretary suggested that Schroeder present his proposal to the Ambassadorial
Group.

Butler asked when this might
happen.

Schroeder said it was hard to say.
We must prepare against the possibility that the Soviets might take some
initiative and we would need to counter it. Or the Soviets might leave
some opening in which we would consider it desirable to take an
initiative.

The Secretary stressed that it was important that there be no press
speculation on this, but that the work proceed quickly in the
Ambassadorial Group. Butler said
it would spoil the effect if there were press speculation.

Schroeder said that a number of
new ideas were coming from German parliamentary circles. The group known
as Indivisible Germany represents a group of leading West Germans. It
was necessary to be able to say that their proposals were being
submitted to the Ambassadorial Group, which has the problem of Germany
under constant review. It would, however, not be necessary to give any
more details. He agreed there would be no reference to the discussion
this evening, but he would say we are referring any proposals to the
Ambassadorial Group.

The Secretary asked when public pressure was likely to arise.

Schroeder replied it existed
already. The Bundestag debate on the Test Ban Treaty might raise the
question of a West German initiative. The cabinet had taken no decision
but Mr. Schroeder thought the
treaty would not come up for debate before March.

The Secretary concluded the discussion of this subject by saying that the
four Foreign Ministers had agreed to examining the German proposals
after Christmas.

CHRISTMAS PASSES

Carstens began the discussion by
reviewing the history of the Christmas pass question. The Secretary said
that he hoped that some arrangement could be worked out regarding
Christmas passes on humanitarian grounds. With regard to the question of
channels of communication, he asked if there were any alternatives such
as the Red Cross or the Commandants. Carstens said that the various alternatives had been
considered but for various reasons dismissed. Krapf raised the question
of how to handle this with the press. The Secretary suggested saying
that it had been agreed that it would be desirable on humanitarian
grounds to work out an arrangement and that it was hoped the East would
not place political obstacles in the way.

Schroeder said that this question
of visiting families had arisen on the two previous Christmases. The
East chose Christmas to make their proposals in order to bring pressure
to bear on the West Berliners. He thought the East German press
conference had been a shrewd move. If we accepted Eastern terms we would
weaken the West's position. On the other hand, it would not appear there
was much we could do.

The Secretary then asked if some technical agencies could handle the
passes and thus avoid political issues. Schroeder said the other side was prepared to use postal
personnel. The decisive point is whether there will be an agreement
between the West Berlin Government and the East German regime. Carstens added that the East wanted
Brandt or his representative
with full powers to sign.

Couve said that no matter how the
agreement was reached it would tend to weaken the position of West
Berlin. There was then some discussion of the various levels at which an
agreement might be concluded.

The Secretary said that if the agreement failed, there might be serious
tensions in West Berlin and this was of concern to the occupation
powers. Schroeder said that the
West Berliners had often been disappointed. The Secretary concluded the
discussion by saying he hoped we would hear more of the pass issue in
the coming days and that something could be worked out without loss of
morale in West Berlin.

Butler said he would like to see
placed in the NATO communiqué a
non-aggression statement and wondered if Schroeder had any objection to this. Schroeder said that the British formula
emphasized Germany too much but might be acceptable if it were shortened
and move general. Butler remarked
they might shorten it two or three sentences. Schroeder said it shouldn't make reference to the UN. Couve said he had not yet seen the British draft but
noted that each year reference was made to the effect that NATO was defensive. Lord Hood concluded
the discussion by saying that the British would come up with a new and
shorter draft.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28
Berlin. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Ausland and approved in S on October 26. The Foreign Ministers were in Paris
for the NATO Ministerial Meeting
December 16–18. A summary of this conversation was transmitted in
Secto 13 from Paris, December 16. (Ibid.)

2 Not printed. Secretary
Rusk, Foreign Ministers Couve de Murville and Schroeder, and
Foreign Secretary Butler were each accompanied by three
officials.

3 On June 23 the Kuratorium “Unteilbares Deutschland”
had sent President Kennedy a memorandum on the
future of German unity. For text, see Dokumente zur
Deutschlandpolitik, 1963, pp. 428–430. On September 15 Executive
President of the Kuratorium Wilhelm Schuetz issued an 8-point
program for German unity. For text, see ibid., pp. 709–710. The
proposals were subsequently distributed to the three Western Foreign
Ministers during the U.N. General Assembly session in New York in
October.

246. Memorandum of Conversation246. Memorandum of Conversation1

December 18, 1963, 8–10 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. Tyler

Mr. Schaetzel

Minister Jones

Mr. Lampson

United Kingdom

Foreign Secretary Butler

Mr. Peter Thomas

Sir Harold Caccia

Mr. Duncan Wilson

Lord Hood

Mr. Henderson

SUBJECT

Germany and Berlin

US/MC/7 London

Butler directed the discussion to
the problems of Germany and Berlin. he said he had reached the
conclusion that the peripheral questions (observation posts, NAP, non-dissemination agreement etc.) if
treated in isolation were so obdurate that it was necessary to think
through again the possibility of making some progress in solving the
central problems.

Rusk replied that the
quadripartite dinner in Paris2 had produced a new
sense of initiative on the German side—a new willingness to look with a
more open mind at the possibility of developing a comprehensive Western
position on Germany-Berlin. Schroeder showed a new approach, a new mobility or at
least a disposition to move on the German problem if possible. An
example of a new and more flexible mood in Germany was a paper prepared
by Unteilbares Deutschland.3 This
had emphasized the possibility of converting economic advantages for
Eastern Europe into political concessions for the West. Although the US
was sceptical about the extent to which this was possible German ideas
were worth exploring. But in dealing with German reunification one must
limit oneself to the reunification of the Federal Republic and the
German Democratic Republic. West Germany had tried to keep open the
possibility of including territory east of the Oder-Neisse line but this
was unrealistic. Hitler had closed that door. Also in thinking in terms
of proposals for German reunification one must bear in mind the elements
of interest to the USSR.
Such a settlement if negotiated on satisfactory terms would free the
USSR from two burdens: (1) the fear of German revanchism; and (2) the
need to keep 22 Soviet divisions stationed abroad. He personally favored
asking the ambassadorial group to go back to the drawing board taking
German proposals as the basis for its work and examining any package
proposal in the light of what would make it worth while to the USSR to
give up 17 million Germans. This is particularly opportune time for such
a review because in the present international atmosphere the USSR may
throw at us sweeping proposals to which we must be prepared to make
counter proposals. We should encourage the Germans to come forward with
the initial proposals and see whether we can build on them if we need
to. We should aim at a comprehensive approach including political,
military, economic and humanitarian elements. There were numerous
possibilities—for example the possibility of examining various formulas
for a Mixed Commission comprising the 4 occupying powers and the East
and West Germans.

Tyler summarized his conversation
with German officials in Paris on this general subject.4 The German Government seemed to be ready to
present a fuller and more complete plan in the near future—probably in
early January (between the 10th and 15th) after the Erhard visit to the US. Their general
thinking seemed to be running along the lines of the proposals of
Unteilbares Deutschland. But although Schroeder was glad to have the general support of this
influential body he did not want to seem to take over the plans without
modification. He wanted the German proposal to bear the stamp of the
Foreign Office and to give the Schuetz proposals a sharper edge. The Foreign Office was
not enthusiastic about all features of the Schuetz plan. They were not convinced that the Four
Power Commission should be authorized to work on a peace treaty. They
wished to think more carefully about the implications of East and West
Germans being associated with the Commission and measure very carefully
the consequences of such an arrangement on the standing of East and West
Germany. But they did consider there were certain measures which could
be taken immediately: such as (1) establishment of a commission for
humanitarian measures; (2) a commission for political amnesty; (3) a
commission for freedom of movement and (4) a commission for economic
concessions. The Germans had been greatly interested in the East German
hint that the agreement on Christmas passes was the first of ten steps
the GDR would propose. The German FO
thought that the next steps might involve greater movement of persons,
broadening of categories, extension of time limits, etc. But the East
German negotiator Wendt had not spelt out what he had in mind. All this had made the West
Germans believe that the time may come in the not too distant future
when the East Germans may come up with what has the appearance of a big
offer, although it will probably include elements which will enhance the
standing of the DDR. The higher level in
the German Foreign Office believes pressures are building up on the East
German regime which they cannot ignore. The existence of the Wall is
having an adverse effect on the standing of East Germany in the eyes of
other Eastern European countries. The rigidity of the Ulbricht regime is embarrassing and is
making East Germany vulnerable. Even the USSR is becoming critical of
it. This island of Stalinism on the western edge of the Soviet world
which is becoming more moderate stands out like a sore thumb. Within
East Germany itself this situation is creating difficulties. The rank
and file of party workers are finding it difficult to explain the
policies of the Ulbricht regime compared to what is happening in a
country like Czechoslovakia. Even the Russians reportedly told Ulbricht
that he should look more human. An illustration of the contrast between
East Germany and the rest of Eastern Europe is the relaxation of travel
measures in Czechoslovakia. East and West Germans are now flocking to
Prague to meet. Another example of the new spirit is the campaign of
highly placed Czech officials to encourage West Germans to spend their
vacation in Eastern Europe.

In commenting on the new flexibility in the German Federal Republic
Rusk said that the FDP and SPD
favored Schroeder's policy of
mobility and offset to some extent the rigid wing of the CDU. This new German Government was
somewhat less rigid on some of the perennial problems. We should be
prepared to encourage the Germans to explore possibilities and give them
their head. He had the impression that Schroeder at Paris progressed beyond the German August
proposals.5

Peter Thomas (British Minister of State) said he could not see that
Schroeder had really gone
beyond the 1959 Peace Plan except for the introduction of economic
inducements. He agreed that the situation would be changed if the
Germans agreed to recognize the Oder-Neisse line and the present Czech
border. The fears of Poland and Czechoslovakia were real and if they
were reassured this would introduce a new and significant element into
the East-West equation. Mr. Rusk
pointed out that when proposals were made for an East German-West German
plebiscite—as was made in the German proposals—this was on the basis of
the FedRep and the GDR. This strengthened the idea that we
were not talking about the territory east of the Oder-Neisse line. He
added that the fact that Mikoyan
had argued that Schroeder's
pressing for the MLF indicated German
revanchist ambitions against Poland and Czechoslovakia showed that these
fears existed in the USSR as well as in Poland and Czechoslovakia. German renunciation of these
frontiers as part of a package would give a Western peace plan a new
sweep. Thomas admitted this would make a difference.

Rusk said when Schroeder in November had emphasized
reunification, Rusk had pointed
out to him this emphasis would have the result of smoking out the West
on the question of what was to be reunified. He added that there seemed
to be new possibilities opening up. The fact that Poland and
Czechoslovakia showed greater independence and possibly exercised
greater influence in the Communist system might make a difference.

Butler said that if the Germans
wished to make an initiative they would have to give their proposals
more scope. He had been disappointed in his talk with Erhard in Bonn to find that Erhard was thinking in terms of economic
initiatives towards the Eastern satellites and of increasing interzonal
trade but not of economic inducements for Russia. He was not optimistic
about getting Ulbricht to move. He described him as a marmoset of
Khrushchev's. Schroeder was much more forthcoming at
the NATO quadrilateral conversation
than he was when Butler talked to
him in Bonn. He must have held back to save his ammunition for the
quadripartite talks. Possibly he had been encouraged by the effects of
greater German trade with Eastern Europe. The Berlin Christmas pass
development had shown that the German Government could not turn down
humanitarian opportunities on purely theoretical grounds. (It was
estimated that between 400,000 and 750,000 might cross the Wall at
Christmas. Tyler said the
Commandants were considering security implications that might arise from
this development.)

Hood asked what was the American
thinking about how all this tied in with disarmament. Rusk said one had to think in alternate
terms—in terms of two possible tracks which might be followed. A German
plebiscite might result in unification or in the acceptance of division.
Which of these courses was chosen would determine how other factors
would be handled. There were possibilities for disarmament which must be
examined. There were possibilities of reductions of forces and of
guarantees against concentrations of forces and surprise attack.
Rusk also expressed the view
that Germans may go on to think of possibilities of economic
arrangements to be extended to the USSR as an inducement for a German
settlement.

Tyler emphasized the danger of
putting forward proposals which might cast doubt on the idea of an
all-German government. The Western Allies had always insisted that a
German settlement must be negotiated by a free all-German Government.
This was essential to the German position. The West must make it
absolutely clear to the Soviet Government that this point is
non-negotiable. Unless this position is maintained the whole German
support would crumble. Schroeder
so far had maintained that the
renunciation of the Oder-Neisse line could only be made by a Pan-German
Government. Butler said Schroeder had made this clear to him.
Hood said the traditional
position to which the West was pledged in the 1954 and other agreements
was that German boundaries must be determined at a peace conference.

Wilson (British) doubted that an offer about the Oder-Neisse line would
be very impressive since the West had renounced the use of force. Caccia
replied that this point may seem like a fly-blown card to us but it did
not look that way to Poles and Czechs. They would attach great
importance to this. Rusk suggested
that Poles and Czechs might put pressure on the USSR. Furthermore they
might welcome an agreement which would get them out of the present
target system within which they now fell.

Ambassador Bruce commented an
Oder-Neisse line offer would have been much more impressive if it had
been made some years ago. Our bargaining power deriving from this point
is now less. We should also be fully aware of the political implications
of this issue. There were a large number of émigrés in Germany from the
eastern territories. The Chancellor had neutralized this vote by his
policy of western development which had made it possible to absorb these
groups but if there was a depression they would reemerge as a political
force of formidable proportions. They would be among the first to feel
the effects of unemployment. They would be quick to protest that their
prescriptive rights had been sold down the river. If this question were
treated in isolation it would be difficult and German politicians would
be leery of it. If it formed part of an attractive comprehensive package
which seemed to have a good chance of being achieved the situation would
be quite different.

It was the consensus of the evening discussion that the FedRep should be encouraged to submit
proposals on Germany and Berlin for study by the ambassadorial
group.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, NATO 3 FR (PA). Secret. Drafted by
Lampson and approved in S on December
24. The meeting was held at 1 Carleton Gardens. Rusk stopped in London December
18–19 following the NATO
Ministerial Meeting.

2 See Document 245.

3 See footnote 2, Document 245.

4 A memorandum of this conversation is in Department
of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER.

5 See footnote 1, Document 212.

247. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson247. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson1

Washington, December 24,
1963.

RE

East-West Negotiations and the Erhard Visit

The background papers (Part III, Tabs A, B and C, of the big book)2 give you the standard U.S. position. They fudge
very sharp differences of judgment and opinion within the Department of
State, but in the main they do give you the Rusk/Ball line.
But you should know that Tommy Thompson, who is subtle, and Averell
Harriman, who is blunt, both think the time is ripe for a much more
forthcoming negotiating position. Thompson thinks the Germans could and would join with
us; Harriman thinks they should be forced to. Thompson may influence Rusk before Friday's briefing
session.3

My own belief is this meeting you will not wish to give Erhard either the rigid feeling of the
Rusk/Ball position or the sense of
insistence on movement that they might get from Harriman (or from
Senator Pell). What you want is to lay a basis for serious work in the
future on these views. For this purpose what the Chancellor needs to
know from you—preferably in a private meeting—is that:

1. You have no intention whatever of using German interests to make a
bargain with Khrushchev over
Erhard's head;

2. You have great confidence in the basic strength and bargaining
position of the West;

3. You do believe that over the long pull we should be constantly
examining the kind of bargain we want in order to improve the position
of the people of East Germany and the city of Berlin. This is a matter
of simple justice and also one of reducing dangers to world peace.

In this connection you could well praise Erhard for the Christmas agreement on the Wall, and
suggest a reference to it in the Communiqué. (This will help put
Erhard on the side of
“porosity,” if he agrees.)

4. You understand this problem in deeply political terms and would like
very much to have a solid understanding of Erhard's political assessment both with respect to
German opinion and with respect to the German-Soviet relations. In
particular you are interested in his view of the ways and means of bargaining with the Soviets on
these central issues.

I think this last point is essential. In the end this is an issue for
Heads of Government, and if you and Erhard have confidence in each other on fundamentals,
you can safely turn to the experts for plans in every different sharp
and flat. The file cases are full of them.

And on this basis you could safely refer the matter to further expert
analysis of the sort which Schroeder has proposed and which Rusk has accepted for our side. Indeed
Schroeder's proposal is one we
welcome, although there is always a danger that the Germans will go
rigid on us.

McG. B.4

1 Source: Johnson Library,
National Security File, Aides Files, Bundy, Chron. Secret. Another
memorandum from Bundy dated
December 27, containing talking points for Erhard's visit, is published in
Declassified Documents, 1979, 471A.

2 A set of the background papers for the
Erhard visit is in
Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF
2353–2355.

3 No record of the briefing
session on December 27 has been found.

4 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

248. Memorandum of Conversation248. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas,December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

US-German Relations (Part 1 of 9 Parts)2

PARTICIPANTS

United States

The President

Arnold Lissance (Interpreter)

Germany

The Chancellor

Hermann Kusterer (Interpreter)

After an exchange of pleasantries and some discussion of local history,
the President told the Chancellor of the close relationship which the
American people felt for the German people, and added that he was especially pleased this meeting
could take place so early in both their administrations.

The Chancellor was grateful for the personal privilege of meeting with
the President in this private atmosphere. He noted, too, there were no
serious problems between the US and Germany.

The President said the US wanted to draw the curtain over the past, work
side by side, and try to live peacefully together with the other peoples
of this planet. This was a major challenge. Despite the great progress
in the physical sciences, comparable progress had not been made in
political science, in the science of people learning to live peacefully
together.

The President reminded the Chancellor that US commitments to the Federal
Republic and Berlin were far reaching. He then went on to say he
considered the Chancellor one of the ablest world leaders and therefore
looked to the Chancellor for suggestions for improving the Atlantic
partnership and reducing East-West tensions. He especially hoped that
during these two days of talks, he and the Chancellor would succeed in
pinpointing possible new approaches for dealing with some of the major
problems facing both their countries.

At the conclusion of the talk, the President told the Chancellor he felt
the conversations had been fruitful and helpful. He reassured the
Chancellor of the US trust and confidence in him and promised that he
could rely fully on US faith and trust.

The Chancellor said he appreciated this. He hoped their exchanges would
always be candid and full. Even though his comments might sometimes not
be diplomatic, the President could always be sure they were honest and
straightforward.

The President said he preferred this kind of relationship. He, too, did
not want to get bogged down in striped pants diplomacy. It was most
important that the two of them understand and trust one another and
maintain the closest possible working relationship.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The
source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by
the White House on January 14, 1964. The Chancellor visited the
Texas White House December 28–29.

2 Parts 2, 4, and 5 are printed as Documents 249,
250, and 251. Parts 3 (European economic problems) and 6–9
(German defense budget, German assistance to less-developed
countries, offset payments, and Cuba) are in Department of
State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2354.

249. Memorandum of Conversation249. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

De Gaulle and Relations with
France (Part 2 of 9 Parts)

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document
248.]

The Chancellor said that among the most difficult issues facing the
Western allies were the questions of European integration and the
Atlantic partnership. Unless economic integration was accompanied by
some kind of political integration, Europe would remain a collection of
separate and different states. In this connection, the Chancellor's
greatest concern was President De
Gaulle. The Federal Republic was pleased with the
reconciliation between the German and French peoples. But the
relationship established by Chancellor Adenauer and General De
Gaulle—and the Chancellor emphasized that he did not mean
to be critical of Chancellor Adenauer—was almost wholly emotional and sentimental and
lacked a solid political base. The viewpoints of the two partners were
never clearly and candidly stated. This could not continue. Moreover,
things were different now. At the recent negotiations in Brussels, for
example, the German representatives stood their ground firmly so that
General De Gaulle would
understand the German view. As far as the Chancellor is concerned, a
healthy relationship between states cannot be based wholly on sentiment.
Account must be taken of the partners' vital interests and world
commitments. And in the case of Germany, there was the special problem
of living down a historical past, demonstrating that it had purged
itself of moral guilt and that it intended to contribute constructively
to the cause of freedom and world peace.

Replying, the President said he personally admired De Gaulle and would try to work with
him. He did not think the differences between the US and France were
irreconcilable. However, he would welcome any suggestions the Chancellor
might have on ways for improving relations between the US and
France.

The Chancellor said he did not want to be misunderstood. The German
people were happy with the reconciliation with France. European
integration would not have been possible if France and Germany did not get together. In fact, in
his talks in Paris2 the Chancellor reminded President De Gaulle of this as well as the need
for strengthening the Atlantic partnership. But De Gaulle obviously looked at the
problem differently. He insisted he was a strong supporter of the
Western alliance and demonstrated this during the Cuban crisis and the
recent Berlin autobahn incidents. But while France was for the Western
alliance, it considered NATO less than
a perfect instrument. NATO simply was
not the French way of doing things. France therefore had to have its own
force de frappe. Germany, De
Gaulle reassured the Chancellor, had every right to rely
on the US for nuclear protection. France, however, wanted to stand on
its own two feet. According to De
Gaulle, the present defense arrangements were inadequate.
Therefore, although remaining faithful to the Western alliance, France
had to take measures for its own defense. As for specific proposals to
revamp NATO, De Gaulle indicated he had none. The
General merely asserted that he did not want to cling to old concepts.
(Interestingly enough, in the Chancellor's view, De Gaulle did not even revert to his
tripartite directorate proposal.)

Describing his reply to De Gaulle,
the Chancellor said he told the French President he could support
France's view on the force de frappe. He could understand, too, France's
desire not to commit forces to NATO.
(The Chancellor said he even volunteered the information that the US
probably felt the same way.) But the Chancellor said he also told the
General that France's attempt to use the veto to prevent military
integration through NATO was totally
incomprehensible.

The Chancellor suggested the President might take this very same line
when he met De Gaulle—a meeting
which he felt had to take place sooner or later. It clearly was not
possible to talk De Gaulle out of
his force de frappe or his determination to keep his national forces out
of NATO. However, the Chancellor felt
strongly that the President had to make clear to De Gaulle that he would not tolerate
obstacles to NATO's development. Such
actions are contagious. And the fact is that if France played a more
positive role in Europe, the other European partners would perform
better.

The Chancellor asserted there was a serious malaise in Europe. Britain
was unsure of herself on the eve of new elections. (The Chancellor added
that personally and confidentially he would like to see the
Conservatives win.) The smaller nations were disgruntled. The Benelux
countries felt they were being treated as second-class nations. And the
EFTA countries thought they were
being discriminated against by the Common Market. This was a matter of
concern to the Federal Republic. New life blood was needed for the
concept of Europe. However, the Chancellor felt no significant progress was possible until the
question of the markets was settled. That was why the
Kennedy Round was so important. Europe could
not afford to isolate itself. It had to keep its ties with the outside
world and maintain close relations with the US. The difficulty was that
national interests differed. France seemed to be moving in a
protectionist direction. Germany, on the other hand, which has 30
percent of its gross national product tied up in foreign trade, looked
to the outside world for its prosperity, and needed an outward-looking
policy.

The Chancellor promised to do his part to try to hold the European
nations together. But a political underpinning was needed. The
Chancellor said he talked with De
Gaulle about this, but the General showed no enthusiasm
for the subject. However, the Chancellor believes De Gaulle is more favorably inclined to
political integration than is apparent. And if this is true, prospects
for an Atlantic partnership are probably good. Because of the importance
the Chancellor attaches to the problem, he intends to see General
De Gaulle again soon; go to
London in mid-January; and to Rome at the end of the month.

As for De Gaulle personally, the
Chancellor admitted great respect for him. He thought he was reasonable
and understanding. When they met in Paris, De Gaulle told the Chancellor that if he were in his
place he would follow the same policy toward the US that the Federal
Republic was pursuing. He also said he would never force Germany to
choose between France and the US.

Having said all this, however, the Chancellor went on to characterize
De Gaulle's views and
policies as rigid. De Gaulle he
said insisted that any aggression from the East, even if only a border
incident, had to be countered not with conventional but with nuclear
weapons. The General was also adamantly opposed to any discussions with
the Soviets on a possible modus vivendi.

The German position, however, the Chancellor assured the President was
more like that of the US. The Germans had no illusions about peace
breaking out all over or people suddenly embracing one another. But the
Germans felt strongly that the likelihood of hot war had to be pushed as
far away as possible.

The basic problem with France, the Chancellor went on to say, is that
De Gaulle has no faith in
NATO. He also overestimates the
effectiveness of his force de frappe. He wants France to go her own way
and insists France must have enough nuclear weapons to destroy the
Soviet Union at once. General De
Gaulle is not impressed with the fact that the Soviet
Union can destroy France ten times over. His answer is that this really
makes no difference, for people can die but once. The Chancellor said he tried to argue this
point with De Gaulle but did not
think he succeeded in changing the General's views one iota.

The Chancellor said he did not know how well the President knew De Gaulle personally, but it was his
impression that De Gaulle was
totally inflexible on political questions.

The President replied that he had known De
Gaulle since 1960 and had no illusions about his
flexibility.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The
source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by
the White House on January 14, 1964.

2 Erhard and Schroeder had visited Paris November
21–22.

250. Memorandum of Conversation250. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Negotiations with the Soviets (Part 4 of 9 Parts)

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document
248.]

On the question of East-West relations, the President told the Chancellor
that the US wanted to explore all roads to better understanding and
specifically look at the possibilities of improving relations with the
Soviet Union. The President reassured the Chancellor that the US would
negotiate from a position of strength and keep the German Government
fully informed of its intentions. In this connection, the President
asked the Chancellor whether he had any suggestions on what the US might
do, or what the Federal Republic itself could do, to improve East-West
relations.

The Chancellor said, as far as Germany was concerned, it made greater
sense to talk with Khrushchev
than Ulbricht. The latter was
nothing more than a Soviet flunkey. But the Chancellor thought the West
had to know more than it now did about the strength of the Soviet Union
and the extent of its present difficulties. The German Government had
the distinct impression that the situation inside the Soviet Union was
tense. He admitted this estimate was based on circumstantial evidence. However, it was gleaned from
dealings with the Soviet satellites and therefore of more than passing
significance.

In this connection, the Chancellor said the Germans were struck by the
fact that the satellites now seemed to have greater confidence and a
greater degree of independence than before. The Germans translated this
to mean that Khrushchev was not
in full control in the way that Stalin was or in the way Khrushchev himself was in earlier
days.

The Chancellor went on to say that some judgment also had to be made
about the current struggle between the Soviet Union and Red China. The
Germans doubted this was an ideological struggle. They were inclined to
believe that this was a competition for power. And this open rift was
not without its military implications. For one of the new facts of life
was that the Soviet Union now had to guard its Eastern and Western
frontiers.

The Chancellor felt three things had to be borne in mind. First, that
modern technology in armaments and industry required vast sums of money
and Soviet attempts to fill the Siberian vacuum (bordering on the home
of 700 million Chinese) with people and industry, was a vast and
difficult undertaking. Second, the progressive adoption of middle-class
standards by Soviet society posed new and complicated problems for the
Soviet Government. And finally, the need to advance industry, added to
already difficult Soviet economic burdens, placed enormous if not
impossible demands on the Soviet economic machinery.

It was the German Government's view that the Soviet economy just could
not meet all these requirements at the same time. Something had to give.
The question was where. If the savings were made in the defense areas,
so much the better. This would improve chances for an East-West
understanding.

In summary, the Chancellor stressed that although the Germans could not
talk with Ulbricht, they might be
prepared to work with Khrushchev.
For the Soviet leadership in trouble might be interested in accepting
material and financial assistance and agree to permit progress in the
solution of the German question.

In reply to the President's question as to the amount of financial
assistance the Germans had in mind, the Chancellor said the Federal
Government's ideas were not quite firm. However, there could not be any
long-term credits without major political concessions. Competition among
the Western countries for extending credits to the Soviets would help
Khrushchev without bringing
about any improvement in the East-West situation. Political and economic
factors had to be tied together. And the Germans were prepared to make
substantial material and financial sacrifices in return for
self-determination and improvement in the Berlin and German
situations.

Continuing, the Chancellor said that the problem was very difficult for
the Germans. They were at loss on how to approach Khrushchev. The Soviet leader was not
likely to admit any readiness to enter into a bargain involving an
exchange of political concessions for material assistance. The
Chancellor thought, however, the US might do some of the probing, talk
with the Russians, and indicate that the Germans were prepared to make
sacrifices if progress on self-determination were possible. The
Chancellor doubted this would work but he thought it ought to be
considered, and felt there ought to be further consultation on it.

In his judgment, the Chancellor said the other problems were relatively
minor. If some understandings were reached, fine. But he warned against
illusions that these would bring about substantive changes in the world
situation. On the other hand, he admitted some progress might be
possible on major problems if Khrushchev were really under heavy pressure. The
Chancellor readily admitted that no one had established how substantial
these pressures were, although the German impression was that Khrushchev's present position was
distinctly uneasy.

The President agreed that such an assessment ought to be made, and the
problem fully considered.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The
source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by
the White House on January 14, 1964.

251. Memorandum of Conversation251. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Berlin Christmas Passes (Part 5 of 9 Parts)

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document
248.]

The President, raising the subject of the arrangements concerning
Christmas visits in Berlin, said he was pleased with the project, for it
showed flexibility and imagination in dealing with a difficult
problem.

The Chancellor, however, did not think the results were all good. In
fact, the Federal Government had some second thoughts about these
arrangements. Moreover, the
Chancellor was somewhat concerned about Soviet Zone plans to enter into
new discussions with the Berlin authorities (and excluding the Federal
authorities) for extension of these arrangements. Ulbricht was not moved by humanitarian
considerations. His aims were political and his eye was clearly on the
consolidation of the three-state doctrine, with Berlin being an
independent entity. The Chancellor felt strongly that further moves had
to be carefully thought out, lest the world get the impression that
Berlin's life and security were no longer tied to Bonn and Berlin was
leading a political life of its own. This, the Chancellor warned, could
have dangerous consequences for the Germans and the Allies. The
Chancellor said he was struck by the fact that even though Western
motives in reaching these arrangements had been wholly humanitarian,
East Bloc comment on the passes made no reference at all to the
humanitarian considerations; it only stressed that the agreement was
reached by the GDR and the “Berlin
Senat.” This was a dangerous political matter.

The German Government had not decided yet on how to deal with the next
step. A better assessment would have to await more definitive data. But,
the Chancellor wanted the President to appreciate the dangerous
implications of this development.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The
source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by
the White House on January 14, 1964.

252. Memorandum of Conversation252. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963, 11:15 a.m.

SUBJECT

The Berlin Christmas Pass Problem and its Relationship to Berlin
and All-German Issues. Part One of

Two2

PARTICIPANTS

Germans

Foreign Minister Gerhard
Schroeder

State Secretary Ludger
Westrick

State Secretary Karl
Carstens

Ambassador Heinrich
Knappstein

Dr. Horst Osterheld, FRG Foreign
Office Adviser to Chancellor

Mr. Weber, Interpreter

US

The Secretary

Ambassador George C.
McGhee

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler, EUR

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Special
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Mr. Robert C. Creel,
Director, Office of German Affairs

The Secretary suggested that since the President and Chancellor Erhard were meeting in private
session,3 the
other participants might hold a separate meeting.

The Secretary told Foreign Minister Schroeder he was very happy to see him here and looked
forward very much to this opportunity to discuss many things. He thought
it would be useful to start with Berlin, where developments were taking
a form not entirely predictable. While he was aware that the Foreign
Minister had been away from Bonn during a good part of the discussions
about Christmas passes, he would be interested in learning how the
Foreign Minister saw the situation and what he thought was likely to
develop from it, particularly insofar as it might affect the
responsibilities of the Three Powers in Berlin.

Foreign Minister Schroeder said he
thought it would be useful to have a look at the background to this
development. He felt we could learn a good deal from what had happened
on the Christmas pass matter. Both Carstens and Westrick had been in Bonn during these developments and
they could report more fully. He, himself, had had a couple of
concerns—First, that when the FRG had
received a letter from Absuch4 which reflected no change in the basic GDR position, there should have been the
most careful consideration of what results we might expect from our side
before making a change in our position. Secondly, there was a danger
that we might be exposed to more public pressure than we had expected;
it was necessary to weigh the pros and cons of the issue and to
determine the extreme limits to which we were prepared to go. This was a
matter of continuing importance since he felt we could expect continued
pressure from the GDR. The Foreign
Minister asked Carstens to review
the developments on the Christmas pass issue.

Carstens said the problem had
started with a letter from Abusch, a Deputy Minister of the GDR, to Mayor Brandt on December 5. Abusch had suggested negotiations
between the GDR and the Berlin Senat to
open East Berlin to West Berliners over the Christmas period. The FRG had discussed the matter with the Senat
and expressed the view that the reply to Abusch should be that the
existing interzonal trade channels (Leopold-Behrendt)
should be utilized for this purpose. A reply in this sense had gone
forward from the Senat, but the other side had said it could not
continue the talks on this basis and that there must be talks on the
GDR/Senat level. The FRG had then agreed that it would be all
right for the Senat to inform the other side that some individual would
be designated by the Senat to discuss the matter. The reply had come
from Wendt, a State Secretary in the GDR
Ministry of Cultural Affairs, that on this basis talks could be held,
the first in East Berlin, and the second in West Berlin. The Senat
designated Korber, a Senatstrat.

Carstens said that all the
foregoing had been done in agreement with the FRG except on one point: the FRG had asked Mayor Brandt not to make any reference in this exchange to the
authority of the Mayor or the Senat, but this line had not quite been
followed. The Senat had sent a message which contained an introductory
phrase to the effect that “the Governing Mayor has asked me to tell you
this”.

Carstens said it had become
evident after several discussions that general agreement regarding
procedural details for Christmas passes had almost been reached. The
Secretary commented that meanwhile the status of the matter had become
public knowledge. Westrick said
that the GDR had given a press
conference on the matter but had made reference to earlier stories in
the Western press on the subject.

Carstens said it turned out fairly
promptly that what the other side really wanted was a signed agreement,
signed in the name of the Berlin Senat. At this point a further
discussion was held between the FRG and
the Senat. The FRG had said it would be
better to avoid any signed agreement but that if this had to happen, it
was important that there should at least be no reference in it to the
Governing Mayor or the Berlin Senat. Carstens said the object was to play the whole thing
down to the question of agreements on the strictly technical level. He
was sure the people in Berlin had tried hard to get this point
established. But then came the GDR press
conference which revealed how far agreement had progressed on the
details for Christmas passes; this served to increase public and
emotional pressures, particularly since the GDR had said the only missing ingredient was a signed
document. At this point Mayor Brandt had agreed that his representative, Korber,
should sign a paper indicating he was signing “by order of the Chief of
Chancellery of the Berlin Senat, who was in turn acting on the orders of
the Governing Mayor”. The FRG had been
informed of this only after this proposal had been put forward.
Carstens said it had been very
difficult for the FRG to decide whether
to accept or veto the proposal. They had finally decided to accept,
because a veto would have destroyed the hopes of a large number of West
Berliners.

Carstens said he felt there had
been one mistake in the procedure followed—the FRG and the Senat had not coordinated their actions and decisions to a sufficient
degree. As concerned the future, he felt it necessary that the FRG agree with the Senat that some
individual in Berlin should act as the FRG representative and that decisions would be made only
with his consent.

The Secretary asked if the Berlin Commandants had been contacted about
this final reply to the GDR. Westrick said the Commandants had issued
a statement that they were in agreement with what had been done; the
statement had also stressed that nothing had taken place which in any
way affected the status of Berlin.

Ambassador McGhee pointed out
that while the Commandants had been consulted, this had taken place only
after earlier consultations with the FRG. He thought it important that full consultation should take
place before any decisive step was taken. Carstens said he agreed completely. He added that the
FRG had reports that the GDR had also been acting under some
pressure, in the form of representations from Gromyko to Ulbricht. Another point was that the GDR was in a somewhat ridiculous position
since, under recent developments, East and West Germans had been able to
meet with each other in Prague but not in Berlin.

The Secretary said he wondered why the other side had been willing to
accept this startling and dramatic contrast between the treatment given
West and East Berliners. He recalled that one West Berliner who had gone
into East Berlin with a Christmas pass had commented that it was like
visiting a penitentiary. Carstens
said he thought there were two factions in the GDR on this issue. One faction had been in favor of
granting Christmas passes since it felt this was a device for extracting
concessions and an element of recognition for the GDR from the FRG. This faction had obviously prevailed.

The Secretary said he wanted to make two comments:

1. He believed the Federal Republic and West Berlin had an enormous
gravitational pull on East Germans and East Berliners. If it were
possible to open up and increase contacts, travel and communication
between the people on both sides of the line, this would in a sense
amount almost to de facto reunification. Admittedly, this was an
historical, evolutionary process which would take time.

2. On the other hand, we did not know very clearly just what the East had
in mind. We should be particularly careful regarding the
responsibilities of the Three Powers in Berlin. If we were to be
involved in a crash landing we must also be there for the takeoff. It
was most important that the three Commandants be fully consulted. He
emphasized that we did not object to these contacts, but it must be made
clear at every stage just how the responsibilities of the Three Powers
are affected.

Ambassador McGhee commented that
the three Commandants were responsible for the security of West Berlin
and this matter had presented a number of problems for them of a
security nature.

The Secretary said that we were not disposed to raise any formal or
hypothetical questions, but that if anything threatened to undermine or
erode Allied rights in Berlin this could be dangerous.

Mr. Tyler asked Carstens whether von Eckhardt was not
already in Berlin as the FRG
representative and whether he could not handle this matter of FRG/Senat consultation. Was Carstens proposing anything different?
Carstens said that von Eckhard
could handle this “in principle”. Schroeder said there might be a question whether von
Eckhard would be the right person for this; there was no institutional
problem but only a question of the person involved.

At Schroeder's request, Weber read
a press ticker item that the Berlin Senat Press Chief, Egon Bahr, had
issued a public statement in Berlin to the effect that the FRG and the Senat were united in the hope
that further facilities for travel between East and West Berlin could be
obtained, but that further steps would be taken only in agreement with
all the parties concerned.

Carstens said the FRG did not wish to make public the fact it
felt it had been informed too late. He commented that it was very
difficult for the people in Berlin, where there were so many emotional
pressures, to instruct the negotiators properly. It might be better for
the instructions to come from people further away from the scene where
the emotional pressures were less.

The Secretary said he had the feeling that over the past five or six
years the West Germans and the West Berliners had underestimated the
power of the attraction the West had for the East Germans. If contacts
could be increased, the East Germans were bound to be attracted even
more. The contrast between West and East Germany was very great indeed.
He recalled how many East Germans had “voted with their feet”. We were,
therefore, relaxed about opening up these contacts. But we must remain
in close touch on this life-and-death matter. This was probably the
principal issue involving war or peace between the East and the West. In
any case, he was sympathetic with the efforts of the West Berliners to
put holes through the wall in Berlin.

Schroeder said he was not so
optimistic as the Secretary on this point. He felt it essential to think
through to the final conclusion the consequences of the steps now being
taken. While he agreed that the West had a magnetic attraction for the
East Germans—after all, this was the basis for their firm hope that if
self-determination were granted to the East Germans they would opt for
the West—there was still the very serious question of how far we could
make use of this factor unless at the same time some of the institutional aspects in East
Germany could be changed. If we merely went along the path of accepting
all offers from the East to ameliorate conditions, this could work out
to the advantage of the other side, since it would serve to make them
look more human and increase their attractiveness. There was a danger
that this could reach the point where world public opinion would feel it
was possible for the West Germans to reach agreement with the other side
even though there were no basic changes in the status quo. It was vital
that things in the GDR be changed
basically; otherwise, world public opinion might force the West Germans
to accept the GDR theses of “all Germans
around one table”, confederation, and the like, even though there was no
basic change in the situation. There would be a problem about where we
could draw the line without running into trouble with public
opinion.

Ambassador McGhee inquired
whether this development might not have been a response to the speech
made recently in Berlin by Federal Minister Mende. Maybe the original initiative had in effect come
from the FRG? Schroeder said he did not think the Mende speech had anything to do with
this though Mende perhaps thought
differently. The GDR offer was mere
repetition of offers which had been made in the past, even as long as
two years ago. When he had first heard about the Absuch offer, he had,
himself, seen no chance of agreement being reached. He had pointed out
to the Bundestag Foreign Affairs Committee the danger that the GDR would indicate readiness to talk any
time about Christmas passes or anything else, but without making any
basic concessions, with the risk that public opinion could shift against
the FRG if it did not agree to such
talks. His first reaction had been that the Absuch letter should be
rejected. He had felt that to accept the offer would be a step toward
recognition of the East Zone and of West Berlin as an independent
entity. But then things had gotten out of hand. He thought it was too
early to take such steps. This particular step had been taken as an
“unpolitical” step because of Christmas sentiment, but he thought it was
a mistake. (He asked Weber to translate for the group the Christmas
greetings which had been handed to each West Berliner visiting East
Berlin, which was full of propaganda and appealed to West Berliners to
support the idea of rapprochement between the two Germanies by
negotiations.)

Schroeder said he felt we must
think through this concept of the powerful attraction of West Germany
and West Berlin for the East Germans. No one had yet been able to
develop for him a complete theory as to just what the final result would
be from promoting these contacts. It must be explained to him just what
changes could be brought about in the East Zone system which would bring
reunification closer. Admittedly these steps might improve conditions
from the humanitarian standpoint, but he had not yet met anyone who could convince him that
going along this path of quasi-recognition would not consolidate the
status quo.

The Secretary said we had no particular fixed theory on this. There was
in any case no problem with us about recognition. We were more strict on
this than other members of the Alliance. He was, himself, impressed with
the longing on the part of the East Germans to rejoin their brothers in
West Germany. Things were changing in Eastern Europe. it would be a good
thing if the people in Eastern Europe could lose their fear of Germany
and in particular of a unified Germany. To the extent that they lost
these fears this would help remove the obstacles to reunification.
Another question was to what extent the East German Army would prove
reliable to the Soviets in a crisis. There was in any case movement in
the status quo and the question for us all was how we could make use of
this movement to our advantage. This sort of question might well be
discussed in the Ambassadorial Group.

Schroeder said that the FRG's long-term policies in Eastern Europe
reflected the Secretary's thinking, and he agreed this would all take
time. But he was concerned that if the Soviets had told the East Zone
regime to adopt a different approach the Soviets had not done this in
order to help the FRG but rather to help
consolidate Ulbricht and his
regime. Schroeder said it was
difficult for people who had not lived under a totalitarian regime to
appreciate its effectiveness. He cited the example of Poland, where 90
per cent of the people were opposed to the regime but where the country
was effectively controlled by the 10 per cent representing the armed
Communist elite. The same situation prevailed in East Germany. He felt
that the basic situation could be changed there only through either a
change in the world power situation or through armed intervention. The
latter was obviously excluded. He was not, himself, convinced that the
internal structure of a Communist regime could be changed by the
measures we had been discussing.

At this point, Under Secretary Ball arrived, and the Secretary suggested
that we might come back to this issue later and start talking about what
had happened in the trade negotiations in Brussels.

Foreign Minister Schroeder agreed
we should come back to this point about consultations on Berlin problems
and the need to improve the consultative process. Before leaving it, he
wished to offer one suggestion. Maybe we should consider that these
consultations should be held in Bonn rather than in Berlin. In Bonn
there were the three Ambassadors and the Federal Government, and we
could get representatives from the Berlin Senat down to Bonn. The
present situation was very bad indeed because no one seemed to have a
clear idea of just what was happening.

The Secretary agreed that we must have clear procedures, but he would
like to think about Schroeder's
suggestion before making any definite reply. He commented that there was
one further problem. Should the East Germans continue to let West
Berliners come into East Berlin regularly and improve conditions in
other respects, there could come a time when the GDR might approach the Berlin Senat and suggest that the
Senat ask the Allies to reduce their troops in Berlin by 50 per cent and
accept Swedes and other neutrals in their place. This would put us in a
bad position. We had run the risk of war in the past in order to resist
just such proposals.

Schroeder said there still was a
question as to whether Berlin should be permitted to make all-German
policies. This could be dangerous not only for the Allied governments
but would be contrary to the policies of the Federal Government.

Mr. Tyler said he wished to point
out that Allied rights in Berlin rested on occupation rights dating back
to 1945, and that we should be careful about undermining the authority
of the Berlin Commandants by shifting the focus of discussions of this
nature to Bonn.

Ambassador McGhee said we should
think in terms of what price should be paid in exchange for gaining
improvements in the Berlin situation. Schroeder said this was precisely the point he was
trying to make. What we needed to do was to think through the
consequences of the first step which had now been taken. It was
difficult to predict where this might end. What we needed was an overall
strategy concept rather than pursuing the matter on the basis of the
“optimism of dilettantes”.

The Secretary stressed the need to have full discussion of these problems
with Mayor Brandt. It was
absolutely necessary that we proceed only with the complete unity of
everyone on our own side. We would harm our own cause greatly if
developments should take a turn which would lead the West Berlin
population to disapprove of Western policies. He said he wished to say
in complete confidence that he felt there was only one circumstance
which could remove US forces from Berlin—this would be if the West
Berliners should say that we do not want your forces here. US public
opinion would then be a controlling factor. We must all be together,
including Mayor Brandt.

Schroeder commented that the
viewpoints in Berlin seemed to differ now more than in former years.
Mayor Brandt, for example, was
trying to mediate the situation, but there were others in Berlin who had
reproached the FRG for not being strict
enough about this matter of Christmas passes. This showed how much more
complicated the situation in Berlin had become.

At this point Governor Herter arrived, and the Secretary suggested that
the meeting now turn its attention to the “dismal science” of the
economic problems raised by the matters covered in the recent Brussels
agreement.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL E
GER-W GER. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Creel and approved in S and U on
January 1, 1964. A summary of this conversation was transmitted in
Secto 1 from the Ranch, December 29. (Ibid., POL 36 GER) For McGhee's account of the conversation, see An
Ambassador's Account, pp. 129–130.

2 A memorandum of Part 2 of the
conversation, which included Christian A. Herter, U.S. Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations, beginning at 12:40 p.m.,
is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF
2354.

3 See Documents 248-251.

4 For text of
Abusch's December 5 letter, see Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik,
1963, p. 982.

253. Memorandum of Conversation253. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 28, 1963,3:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

East-West Relations (Part 5 of 5)2

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows a lengthy list of participants. President
Johnson was accompanied by Secretary
Rusk and 10 other
officials; Chancellor Erhard
by Foreign Minister Schroeder
and 12 others.]

President Johnson said that he would like to ask the
Chancellor about East-West relations. Does the Chancellor feel that we
are doing enough to find solutions to the problems dividing the
world?

Chancellor Erhard replied that
first of all he believes it is important not to think only in terms of
what the West might do. It is necessary also to look at the position of
the East and its responses to Western offers. Responses from the East
have not so far been encouraging. There have been many Western
suggestions but few encouraging responses. It is true that a test ban
agreement was reached, and this reduced the threat of a hot war. But
there has not been a favorable response in other areas, as for example
on observation posts.

The Chancellor said that our views would be more meaningful if we had a
more exact evaluation of the Russian position, if we knew how deep the
trouble is in the Soviet Union. The Chancellor said that the FRG would discuss this subject in the
Ambassadorial Group.

The President said that he interpreted the Chancellor's remarks as
indicating the view that the Soviets may be in pretty serious trouble.
The Chancellor said that he
thinks they are, but that he doubted the Soviets have reached a stage of
being willing to change their policies in any visible way. The Soviets
remain concerned about their prestige, as dictatorships are more than
democracies.

The Chancellor said that he was favorable to the proposed wheat sales to
the Soviet Union. He does not believe this is a point on which the West
should be tough. The Chancellor noted that the German people would have
starved in the period after World War II had it not been for US aid.

The President asked whether the FRG was
not selling flour to the Soviet Union. The Chancellor said this was
true.

The Chancellor commented that he felt the recent autobahn incidents had
been no accident. The Chancellor then reiterated his view that we should
not always be thinking in terms of what we should do; we should also
look at the attitude of the other side.

The Chancellor commented that sometimes these subjects can get hot. The
Christmas pass issue has dynamite in it even though it looks harmless.
The East Germans and Soviets are pressing their three-state theory. The
question is arising as to who speaks for Berlin. The FRG position up to now has been that the
Berlin Senat and the Federal Government will jointly carry out
discussions and any arrangements entered into.

The meeting ended at 5:15 p.m.

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of
Conversation: Lot 64 D 149. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by
Finn, approved by the White House on January 8, 1964, and by S and U on
January 17.

2 Part
1 on the Kennedy Round is printed in vol.
XIII, Document 89. Parts 2–4, which summarized the discussion on
European political unity, the MLF, and aid to less-developed countries, are in
Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF
2354.

254. Memorandum of Conversation254. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 29, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Germany and East-West Negotiations (Part 2 of 2 Parts)2

PARTICIPANTS

Germany

The Chancellor

Hermann Kusterer, Interpreter

United States

The President

McGeorge Bundy, Special
Assistant to the President

Arnold Lissance, Interpreter

Returning to the subject of East-West relations, the President told the
Chancellor he was under no illusions as to what might be accomplished
with the Soviets. Nevertheless, if imaginations were put to work,
somehow and some way ideas might emerge which promised hope.

The Chancellor assured the President that the Federal Government was not
opposed to a relaxation of tensions. Germany could not afford to take
such a position. It was incumbent upon everyone, and especially for the
Germans, to see what could be done to make war impossible. And the
Germans, for their part, would try to make constructive contributions to
this end.

The President said he found this encouraging and was indeed pleased with
the leadership Chancellor Erhard
was giving Germany.

The President emphasized that the West must lead from strength; and that
the US was prepared to do its part. This year, the US was thinking in
terms of a $50 billion defense budget and the German defense budget of
DM 20 billion was an important
element in the overall western defense posture.

The Chancellor said the Federal Republic would do all it could to avoid
the dangers of war. However, it was impossible for the Federal
Government to approach Khrushchev
directly. He wondered therefore whether the US might be willing to make
the necessary approaches to Khrushchev, making it clear that the US could not
renounce the principle of self-determination. The Chancellor suggested
Khrushchev might also be told
Germany was prepared to make real sacrifices to this end. The Federal
Republic was not only ready to extend credits; it was prepared to make
other kinds of substantive contributions.

The Chancellor then asked whether the President might be willing to
explore with Khrushchev possible
solutions to some of the urgent problems in Europe. In this connection,
the Chancellor mentioned that six or seven years ago as Minister of
Economics he received an invitation to visit the Soviet Union. But this
invitation was no longer valid now that he was Chancellor. However, this
was no reason for not communicating. In fact, the Chancellor thought the
Western powers ought to continue to explore with the Soviets possible
points of agreement and attempt to determine whether economics might not
buy political solutions.

The President said he had no illusions about Khrushchev. Moreover, he had no intention of meeting
with him unless and until such a meeting could produce concrete,
positive results. By the same token, he was prepared to go anywhere and talk with anyone if
something useful could be accomplished.

The US, the President continued, had a $50 billion defense budget and its
combat strength had increased considerably during the past three years.
This was an important element in the equation. The US always had to lead
from strength and be prepared to defend itself.

The President said one of his principal concerns, however, was that there
seemed to be a dearth of new ideas for relieving international tensions.
A considerable amount of planning had been done in the State Department
and elsewhere. But the end result always seemed to be that we would have
to travel along until we slid into war. Perhaps the Chancellor had ideas
on how we might make things just a little easier for ourselves by making
Soviet aggression less likely. For if there is no relaxation, there
could suddenly be a situation where “Khrushchev goes for our jugular.”

The Chancellor thought things were going very rapidly and clearly we had
to think in different categories than we did fifteen years ago. Some
good might come out of all this movement, but he, the Chancellor,
thought it necessary to remain hard-headed. The Soviets seemed to be
having real difficulties, and if the West had a better idea of what was
going on in the Soviet Union, it might be better prepared to deal with
the Kremlin. The Chancellor mentioned that Secretary Rusk had told him that such studies were
now under way and that the conclusions would be made available to the
Chancellor. This would certainly help in making the necessary political
judgments.

The President agreed, but added that as soon as the study was finished
and more precise information available, minds and resources had to be
applied to see what might be done. It was especially important to do so
while Khrushchev was still weak,
for it would be a great mistake to wait until the Soviets recovered.

The President said what disturbed him a great deal was that the West
seemed to be getting all the wrong headlines. Wheat sales and the test
ban agreement were not looked upon as the Western powers' will for
peace. The Soviets seemed to get the major credit for these developments
even though Khrushchev did not do
more about peace than we have done and are doing. While we must stay
strong, we also must remain reasonable. One of the things that troubled
him over the past six or seven years was Chancellor Adenauer's numerous warnings to the
President to “be careful” and “not trust Khrushchev.” The fact was that he did not trust
Khrushchev. But by the same
token he did not think the Western powers could remain insensitive to
world opinion and he thought it would be a great mistake if the West
refused to consider moves toward peace.

The Chancellor said he talked about this often with Adenauer. But Adenauer always insisted that Khrushchev was isolated in a fortress
under siege and therefore the only alternative was to starve him out.
Erhard said he never accepted
this view. On the contrary, it was his view that it is dangerous to push
dictators into a corner. This was bound to produce irrational reactions,
and the Germans probably knew more about this than any other people
since they lived with unpredictable dictators and watched them react
under pressure.

The Chancellor expressed his personal appreciation for this candid
exchange of views. He was pleased that there seemed to be a meeting of
the minds and his views of the important problems were not unlike those
of the President.

The President reiterated that it was absolutely essential that the US
remain strong and not allow itself to be weakened. At the same time, its
policy had to be one of live and let live. The President was sure
Khrushchev knew he did not
have to worry that US bombs would be dropped on him. By the same token,
Khrushchev had to understand
he would not be permitted to subvert this hemisphere. The US wanted no
more Cubas. The US was willing to guarantee Moscow's survival in return
for comparable Soviet guarantees for Berlin and New York. Everything was
capable of solution if minds were put to work. However, it was not
enough to talk peace; something had to be done about it.

In this connection, the President said he again wanted to reaffirm US
commitments to Germany. However, Germany does have commitments to the US
which it demonstrated by agreeing to a defense budget of DM 20 billion.

The President then reemphasized that areas of agreement had to be found.
He hoped to remain in touch with the Chancellor so there would be no
lack of understanding on either side, and each would know what the other
was doing.

The President then shifted the discussion and said he wanted to make one
point absolutely clear since this was a matter of continuous
speculation—he had no antipathy for nor was he disappointed by General
De Gaulle. He knew the
General well. Both he and the General understood the problems between
us, and both realized that for the most part they did not lend
themselves to simple or easy solutions. However, the President added he
was certain that when the chips were down, President De Gaulle would stick by the alliance
as he did during the Cuban crisis and on other occasions.

The Chancellor said so many changes were taking place in the world, the
German people were in a quandary as to how to react. Would the future
course be protectionism and isolation or trade expansion and wider
association? In Brussels the Germans put up a strong fight for the Kennedy Round for this is an essential prerequisite
to wider world trade. The Chancellor said he would be willing to go to
Geneva himself if his presence there would assure this. But the
Chancellor also felt the President should know—and he emphasized that he
was telling this to him in all frankness—that there was wide speculation
that the US intended to loosen its military and political ties with
Europe. And if there was to be any success in Geneva, answers had to be
given to these unspoken questions to end this harmful kind of
speculation.

The President appreciated this comment. He said he wanted to reassure the
Chancellor that there need be no doubt about changes in US plans or
policies.

(At this point, the President invited Mr. Bundy to join the talks to discuss possible Western
approaches to the Soviet Union.)

The President emphasized again that dealings with the Soviets had to be
from a position of strength. The Federal Republic had its defense budget
of DM 20 billion and the US its budget of
$50 billion. The US had a continuing commitment to keep its six
divisions in Europe. There was no question in the President's mind but
that the West needed a strong, unified Europe tied to a strong America
in an unbreakable alliance. However, talk was not enough. Something had
to be done about it. Khrushchev
was weakened by his difficulties with his Chinese allies and his
economic problems at home. But the West did not seem to be taking
advantage of the situation. The President felt strongly that it was
important for the Western powers to use their imaginations and ingenuity
to get what they could and what they had to have. This was the time for
the partnership to see what it could do and take the necessary
action.

Turning to Mr. Bundy, the
President explained that he had asked the Chancellor for his ideas and
thoughts for dealing with the East-West situation. He explained that the
Chancellor indicated his willingness to make some concessions to the
Soviets, perhaps in the form of large loans. However, the Chancellor did
not think the Germans could propose this to the Soviets. They preferred
to have the US handle this matter with Moscow. The President thought
this proposal ought to be carefully considered.

Mr. Bundy explained that as he saw
it the problem was to try to find something that could be offered to the
Soviets which the Kremlin wanted and which was worth more to them than
to the West, in return for which the Western position in Berlin, where
the greatest danger to peace now existed, would be strengthened. The
West had to look for the kind of proposal that went to the heart of the
problem—that relieved the existing political situation in Germany
without bringing about the recognition of East Germany. The Federal
Republic was not prepared to consider recognition, and neither was the
US. Nevertheless, the West had to make clear to the Soviets it was
prepared to work toward a settlement. Therefore the US looked to the Chancellor for
suggestions for improving the lot of the Germans living in East Germany;
strengthening the Western position in Berlin; and in the last analysis
providing a clear quid pro quo for the Soviets.

The Chancellor admitted that under Adenauer it was difficult to get such talks started. The
German Government agrees that pressures must be put on Khrushchev, but the question is how and
where. A better assessment of the Soviet situation would be most
helpful. Khrushchev is having
problems. He is clearly under pressure on several fronts. He therefore
is probably approachable. In this kind of situation, credits could be
attractive, and Khrushchev might
be interested in such a proposition. Long-term credits from the West,
however, depended on a real relaxation of tensions. However, if such a
dialogue were undertaken, the US would have to insist upon Soviet
acceptance of the principle of self-determination. There would also have
to be a phased and synchronized time table to insure the right of the
German people to decide their future. Germany was willing to pay the
price. It was prepared to offer credits and other kinds of assistance,
including help for Soviet industry in Eastern Siberia. But in addition
to economic assistance, there had to be a phased program for increasing
freedom in East Germany and East Berlin, and leading to free elections.
The Chancellor said he realized this was a radical plan. Sometimes,
however, such plans were easier to achieve than the conventional
ones.

The Chancellor admitted he had no illusions about the ease of getting
such a program under way. However, he was sure he could appeal to the
German people for the necessary sacrifices. These sacrifices would not
only be good for the Germans; they would demonstrate to the world that
the Germans' principal interest was reunification and not revanchism. In
this connection, the Chancellor said he wanted to add a word of
caution—that under no circumstances could such a program be considered
reparations. Economic sacrifices of this order had to buy freedom for
the German people.

Mr. Bundy said he wanted to
reiterate a point made earlier. The President appreciated the difficulty
of the German problem. However, there were people in the US who were
putting pressure on the President for an early solution. Their argument
is that the difficulties being discussed are not really decisive or
real; and that in fact there are a number of options open to us.
Moreover, they feel Khrushchev
needs time and an easing situation if he is to make any counter
concessions. At the present time, this kind of development seemed
blocked by the Federal Republic's rigid attitude toward East Germany.
Ulbricht, these people argue,
remains in control because the Soviets have no alternative and West
Germany's rigidity on contacts with the Soviet Zone will not facilitate
self-determination. They go on to say Khrushchev cannot be bought off. The only way to move toward a German solution is
for the Federal Republic's relations to East Germany to develop as they
did with Poland, Rumania and Czechoslovakia. Therefore, they conclude
the answer to the present impasse is to seek an interim agreement
preserving the freedom of Berlin; defuse the access question; and take a
more flexible position on the question of relations with East Germany.
“That is what people are telling us, Mr. Chancellor. And my question to
you, sir, is what shall we answer?”

The Chancellor said he was convinced that any recognition of the Soviet
Zone, even only superficial, would mean the final and irrevocable split
of Germany. There should be no illusions about this. The two parts of
Germany were quite different socially and economically. It was
impossible to reconcile them. The Federal Republic was free, democratic
and capitalistic. The Soviet Zone was undemocratic, unfree, and
communistic. There is no middle ground. If the Communists are permitted
a breakthrough, the split will be final. The Chancellor vehemently
denied that the West Germans were out of touch with the East Germans.
The Federal Republic, for example, is trading with the Soviet Zone; West
German credits were offered to improve the lot of the East Germans.
There are communications between the two parts of Germany. There were
even the Christmas passes. But the fact remains that it was the East
Germans who built the wall. East Germans can come to the Federal
Republic any time and without passes; West Berliners need passes to
enter East Berlin. The West Germans and the West Berliners want to see
German life normalized and therefore certain agreements are possible.
The Chancellor said he understood the Ambassadorial Group was now
looking at possible new initiatives, but it was too early to predict the
results. He went on to say that he understood the pressures the
President was under to provide answers on how to proceed. But the German
Government was not viewing the problem from a narrow point of view. It
was taking into consideration not only German needs but also the needs
of Germany's friends and allies. Nevertheless, the Chancellor promised
to give this matter further thought, but warned against an easy
solution, given the history of this complicated problem.

The President said he appreciated this. Nevertheless, he was concerned
that inaction could produce disaster. Much therefore depended upon the
ideas the West could produce and particularly on what the Germans might
come up with.

Concluding, the Chancellor pointed out that the Soviets were signatories
to the Potsdam Agreement which committed them to a peace treaty
following all-German elections. If such elections were permitted, West
Germans were fully prepared to accept comprehensive international
controls. One would assume, however, that the Soviet Zone would also
submit to such controls. In addition, the Chancellor said, there would have to be free movement of
all Germans to permit full campaigning on both sides. The Germans were
ready to decide their own destiny, and once that was out of the way, the
boundary problems could be resolved. (The Chancellor asked the President
to keep this information absolutely confidential.) Germany could and
would live in peace with its Eastern neighbors.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2354. Secret; Exdis. The
source text bears no drafting information, but it was approved by
the White House on January 14, 1964.

2 Part 1, a 7-line memorandum of conversation
about relations with Communist China, is ibid.

255. Memorandum of Conversation255. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 29, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Procedure for Consultation on Berlin Problems. Part One of
Two2

PARTICIPANTS

Germans

Foreign Minister Gerhard
Schroeder

Ambassador Heinrich
Knappstein

State Secretary Ludgar
Westrick

State Secretary Karl
Carstens

Assistant Secretary Franz Krapf

Minister Georg von
Lilienfeld

United States

The Secretary

Ambassador George C.
McGhee

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Special
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Assistant Secretary William R.
Tyler, EUR

Mr. Robert C. Creel,
Director, GER

After the President and the Chancellor had gone into private
session,3 the Secretary suggested that a small
group convene to continue yesterday's discussion of certain Berlin and
all-German problems.

He said he first wanted to say a word about the procedures for
consultation on problems in Berlin. He was himself inclined to use
procedures now in force,
involving the Four-Power Group in Bonn, the Ambassadorial Group in
Washington, and existing arrangements for Bonn to keep in close touch
with the Commandants and Senat in Berlin.

Carstens said the problem arose
from the fact that as concerned contacts between the Commandants and the
Senat it was difficult under present procedures for the FRG to be fully in the picture. It was
absolutely essential for the FRG to be
fully informed at all times. He therefore wished to suggest that the
focal point for consultations be in Bonn where there were the three
Ambassadors, the FRG and a
representative of the Senat. (Note: Klaus
Schuetz, Senator for Federal Affairs.) This would insure
that the FRG knew what everyone was
saying at one time—there had been much difficulty in the past with
knowing what had been said here and what had been said there. The FRG was always getting different stories.
It was essential that there be one place where the Three Powers, the
FRG and the Senat could all sit
around one table.

The Secretary said we must be very careful not to diminish in any way the
authority of the Commandants in Berlin. Ambassador McGhee stressed the importance of the
three Commandants in Berlin meeting frequently as a group. Mr. Tyler pointed out that while there were
many types of problems regarding Berlin which might arise, there were
some which fell strictly within the competence of the
Commandants—particularly those matters affecting the security of Berlin.
He thought Carstens' suggestion
might create problems in this respect.

Carstens said that his proposed
procedure would be limited to those particular contacts and discussions
which were already under way in Berlin. As concerned this matter, it was
absolutely necessary for the FRG to know
who was saying what, and to arrive quickly at the stage where we were
all sure we were in full agreement. This could be done only if all those
concerned were assembled in one place. He pointed out again that the
Berlin Senat had a permanent representative in Bonn and also mentioned
the divergent trends in Berlin.

The Secretary observed that if we had this procedure for 5-party
consultation differing from existing procedures, there was the
possibility we could have five vetoes. This was undesirable. It was
essential that the three Commandants in Berlin remain in a position to
give instructions to the Berlin Senat.

Ambassador McGhee pointed out
that there were even certain aspects of the present problem of passes
which were within the sole competence of the Commandants insofar as they
might affect the security of Berlin (as, for example, the location of
pass offices).

Carstens said his immediate
concern was how we should coordinate the matter of the answer to be
given to the next initiative from the East. There were indications that
such an initiative was already under way. There would be strong pressures to continue the
measures which had been started, but we should not let the other side
exploit any differences among us. He agreed that we should do nothing to
prevent the Commandants from continuing to carry out their existing
responsibilities, but he did not feel that what he was proposing would
have any such effect.

The Secretary said he was still not clear why the existing machinery was
not satisfactory. Mr. Tyler
commented that we had always looked to the FRG and the Senat to coordinate between themselves the
German position on Berlin matters. Why wasn't the present arrangement
adequate for this?

Mr. Bundy observed that, as he
understood Carstens' point, the
FRG was afraid it would get
“whip-sawed” by hearing two different things from two different sources.
Carstens said this was right;
they had already gone through this several times. He stressed again that
what he was proposing would not in any way affect the rights and
responsibilities of the Commandants.

The Secretary inquired whether the Senat had good and secure
communications with its representative in Bonn. Carstens said this was the case and
added that Schuetz was very close
to Brandt personally. He said his
suggested procedure should be used only in cases where “all four of us
agree there should be a conference of five”. This was the only way to
handle the problem rapidly.

The Secretary said we would consider the matter further and take it up
with the French and British.

Mr. Bundy said that if Carstens' suggestion were adopted, we
should not let on that this represented any big change. It would be
important not to give Moscow the idea there had been any modification in
Bonn-Berlin relations. It would also be important not to give the
appearance of by-passing the Commandants and making them less
visible.

Carstens commented that an
alternative procedure might be to bring the FRG into the Senat-Commandant discussions in Berlin. This
was not now being done and to do so would in fact represent a real
change. But what he was proposing was not in fact a change in existing
procedures.

The Secretary concluded the discussions at this point by saying it was
agreed that we would look into Carstens' proposal and maybe give it a try.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28
Berlin. Secret. Drafted by Creel and approved in S on January 1, 1964.

2 Part 2 is printed as Document 256.

3 See Document 254.

256. Memorandum of Conversation256. Memorandum of Conversation1

LBJ Ranch, Texas,December 29, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

New German Initiative on Reunification Law. Part Two of Two

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document
255.]

The Secretary suggested that the meeting turn to consideration of a new
initiative on the all-German problem.

Foreign Minister Schroeder said the
Germans were preparing a paper on the subject for discussion with the
other three governments, which could then be considered by the
Ambassadorial Group. The paper would first have to be approved by the
Cabinet in Bonn, but he thought it would be ready for submission to
other governments by mid-January.

The Secretary recalled our experience in dealing with the Soviets on such
occasions as the meetings of the Deputies for the Austrian Peace Treaty,
the Palais Rose, etc. He asked whether what Schroeder had in mind was an effort to set up a
four-power group with German participation with a broad frame of
reference.

Schroeder said he felt there
should be no Germans at all in this group. If the FRG were represented, Pankow would also
claim the right to participate and we would have a replica of the
situation at Geneva in 1959. This the FRG wished to avoid.

The Secretary inquired about the terms of reference—should they be
detailed or general. Schroeder
said the Germans had in mind possibly five points: a timetable for the
transitional period, a plan for reunification and European security, a
draft electoral law, a procedure for settling disputes, and a proposal
for supervising the conduct of the elections.

The Secretary commented that with such a frame of reference it would be
his guess that no meeting with the Soviets would ever take place.
Carstens agreed it was
difficult to suggest anything acceptable to the other side. He felt our
position could remain very flexible. These were merely ideas to try to
help make progress.

The Secretary said he felt a distinction should be drawn between broad
terms of reference on the one hand for discussions with the Soviets, and
on the other the arrangements among themselves (US, UK, France and
FRG) which would have to be very
detailed. We should be prepared
to meet an impasse with the Soviets at the outset, although it might be
possible over a period of time to make gradual progress on certain
aspects, such as the humanitarian side. Based on our experience with the
Austrian Treaty he felt that if any such group were set up it should be
prepared to hold at least 300 meetings.

The Secretary said he had a question about the plebiscite. Was Schroeder confident that if a fair
plebiscite could be held on the issue of whether the Germans wanted a
united or divided Germany, the vote would come out on our side?

Schroeder replied that there would
be no point in the Germans talking about self-determination as they had
been doing unless they were prepared to go all the way through with it.
Carstens said the FRG did not have much doubt on this score.
He cited the observations of the London Times' correspondent who had
recently visited East Germany and expressed the view that a fair
election would result in an overall vote of at least 80 per cent in
favor of the West.

The Secretary cited the example of Puerto Rico where our position on this
issue was very powerful. If anyone raised the issue of Puerto Rico
independence, we could always say “Why don't you ask the Puerto Ricans”?
He recalled that the Soviets had frequently said, without really meaning
it, that reunification was up to the Germans themselves. Schroeder said that what the Soviets
really meant was—ask the Pankow regime. Carstens referred to the formula in the Heads of
Government Directive at Geneva in 19552 which called for German
reunification by free elections “to be carried out in conformity with
the national interests of the German people” and pointed out that the
Soviets had interpreted this phrase in such a way as to block completely
any possibility of free elections.

Mr. Krapf inquired whether consultation should take place first in the
capitals or in the Ambassadorial Group. Schroeder said this point had been discussed in Paris
among the Foreign Ministers, and he would himself see no objection in
having it discussed first in the Ambassadorial Group. The Secretary said
this would mean that the first discussion would be very brief since the
matter would have to be referred to governments. Schroeder replied that the matter had
been discussed with Couve and the
other Foreign Ministers in Paris and he had considered Couve's reaction to the idea of a new
German initiative very forthcoming. The Secretary commented that this
might be one of the fruits of the Franco-German Treaty.

Schroeder commented on the
importance of discussing the whole thing among ourselves in great detail
before any approach was made to the Soviets. Mr. Tyler stressed
the need to hold the matter closely, particularly in view of the fact
that the press was already apparently aware that something was up; he
cited the recent Gruson story from London on the subject.

The Secretary said he agreed we should put our minds to this in the
Ambassadorial Group. There were some aspects of the matter from the
standpoint of European security which might be difficult and
complicated. For example, how could we assure that German reunification
would not upset the existing power balance? He commented that this was
the only major issue on which an East-West armed conflict could occur.
There would be various other things such as observation posts,
non-aggression pacts and the like, which would have to come into the
picture.

Ambassador McGhee asked Schroeder what he would think of setting
up a link between improvement of access to Berlin—as for example, by an
International Access Authority—and a non-aggression pact. This link
would be established on the basis that the NAP would become null and void in the event of any new
interference with Berlin access which might impel us to use an armed
probe.

Schroeder said they had not quite
made up their minds on this. He felt it would impose a heavy burden on
the Swiss, Swede or whoever might be Chairman of the Access Authority to
take decisions involving peace or war. Ambassador McGhee commented that Ambassador
Thompson felt the Soviets
would not agree to establishing the Access Authority solely in exchange
for the NAP. Schroeder added that he felt the Soviets were not
prepared to do anything which would exclude the idea of setting up West
Berlin as a free city.

The Secretary inquired whether there would be any point in proposing that
the Berlin Wall be established on the east frontier of East Berlin.
Carstens commented merely that
several hundred thousand people would leave East Berlin and not come
back. The Secretary made reference to Mayor Brandt's idea about letting East Berliners enter West
Berlin freely on the basis of a guarantee that they would not move any
further West than West Berlin.

Ambassador McGhee inquired about
the possibility of using interzonal trade and credits to arouse
expectations on the other side. This could then put the FRG in a position to make demands on the
East. Schroeder said he thought
this was underestimating the realities in a totalitarian system.
Carstens added that the GDR had not yet reacted to the offer of
increased credits in IZT, which had been
put forward over a year ago.

The meeting then adjourned to proceed to the barbecue at Stonewall.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66
D 110, CF 2354. Secret. Drafted by Creel and approved in S on January 1, 1964.

2 For
text, see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol.
V, pp. 527–528.

IndexIndex

Note: The original index has been suppressed in this ebook; for more information, see “About the Electronic Edition”
