Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume II, Vietnam, 1962 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1990)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v02).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Vietnam, 1962 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume II)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume II

Vietnam, 1962

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Vietnam, 1962 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume II)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

VietnamI. Reorganization of the U.S. Military Command Structure in Vietnam, January 1-February 8, 1963 (Documents 1-53)

II. Consideration of a Civic Action Program for South Vietnam, February 9-26 (Documents 54-86)

III. Attack on the Presidential Palace February 27-March 2, 1962 (Documents 87-97)

IV. Further U.S. Efforts To Strengthen the Government of South Vietnam, March-April 1962 (Documents 98-170)

V. Consideration of an International Conference on Vietnam and the Preparation of the ICC Report of June 2, April-June (Documents 171-232)

VI. Final Report of the Vietnam Task Force and the Establishment of the Vietnam Working Group July (Documents 233-249)

VII. U.S. Consideration of a Crop Destruction Program for South Vietnam, July-September (Documents 250-279)

VIII. General Taylorʼs Visit to Vietnam, September 10-13, and Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency Thuanʼs Trip to the United States, September 11-25 (Documents 280-297)

IX. Press Relations, Defoliation, Strategic Hamlets, and South Vietnamʼs Relations With Laos, October-November (Documents 298-322)

X. Senator Mansfieldʼs Visit to Vietnam and Subsequent Report; Visits and Reports by Johnson and Heavner December 1962 (Documents 323-334)

Index

Preface Preface

The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. The volumes in the series include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions of the United States together with appropriate materials concerning the facts that contributed to the formulation of policies. Documents in the files of the Department of State are supplemented by papers from other government agencies involved in the formulation of foreign policy.

The basic documentary diplomatic record printed in the volumes of the series is edited by the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State. The editing is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and in accordance with the following official guidance first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925: There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating the place in the text where the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters that would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business.

b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details.

c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments.

d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals.

e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in dispatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification: in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternative presented to the Department before the decision was made.

Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume II

Document selection for this volume proceeded on the basis of a research plan developed by the editors after a preliminary review of repositories in both governmental and private agencies. From the outset the editors also approached their research with the recognition of the need to supplement the written record of U.S. policy during the Vietnam war with interviews of officials who participated in the policy process. Early attention was also given to those oral history interviews of participants already in existence and available in various locations.

On the basis of their preliminary research and the review of already-published documentation, including the “Pentagon Papers” of 1971, the editors developed the following five major general areas of focus for the research and selection of documents for inclusion in this volume: 1) Discussion and formulation of policy in Washington; 2) Policy implementation; 3) Reports from the Embassy in Saigon; 4) U.S. military involvement in Vietnam; and 5) Intelligence activities.

Discussion and formulation of policy in Washington: President John F. Kennedy made the basic policy decisions on Vietnam, based on advice from the Washington foreign affairs community, either at meetings or in documents submitted to him. The records of these meetings with the President and advice provided to him in writing are at the center of this volume. The editors are confident that they have had complete access to all the Presidential records bearing on Vietnam policy. The primary source for these records is the John F. Kennedy Library. The records of the Department of State, to which the editors had the fullest access, include a large segment of Presidential and National Security Council documentation, but the Kennedy Library document holdings remain the single most comprehensive source. The papers of the Presidentʼs Military Representative, General Maxwell D. Taylor, at the National Defense University in Washington, D.C. are also of unusual importance. Largely unduplicated at any other repository, the Taylor Papers provide a unique record of Taylorʼs advice to the President on Vietnam and records of some meetings both at the White House and at the Department of Defense for which there are no other accounts.

Policy implementation: The editors also selected documentation that covered the implementation of Presidentially established policy and involved a range of lesser policy decisions that did not reach the White House or were resolved at the Department of State or other agencies in the foreign affairs community. The files of the Department of State and the Kennedy Library are the primary documentary sources for these matters.

Reports from the Embassy in Saigon: The editors selected a representative portion of telegrams from the Embassy in Saigon that reported on important meetings with Vietnamese leaders and furnished policy-makers in Washington with information on the impact of U.S. policy decisions and programs. The editors also included in this volume some of the more important telegraphic reports from the Embassy in Saigon on the Vietnamese attitude toward the United States and U.S. officials as well as on internal developments in Vietnam.

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: The editors did not attempt to include in this volume any documentation on the U.S. military involvement in the war in Vietnam. They did, however, seek to include that portion of the official documentation that illustrated the main relationships between military planning and strategy and the conduct of U.S. diplomatic relations with Vietnam and other countries. The Taylor Papers are at the center of the editors' selection of this documentation as are the files of the Secretary of Defense and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs at the Washington National Records Center of the National Archives and Records Administration. The Department of State was not a principal party in the military planning for Vietnam, and its files include no significant record of this part of U.S. involvement in Vietnam.

Intelligence activities: The editors sought to include in this volume a representative selection of major intelligence appraisals and estimates on the basis of which foreign policies were formulated. They did not make any effort to research any alleged covert operations conducted in Vietnam. Most of the intelligence documentation included in this volume was obtained from the files of the Department of State and the Kennedy Library. These documents and those furnished by the Central Intelligence Agency provided a wide range of intelligence-related information on Vietnam. The editors believe that they have satisfactorily documented the more significant aspects of the role of intelligence in the formulation and implementation of U.S. policy toward Vietnam.

In preparing this volume the editors emphasized the political and economic aspects of the formulation of U.S. foreign policy. They did not seek to document the full range of U.S. relations with Vietnam in the military, cultural, or informational spheres. The editors did take careful account of the documentation in the complete “Pentagon Papers”, both the published and unpublished volumes of documents on diplomatic relations. The editors have, in general, sought to avoid reprinting here documents already published in the “Pentagon Papers”.

The declassification review process for the documents prepared for this volume, outlined in more detail below, resulted in withholding from publication only an insignificant percentage of the original manuscript. No documents of major significance to the understanding of the policy discussions and decisions presented in the volume were withheld for security reasons. The editors of the volume are confident that the documents printed here provide a comprehensive and accurate foreign affairs record of United States involvement in the Vietnam war in 1962.

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the National Archives and Records Administration; the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, in particular Suzanne Forbes; the Department of Defense; and other specialized document repositories who assisted in collection of documents for this volume.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Incoming telegrams from U.S. missions are placed according to the time of receipt in the Department of State, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversations are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the Editor in Chief and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in footnotes. Obvious typographical errors are corrected, but other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an omission in roman type. Brackets are also used to indicate text that has been omitted by the compiler because it deals with an unrelated subject. Ellipses are inserted to replace material that remained classified after the declassification review process. Ellipses of three or four periods identify excisions of less than a paragraph; ellipses of seven periods spread across the page identify excisions of an entire paragraph or more. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the documentʼs source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or Secretary of State read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in this volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs of participants and other first-hand accounts, available when this volume was originally compiled in 1983, has been used where possible to supplement the official record.

Declassification Review Procedures

Declassification review of the documents selected for publication was conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review was made in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the criteria established in Executive Order 12356 regarding: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; and

9) a confidential source.

Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State and of other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and communication with foreign governments regarding documents of those governments. The principle of declassification review is to release as much information as is consistent with contemporary requirements of national security and sound foreign relations; some documents originally selected and portions of documents presented have been withheld.

David M. Baehler and Charles S. Sampson compiled the volume under the supervision of Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. Suzanne E. Coffmann of the Historianʼs Office prepared the lists of sources, names, and abbreviation. Vicki E. Futscher and Althea W. Robinson of the Editing Division of the Historianʼs Office performed the technical editing under the supervision of Rita M. Baker. Barbara A. Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Paul M. Washington, Chief) oversaw production of the volume. Max Franke prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State 1. Indexed Central Files. A major source of documentation for this volume was the indexed central (decimal) files of the Department of State.

2. Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the lot files consulted in this volume follows: Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for 1962 as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 476 Correspondence of the President with various heads of state, 1961-1966.

S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents, drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for 1962.

S/S Files: Lot 66 D 219 Briefing books and chronologies as maintained by the Executive Secretariat, 1962-1965.

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961-1968.

Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of the Secretary of Stateʼs and Under Secretary of Stateʼs conversations, 1961-1964.

Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193 Files of the Vietnam Working Group, 1960-1962.

Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307 Master files of the Vietnam Working Group for 1962.

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 84, Records of Foreign Service Posts of the United States Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677 Classified files of the Embassy in Saigon for 1962.

Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159 Top Secret files of the Embassy in Saigon, 1955-1964, formerly Lot 66 F 89.

Record Group 306, Records of the U.S. Information Agency USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933 U.S. Information Agency subject files for the Far East.

USIA/IAF Files: FRC 68 A 1415 Files of the Office of the Director of the U.S. Information Agency, 1961-1962; action copies retained by the Assistant Director for the Far East.1963-1964.

Record Group 330, Records of the Offlce of the Secretary of Defense OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 3501 General and country files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1962.

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Records of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistants for 1962

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts National Security Files (NSF) Brornley Smith Series.

Departments and Agendes Series.

Meetings and Memos Series.

Vietnam Country Series.

Presidentʼs Office Files

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. Harriman Papers, Vietnam

National Defense University, Washington, D.C. Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1955-1959 Military Adviser to the President, 1961-1962; Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff 1962-1964.

Naval Historical Center, Washington, D.C. Burke Papers Papers of Admiral Arleigh A. Burke, Chief of Naval Operations, 1955-1961.

University of Montana, Missoula, Montana Mansfield Papers

Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut Bowles Papers

Published Sources

Documentary Collections and Periodicals The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog, 1977. Washington: Carrollton Press, Inc., 1977.

The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog, 1978. Washington: Carrollton Press, Inc., 1978.

The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog, 1981. Washington: Carrollton Press, Inc., 1981.

The Pentagon Papers: The Defense Department History of United States Decisionmaking on Vietnam [The Senator Gravel Edition], 4 vols. Boston: Beacon Press, 1971.

Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962. Washington.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963.

U.S. Department of Defense. United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967 [The Pentagon Papers], 12 vols. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971.

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1966.

———. Department of State Bulletin, 1962. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.1962.

Memoirs Note: The following memoirs were consulted at the time this volume was prepared in 1984. The Department takes no responsibility for their accuracy nor endorses their interpretation of the events.

Galbraith, John Kenneth. Ambassadorʼs Journal: A Personal Account of the Kennedy Years. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1969.

Hilsman, Roger. To Move a Nation. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1967.

Mecklin, John. Mission in Torment. Garden City, N.Y: Doubleday, 1965.

Taylor, Maxwell D. Swords and Plowshares. New York: W.W. Norton, 1972.

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

AID, Agency for International Development

AIK, assistance in kind

Amb, Ambassador

AP, Associated Press

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam

BGen, Brigadier General

BN, battalion

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

CA, civic action

CAS, Controlled American Source

CEP, Country Economic Program

CG, Civil Guard

ChiCom, Chinese Communists

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CI, counterinsurgency

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIG, Counterinsurgency Group

CIO, Central Intelligence Organization

CIDG, Civilian Irregular Defense Group

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief of the Pacific

CNO, Chief of Naval Operations

COMUSMACV, Commander, U.S. Military Advisory Command, Vietnam

CONUS, Continental United States

CT, Country Team

DA, Department of the Army

DCI, Director for Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DGI, Director General of Information

DM, Deutschemark

DOD/ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

DOD/OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Department of Defense

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

ECAFE, Economic Cooperation Administration for the Far East

EDCOR, Department of Defense psychological warfare project in the Philippines during the 1950s

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FE, Far East; Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FECON, Far East Conference

FLN, National Liberation Front

FP, Force Populaire

FSI, Foreign Service Institute, Department of State

FSO, Foreign Service officer

GOF, Government of France

GOI, Government of India

GVN, Government of Vietnam

HICOM, High Commissioner

IAF, Far East Division, U.S. Information Agency

ICA, International Cooperation Administration; intelligence collection area

ICC, International Control Commission

IDA, International Development Association

ILO, International Labor Organization

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

ISA, International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

JCS(M), Joint Chiefs of Staff (Memorandum)

JGS, Joint General Staff

L/C, Local currency; letter of credit

LOC, lines of communication

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MACV, Military Advisory Command, Vietnam

MACV/PIO, Public Information Officer for Military Advisory Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MGen, Major General

MSP, Mutual Security Program

NACO, National Agricultural Credit Office

NBC, National Broadcasting Company

NCO, Non-Commissioned Officer

NEA, Near East and Africa; Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, Department of State

niact, night action

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

NISC, National International Security Council

noforn, no foreign dissemination

NPSS, National Police and Security Service

NSAM, National Security Action Memoranda

PA, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

PAO, Public Affairs Officer

PA/PR, purchasing authority; purchasing regulation

PIO/MACV, Public Information Officer for U.S. Military Advisory Command, Vietnam

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants

Polad, Political Adviser

POW, prisoner of war

R&R, rest and relaxation

reftel, reference telegram

RKG, Royal Khmer Government

RLG, Royal Laotian Government

RVN, Republic of Vietnam

RVNAF, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

S, Secretary of State

SAC, Strategic Air Command

SACSA, Spedal Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities

SDC, Self Defense Corps

SEA, Southeast Asia; Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SecDef, Secretary of Defense

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from U.S. delegations at international conferences

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SOA, Office of South Asian Affairs, Department of State

S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SVN, South Vietnam

TF/Saigon, Task Force in Saigon

TF/SEA, Task Force on Southeast Asia

TF/VN, Task Force on Vietnam

Toeid, series indicator for telegrams from AID missions to Washington

Tousi, series indicator for telegrams from USIS missions to USIA

UPI, United Press International

USAF, United States Air Force

USDel, United States Delegation

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

USMACTHAI, United States Military Advisory Command, Thailand

USMACV, United States Military Advisory Command, Vietnam

USMC, United States Memorandum of Conversation; United States Marine Corps

USOM, United States Operations Mission

VAdm, Vice Admiral

VC, Viet Cong

VM, Viet Minh

VNMC, Vietnam Marine Corps

VNN, Vietnam Navy

WG/VN, Working Group on Vietnam

List of Persons List of Persons

Amory, Robert, Jr., Deputy Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Anderson, Adm. George W., Chief of Naval Operations from August 1, 1961

Anspacher, John M., Counselor for Public Affairs in the Embassy in Saigon

Anthis, Brig. Gen. Roland H. (USAF), Commander, U.S. Second Air Division; Chief, U.S. Air Force Advisory Group, Vietnam

Bagley, Worth H., Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State from January 1, 1962

Barbour, Robert E., Second Secretary for Political Affairs at the Embassy in Saigon

Barnard, Robert J., Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near East and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

Barwick, Sir Garfield, Australian Foreign Minister

Battle, Lucius D., Spedal Assistant to the Secretary of State and Executive Secretary of the Department of State

Bowles, Chester A., Ambassador at Large, Department of State

Brent, Joseph L., Director, Operations Mission in Vietnam, from August 1962

Bunce, William K., Deputy Assistant Director for Far Eastern Affairs, United States Information Agency, until July 29, 1962; thereafter United States Information Agency representative on the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Bundy, McGeorge, Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs

Bundy, William P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs; Defense representative on the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Burris, Col. Howard L., Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide

Buu Hoan, Head of the Research Department of the National Bank of Vietnam

Carroll, Lt. Gen. Joseph E, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Chayes, Abram J., Legal Adviser, Department of State

Chen Yi, President of the Chinese Institute of Foreign Affairs and Peopleʼs Republic of China delegate at the Geneva Conference on Laos

Clay, Gen. Lucius D., Presidentʼs Personal Representative in Berlin until May 8, 1962

Cleveland, Robert G., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State, May 27-September 16, 1962

Clifton, Brig Gen. Chester V., Presidentʼs Military Aide

Cottrell, Sterling J., Director of the Task Force on Vietnam until June; thereafter Deputy Director and Chairman of the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Czyzak, John J., Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Decker, Gen. George H., U.S. Army Chief of Staff

Desai, Manilal Jagdish, Secretary of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs

Diehl, William, Chief of the Far East Division, Office of International Finance, Department of Treasury

Dueng Van Minh, Gen., Commander, Army Field Command, Army of the Republic of Vietnam, until December 1962; thereafter Military Adviser to President Diem

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States until January 20, 1961

Ellis, William A., Director, Office of Development Planning, Bureau for the Far East Agency for International Development, from March 4, 1962

Felt, Admiral Harry D. (USN), Commander in Chief, Pacific

Fippin, William H., Agricultural Officer at the Operations Mission in Vietnam until February 25, 1962; Assistant Director for Rural Affairs, February 25-October 10, 1962; thereafter Deputy Director of the Operations Mission

FitzGerald, Desmond, Chief of the Far East Directorate, Central Intelligence Agency, and CIA representative on the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Forrestal, Michael V., National Security Council staff member

Galbraith, John Kenneth, Ambassador to India

Gardiner, Arthur Z., Director of the Operations Mission in Vietnam

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense

Gundevia Yezdezard Dinshaw, Indian Commonwealth Secretary

Hamilton, Fowler, Administrator, Agency for International Development

Harkins, Gen. Paul D. (USA), Commander of the Military Advisory Command, Vietnam, from February 8, 1962

Harriman, W. Averell, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs and Chairman of the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Heavner, Theodore J. C., Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs, Department of State

Heinz, Rear Adm. Luther C., Regional Director for the Far East, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Hooten, Canadian member of the International Control Commission

Janow, Seymour J., Assistant Administrator for Far Eastern Affairs, Agency for International Development, from January 3, 1962

Johnson, Robert H., member of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Kaysen, Carl, Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States from January 20, 1961

Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich, Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers

Koren, Henry L.T., Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Krulak, Maj. Gen. Victor H. (USMC), Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities, Joint Staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; JCS representative on the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Lansdale, Brig. Gen. Edward G. (USAF), Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Le Van Ty, Chief of the Joint General Staff, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until October 1, 1962

MacapagaL Diosadado, President of the Philippines

McConaughy, Walter P., Special Assistant in the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence

McGarr, Lt. Gen. Lionel C. (USA), Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense

Maechling Charles, Director of Internal Defense, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Magathan, Wallace C., Jr., Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Manfull, Melvin L., Counselor for Political Affairs at the Embassy in Saigon from April 14, 1962

Mansfield, Mike, Senator from Montana; Majority Leader and member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Martin, Edwin W., Political Adviser to the Commander in Chief, Pacific, from September 3, 1961

Mecklin, John, Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Saigon, July 8-September 28, 1962; thereafter Counselor for Public Affairs

Meloy, Francis E., Jr., Director of the Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from June 24, 1962

Mendenhall, Joseph A., Counselor for Political Affairs at the Embassy in Saigon

Menon, V.K. Krishna, Indian Defense Minister and Representative at the Geneva Conference on Laos

Moore, Daniel E., Deputy Assistant Director for the Far East, United States Information Agency, from October 15, 1962

Murrow, Edward R., Director, United States Information Agency

Nehru, Braj Kumar, Indian Ambassador to the United States

Ngo Dinh Can, President Diemʼs brother

Ngo Dinh Diem, President and Secretary for National Defense of the Republic of Vietnam

Ngo Dinh Nhu, President Diemʼs brother and Political Adviser to the President

Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame, Ngo Dinh Nhuʼs wife and official hostess for President Diem; daughter of Tran Van Chuong

Nguyen Dinh Thuan, Secretary of State at the Presidency of the Republic of Vietnam and concurrently Assistant Secretary of State for Defense and Acting Coordinating Secretary of State for Security

Nguyen Khanh, Brig. Gen., Chief of Staff of the General Staff, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

Nguyen Ngoc Tho, Vice President of the Republic of Vietnam and Coordinating Secretary of State for Economic Development

Nitze, Paul H., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Nolting, Frederick E., Jr., Ambassador to Vietnam

Owen, Henry D., member of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, until April 15, 1962; Deputy to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, April 15-November 25, 1962; thereafter Deputy Counselor of the Department of State and Vice Chairman of the Policy Planning Council

Parthasarathi G., Indian member of the International Control Commission

Pell, Clalborne, Senator from Rhode Island

Pezzullo, Lawrence, Executive Secretariat Staff, Department of State

Phillipo, Rufus, Consultant at the Operations Mission in Vietnam, June 9-September 19, 1962; therafter Assistant Director for Rural Affairs

Phoumi Nosavan, Gen., Deputy Premier and Minister of Defense of the Royal Laotian Government until July 1962; thereafter Deputy Premier and Minister of Finance

Ramsey, Henry C., member of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

Rice, Edward E., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Riley, Vice Adm. Herbert D., Director, Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Robinson, James, NBC correspondent in Southeast Asia

Rootow, Walt Whitman, Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council

Rowan, Carl T., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs from February 27, 1961; observer on the Interdepartmental Task Force on Vietnam

Rowen, Henry S., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Planning and NSC)

Rowny, Maj. Gen. Edward L., Special Assistant for Tactical Mobility, Department of the Army

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Salans, Carl F., Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Salinger, Pierre, Presidentʼs Press Secretary

Shoup, Gen. David M., Commandant, U.S. Marine Corps

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, Head of State of Cambodia and President of the Council of Ministers

Silver, Warren A., member of the Interdepartmental Task Force on Vietnam; member of the Staley Group

Smith, Bromley, Executive Secretary of the National Security Council from August 1961

Souphanouvong, Prince, Pathet Lao leader and representative to the Geneva Conference on Laos; Deputy Premier and Economics Minister from July 1962

Souvanna Phouma, leader of the Neutralist Government of Laos until July 1962; thereafter Premier and Minister of Defense and Veterans and Social Affairs

Stahr, Elvis, Jr., Secretary of the Army

Staley, Eugene A., Research Director of the Stanford Research Institute

Stoneman, Walter, Director, Office of Vietnam Affairs, Agency for International Development

Sukarno, Achmed, President and Prime Minister of Indonesia

Sullivan, William H., United Nations Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Sully, Francois, reporter for Newsweek magazine

Sylvester, Arthur, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public AffAirs

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D. (USA), Presidentʼs Military Representative until October 1, 1962; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Thompson, Robert G.K., Head of the British Advisory Mission, Vietnam

Timmes, Maj. Gen. Charles J., Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam, from March 6, 1962

Tran Van Chuong, Ambassador of the Republic of Vietnam to the United States

Tran Van Don, Maj. Gen., I Corps Commander, Army of the Republic of Vietnam, until December 1962; thereafter Commander of the Army

Trueheart, William C., Counselor and Deputy Chief of Mission of the Embassy in Saigon

Tunku, Abdul Rahman, First Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs of Malaya

Valeo, Frank, Legislative Assistant to Senator Mansfield

Vu Quoc Thuc, Dean of the Saigon University Law School

Vu Van Mau, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs for the Republic of Vietnam

Williams, Haydn, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Wilson, Donald M., Deputy Director, United States Information Agency

Wood, Chalmers B., Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State, until June; thereafter Executive Director of the Working Group on Vietnam and State Department representative on the Task Force on Southeast Asia

Yarmolinsky, Adam, Special Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Young, Kenneth, Ambassador to Thailand

VietnamVietnam

Contents

I. Reorganization of the U.S. Military Command Structure in Vietnam, January 1-February 8, 1963I. Reorganization of the U.S. Military Command Structure in Vietnam, January 1-February 8, 1963

1. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 2, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-015-69. Top Secret. A draft of this memorandum, with virtually identical wording, is in Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. President Kennedy approved the program on January 3.

2. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting With the President, Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 1962

Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-138-69. Top Secret. Drafted on January 9. A covering memorandum of January 9 from Gilpatric to Taylor indicated that, with certain changes recommended by the JCS and Taylor, the record could now be considered in final form. Attached to the source text were two memoranda that dealt with language changes in the record of the discussion of the Department of Defense budget. For a further record of this meeting, see Document 9.

3. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer)

Washington, January 4, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Sensitive 7-61. Secret. Drafted by Colonel Kent. Also sent to the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.

4. Editorial Note

5. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, United States Information Agency (Neilson), to the Directorʼs Special Assistant (Harris)

Washington, January 4, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field-Far East (IAF), 1962. Confidential. Initialed by Nielson. Attached to Document 16.

6. Talking Paper Prepared by Colonel Robert M. Levy, J-3, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, January 4, 1962.

Source: JCS Files. Top Secret. Prepared for General Lemnitzer, for his meeting with Ambassador Nolting on January 9 at 10 a.m. Nolting arrived in the United States on January 5 and departed with Secretary McNamara for Honolulu en route to Saigon on January 14. During his stay in Washington he was involved in numerous meetings and briefings, some of which are documented in the following pages. Nolting subsequently indicated that his primary purpose in returning for consultations was to discuss the terms of reference for the new military commander in Vietnam. “Department of State, Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Frederick Nolting, June 1, 1984) For the original terms of reference agreed to at the Palm Beach meeting with the President, see Document 9.

7. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 5, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-562. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to Bangkok. At the top of the first page, presumably in Woodʼs handwriting, was: “COT [Sterling J. Cottrell]-IMPT Answer to Taylorʼs Query re Progress on Joint Agree. W” No record of Taylorʼs request has been found, but telegram 838 to Saigon, January 3, requested a summary of Vietnamese actions in response to the Joint Memorandum of Understanding for discussions with Ambassador Nolting when he arrived on January 5. (Ibid., 75 l K.00/12-462)

8. Telegram From the Task Force in Vietnam to the United States Information Agency

Saigon, January 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8. GVN. 1962. Information & Civic Action. No classification appears on the source text.

9. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Washington, January 6, 1962, 1:40 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers, Folder 24. Top Secret Priority; Eyes Only. A handwritten draft by Lemnitzer, dated January 6, is ibid., L-211-71.

10. Editorial Note

11. Paper Prepared by the Task Force in Vietnam

Saigon, January 10, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 65 F 115, Counterinsurgency Plan. Secret. The annexes are not printed. Transmitted under a January 18 memorandum from Mendenhall to Nolting, which indicated that all agencies represented on the Task Force in Vietnam had approved the plan and that the Task Force now awaited permission from Nolting to present the plan to the Government of Vietnam. Also attached was a second memorandum of January 18 from Mendenhall to the Task Force noting two changes recommended by MAAG and USIS, which are incorporated in the source text; another memorandum of January 10 from Mendenhall to the Task Force transmitting copies of an earlier draft; a handwritten note from Mendenhall to Nolting of December 15 specifying various changes from earlier drafts; and a covering memorandum from Mendenhall to the Task Force transmitting the first draft on December 1. The plan was transmitted to the Department of State as an attachment to despatch 429, April 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-662) The despatch, signed by Mendenhall, reported that the plan was designed to implement the “Counterinsurgency Plan” developed and approved for all of South Vietnam in 1961 (Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 1), but that it was not submitted to the Government of Vietnam because in the interim the British Advisory Mission had submitted the Delta Pacification Plan (Document 51) for approval. The despatch reported that the two plans were compatible, but that the Embassy saw merit in avoiding swamping the Government of Vietnam with too much paper at once. Finally, it stated that the U.S. Interagency Committee on Province Rehabilitation, established in late March 1962, was using the Plan as its basic guide.

12. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Johnson) to the Director (Rostow)

Washington, January 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron. Secret. Johnson, who had just left the National Security Council Staff for the Department of State, indicated in a covering memorandum that he had prepared the study in an effort to fill in his successors in the NSC and that it provided a picture of where the United States stood on various issues at the time.

13. Memorandum for the Record

Saigon, January 12, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 GVN. Secret. Transmitted to Ambassador Nolting under a memorandum of January 19 from McGarr; also attached was a talking paper of January 15 for McGarrʼs use at the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu, January 15, based in part on this conversation. McGarr stated in the transmittal memorandum that Nolting might want to review the papers before his meeting with Thuan on January 20. No record of the January 20 meeting has been found.

14. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 11, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-026-69. Secret.

15. Editorial Note

16. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, United States Information Agency (Neilson), to the Deputy Director of the Agency (Wilson)

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field—Far East (IAF), 1962. Secret. Initialed by Neilson.

17. Terms of Reference for the Senior United States Military Commander in Vietnam

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam 1961: Taylor Recommendations, Command. Secret. A covering note on White House letterhead, dated January 12, indicates that the revised terms of reference were transmitted to McNamara from General Taylor. The revision may have been the paper handed to Taylor by President Kennedy during the meeting with Nolting, Harriman, and Taylor by January 12. (See footnote 2, Document 14) Also on January 12, presumably in response to directions by Harriman acting on the Presidentʼs instructions for revision, draft terms of reference were prepared in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs for use in a meeting with Secretary Rusk on January 13. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam 1961, Taylor Recommendations, Command) These were sent to Secretary McNamara in a letter of January 13 from Secretary Rusk. The changes made by the Department of State in the original terms of reference approved by President Kennedy on January 3 were less extensive than those in the version printed here, consisting only of the addition of the first paragraph, as printed here, and not including any of the changes made here in the fifth and sixth paragraphs (see Document 9).

18. Memorandum by the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, January 13, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-628-71. Secret.

19. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 13, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-026-69. Secret. At the top are written the words: “Read by HA.” “HA” stands for “Higher Authority” and was regularly used in referring to President Kennedy.

20. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 13, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489, VN (Sensitive). Top Secret. A stamped notation indicates that the Secretary of Defense saw the paper.

21. Editorial Note

22. Editorial Note

23. Memorandum of Conversation, Saigon, January 16, 1962

Saigon, January 16, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814, USIS, 1962. Confidential. Drafted by Gardiner.

24. Memorandum of Conversation, Mendenhallʼs Residence, Saigon, January 16, 1962

Saigon, January 16, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, 350-GVN. Confidential. Drafted by Mendenhall on January 17. The meeting was held in Mendenhallʼs Residence. Another copy is in Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 14,GVN, 1962, Political Situation, General. Distributed throughout the Embassy, to CINCPAC, and to the Department of State.

25. Telegram From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Nolting) to the Department of State

Honolulu, January 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-1762. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Priority. Attached to the source text was a note from Battle to the Secretary indicating that U. Alexis Johnson had action on it and that no other distribution had been or would be made pending Johnsonʼs recommendations to Rusk. The letter was never submitted to the President. For Ruskʼs reply, see Document 40.

26. National Security Action Memorandum No. 124

Washington, January 18, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Secret. Attached to the source text were a memorandum to all Assistant Secretaries of State for regional affairs, January 26, from U. Alexis Johnson establishing State Department liaison with the Special Group; copies of letters to Ambassadors in Southeast Asia asking for views on counterinsurgency; a copy of a letter from Rusk to Lemnitzer, June 16, establishing a Task Force for Southeast Asia to complement the Vietnam Task Force and other papers from 1965 and 1966 relating to the revision of NSAM 124 and abolition of the Special Group (Counterinsurgency).

27. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, January 1862, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-1862. Secret. Drafted by Johnson. Copies sent to Lemnitzer, Rostow, Harriman, Cottrell, and Nolting.

28. Editorial Note

29. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)

Honolulu, January 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5-M SP/1-1962. Top Secret; Official-Informal.

30. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, January 20, 1962, 4:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-2062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Drafted by Peters on January 19; cleared by Cottrell, Peterson and Maechling; and approved by Rice.

31. Memorandum of Conversation Between Dr. Wesley Fishel of Michigan State University and the Counselor of Embassy in Vietnam (Mendenhall), Saigon, January 23, 1962

Saigon, January 23, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 14. GVN 1962, Political Situation, General. Confidential. Drafted by Mendenhall on January 24.

32. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 24, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2462. Secret. Drafted by Johnson; a copy was sent to General Taylor.

33. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 24, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2462. Secret Priority; Eyes Only.

34. Editorial Note

35. Draft Memorandum by the Assistant to the Director for Regional Affairs (Far East), Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense (Kent)

Washington, January 26, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam . Secret. No addressee indicated. Attached to the source text was a note from Kent to Lansdale stating that Haydn Williams, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Regional Affairs), had requested the paper and asking for Lansdaleʼs comments on the draft.

36. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 27, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2762. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

37. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Assistant to the Director for Regional Affairs (Far East), Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense (Kent)

Washington, January 27, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam #5. Secret.

38. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 29, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-2962. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

39. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, January 31, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Sensitive 7-61. Top Secret. Secretary McNamara also received a copy.

40. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 1, 1962—11:22 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-162. Top Secret, Niact, No Distribution; Eyes Only for the Ambassador. Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson and cleared with Manfull.

41. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to President Kennedy

Washington, February 2, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. A memorandum of February 2 from Harriman through Johnson to Rusk recommended that Rusk concur in the Department of Defense plan. (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.8158/2-262) According to a note on the source text, it was approved by McNamara and Rusk on February 2 and sent to Taylor. A memorandum of February 5 from Bromley Smith to McNamara indicates that President Kennedy approved the recommendation. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 370164) Listed as an attachment to the memorandum, but not found attached to the source text, was a map showing the areas contemplated for defoliation.

42. Paper Prepared by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Washington, February 2, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, Reports and Memos, 1/62-2/62. Secret. Attached to the source text were a cover sheet, indicating that the original had gone to General Taylor; a transmittal memorandum from Hilsman to Taylor, in his capacity as chairman of the Special Group (CI), stating that the paper had been prepared as requested by Taylor and the President; and a table of contents. The table of contents indicates that maps, not found attached to the source text, were included with the original. At the Presidentʼs behest Hilsman attended the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu on January 15, then went on to Saigon with Nolting to begin an inspection tour of South Vietnam. This report was based on that tour. Hilsman spent the latter half of January in Vietnam. Regarding the background of his visit, see Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 427.

43. Telegram From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Saigon, February 3, 1962—12:05 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Top Secret. Repeated to the JCS, which was requested to pass it to the Vietnam Task Force This telegram was also passed to the White House. A handwritten note at the top of the source text reads: “Bundy—See last para.”

44. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 3, 1962—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-362. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated CINCPAC for Polad.

45. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 3, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-362. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. At the top, in Woodʼs handwriting, were the words: “Cot[trell]—good news.”

46. Editorial Note

47. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group Vietnam (McGarr)

Honolulu, February 3, 1962—7:31 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, Secret. Repeated to the JCS; Ft. Ritchie, Maryland; Hickam Air Force Base for PACAF; CINCPACFLT; and CINCUSARPAC.

48. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 6, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/2-662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to the Department of Defense.

49. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, February 6, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-142-69. Top Secret. Transmitted under cover of a February 6 memorandum from Gilpatric to Taylor stating that the Department of Defense was submitting a draft of the events at Binh Hoa that differed from that submitted by Roger Hilsman in Document 42. On the transmittal memorandum was the penciled notation in Taylorʼs hand: “Report to HA 8 Feb '62.” Another copy of the memorandum in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489, Sensitive 7-61, includes a covering memorandum from Lansdale to Gilpatric recommending that Gilpatric forward the paper to Taylor.

50. Editorial Note

51. Draft Paper by the Head of the British Advisory Mission in Vietnam (Thompson)

[Saigon, undated.]

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Vietnam, 1/62-2/62. Secret. Sent to Hilsman under an undated memorandum for J.B. Denson of the British Embassy in Washington. At the top of Densonʼs transmittal memorandum is written in pencil: “For 6 p.m. appt 2/7/62.” No record of a meeting between Hilsman and anybody at that time has been found.

52. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Washington, February 7, 1962—7:57 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers, 1962, Folder 24. Secret; Priority.

53. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr)

Honolulu, February 8, 1962—6 a.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files: FRC 69 A 702, Organization and Planning Files (1963). Secret. Also sent to DEPCINCUSARPAC and repeated to all commands and representatives under CINCPAC. It repeats a message to all concerned parties sent by JCS to CINCPAC.

1. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to President Kennedy 1. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 2, 1962.

2

I-25006/63

SUBJECT

Defoliant Operations in Vietnam

You have previously approved, subject to prior consideration and authorization by Washington of specific plans, U.S. participation in a selective and carefully controlled joint US-VN program of defoliant operations in Vietnam.3 These operations were to start with the clearance of key routes and proceed thereafter to food denial only after the most careful basis of resettlement and alternative food supply has been created. Proposed operations in Zone D and the border areas were not to be undertaken until there were realistic possibilities of immediate military exploitation.

A specific plan for clearance of key routes has been developed by CINCPAC. As the proposed initial defoliant operation, it has been designed with limited specific objectives to provide an opportunity to evaluate its success and thereby determine the advisability of further defoliant operations. The operations recommended in the plan are designed to clear vegetation along key lines of communication to be used by the Vietnamese in a campaign to eliminate the Viet Cong from specified provinces in Southern Vietnam. Principal features of the plan are the following:

1. Objectives. a. To assist the counter-insurgency operation by clearing lines of communication in support of current or projected campaigns.

b. To improve aerial observation of selected areas controlled by the Viet Cong.

c. To assist in clearing fields of fire and to reduce the likelihood of close-in ambushes.

2. Scope. Approximately three hundred miles of road would be defoliated to a distance of 200 meters on both sides. The selected routes are all at least ten miles from the Cambodian Border. (See attached map.)4 They would be defoliated by segment in a sequence which avoids concentrating the operation in any one area, thereby reducing the risk of alerting the Viet Cong to the proposed Vietnamese campaign in Binh Duong Province. Operations would commence about 10 January. It could take up to two weeks to determine the full effect of the first application, and a second application may be required for all or part of the area. Sufficient chemicals for the operation arrive in Saigon this week.

3. Participation. Defoliant operations will be conducted by U.S. and VN forces. The bulk of the operation will be carried out by U.S. personnel in uniform under PACAF control. They will employ U.S. C-123 aircraft with USAF markings. Some of the spraying will be performed by Vietnamese employing their own H-34 helicopters and ground spraying equipment.

4. Public Relations. At the direction of the Department of State, Ambassador Nolting has discussed the public relations aspects of the defoliation program with the GVN. The Ambassador has obtained GVN concurrence in the State Departmentʼs proposals that, at the time of the operation, the Vietnamese Government would undertake appropriate publicity in the form of press releases, public statements and leaflet drops. The publicity would include statements that the program is under GVN direction and control and that U.S. assistance has been requested. The defensive purpose of the program will be explained and, in addition, efforts will be made to advise the inhabitants of affected areas that the spray will have no harmful effects on humans, livestock, or the soil. In response to any press inquiries, U.S. officials would reply along the following lines:

“Noting Communist guerrillas use roadside underbrush to ambush civilian buses, trucks, and passenger cars, making roads unsafe for daily travel by people of the country, the GVN has asked the U.S. for assistance in a program of clearance of jungle growth along roads of Vietnam. U.S. equipment will be used. Road clearance will aid the ARVN in patrolling roads to protect people and will facilitate normal maintenance. Operation involves use of materials which are similar to those used every day for weed clearance along rights of way in the United States. As our people know from experience, these defoliants of the 2-4D variety are not harmful to humans, animals, or the soil. Since there are miles of jungle roads in Vietnam, U.S. planes and personnel are actively cooperating in jungle growth clearance operation.”

It is understood that the recommendations of the Department of State are being forwarded by a separate paper.5

The Department of Defense recommends that CINCPAC be authorized to implement his proposed plan for clearance of selected routes, upon receipt by Ambassador Nolting of GVN concurrence in this specific plan.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-015-69. Top Secret. A draft of this memorandum, with virtually identical wording, is in Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. President Kennedy approved the program on January 3.

2 The source text is undated, but the papers accompanying the draft cited in footnote 1 indicate that it was sent to the President on January 2.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 275.

4 Not printed.

5 Attached to the draft cited in footnote 1 is a memorandum of January 2 from Secretary Rusk to the President recommending approval of the proposal as long as the program was carried out under the direction of Ambassador Nolting. Also attached is a memorandum of January 2 from Harriman to Rusk suggesting that the latter recommend approval of the program.

2. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting With the President, Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 1962 2. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting With the President, Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 19621

Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Presidentʼs Meeting with JCS on January 3, 1962

At the meeting with the President, besides the Joint Chiefs of Staff (with General Smith in place of General LeMay), were the Vice President, Secretary McNamara, General Taylor, General Harkins, and myself. There follows a summary of the discussion which took place during the meeting:

[Here follows discussion of the Department of Defense budget for fiscal year 1963 and Soviet air reinforcements.]

South Vietnam

There was a discussion of the proposed new command structure for South Vietnam as agreed upon between State and Defense. The President approved the assignment of General Harkins to the position of senior U.S. commander in Vietnam and his recess appointment to the grade of General. It was agreed that no publicity would be given, at least for the time being, to General Harkins' new mission.

In the discussion concerning South Vietnam the President reemphasized the importance of the U.S. not becoming further involved militarily in that area. The President also emphasized the importance of playing down the number of U.S. military personnel involved in Vietnam and that the U.S. military role there was for advice, training and support of the Vietnamese Armed Forces and not combat.

Following a briefing on the proposed defoliant operations, it was agreed that the first step would be for a small-scale application on an experimental basis which would be limited to the first priority road, i.e., a stretch of approximately 35 to 40 miles long.

Roswell L. Gilpartic2
Deputy Secretary of Defense

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-138-69. Top Secret. Drafted on January 9. A covering memorandum of January 9 from Gilpatric to Taylor indicated that, with certain changes recommended by the JCS and Taylor, the record could now be considered in final form. Attached to the source text were two memoranda that dealt with language changes in the record of the discussion of the Department of Defense budget. For a further record of this meeting, see Document 9.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

3. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) 3. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer)1

Washington, January 4, 1962.

SUBJECT

Public Affairs and Security Aspects of Operations in Vietnam

1. Improved planning and implementation of the public affairs and security aspects of our military operations and programs in Vietnam is required. The security and public affairs policy for U.S. military progress in Vietnam is governed primarily by the policy of the United States toward observance of the Geneva Accords.2 That policy is currently that the United States and the Government of Vietnam have a good, legally sound position to take publicly in response to challenges of increased U.S. assistance to Vietnam. It provides a firm political case for whatever actions may later be judged necessary. This position is as follows: GVN is committing sets of aggression in flagrant violation of the Geneva Accords, and the GVN has consequently requested the United States to provide additional support in men and materiel. These measures are being taken as requirements of legitimate self-defense necessitated by North Vietnamese breaches of the Accords. As soon as the North Vietnamese end their aggressive acts and resume their observance of the Geneva Accords, these measures of support can be terminated.

2. … In response to queries U.S. representative will respond as follows: “The United States has acceded to GVNʼs request for expanded aid in men and materiel and is determined to help preserve its independence. This is the sole objective of the United States. The United States will terminate these measures as soon as North Vietnam ends its acts of aggression.”

3. To ensure that public affairs aspects of operations in Vietnam are consistent with the above policy, adequately planned and effectively implemented, the following procedures should be followed: a. When an action or program with significant public affairs or security implications is planned, the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, in coordination with the Secretaries of the Services providing personnel or logistic support for the operation, will recommend a suitable cover story, or stories, a public explanation, a statement of no comment or an appropriate combination thereof, for approval by the Secretary of Defense. This recommendation will cover the initial call up and movement of forces or material concerned to the area of operations and their subsequent employment. The Service Secretaries will be responsible for coordinating on that portion of the operation which will take place under their authority.

b. The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs) shall advise the Departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff of current public affairs policy for Vietnam to guide them in the development of proposed cover stories and public explanations.

c. The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs) shall evaluate the proposed cover stories or public explanations to insure that they are in consonance with overall policy guidelines developed in coordination with the Department of State.

Roswell L. Gilpatric3
Deputy Secretary of Defense

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Sensitive 7-61. Secret. Drafted by Colonel Kent. Also sent to the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.

2 For text of the Geneva Accords of 1954, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. XVI, pp. 1505-1520.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

4. Editorial Note 4. Editorial Note

On January 4, 1962, the United States and Vietnam issued a joint communiqué outlining an expansion of economic, social, and military development programs. For text of this communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 1096-1098.

5. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, United States Information Agency (Neilson), to the Directorʼs Special Assistant (Harris) 5. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, United States Information Agency (Neilson), to the Directorʼs Special Assistant (Harris)1

Washington, January 4, 1962.

SUBJECT

Foreign Correspondent Flap in Saigon

Re your query and Bill Clarkʼs2 plea, the following paragraph from a recent letter to me from our man in Saigon3 will be illuminating: “As I am sure you realized a few weeks ago following the conclusion of the Ambassadorʼs conversations with President Diem, a background-briefing was called by the Ambassador at his home for American correspondents only. I tried very hard to argue him out of this since we have previously come under considerable fire for such a practice. I am by and large against it in principle, although I do understand there may be some very special reasons from time to time for doing it. Personally, I did not think this was one of them. The Ambassador not only conducted the briefing privately in his own home, but he released copies of the Jorden Report4 to the Americans who were at the briefing session, well ahead of the agreed-upon time of distribution the next morning to the entire press corps. I tried hard to object to this, and even in retrospect—the day after—I pointed out to him that this was not the best or most effective press-relations technique. I based my arguments not only on my own experience but on the blasts we had had from the non-American correspondents in Saigon. One of them even sent back the Jorden Report we had sent him with a little note to the effect that “please strike me from your list of publications and information materials. I no longer need to get my American propaganda from a source which restricts its outlets to its own people.”

I suggest that Don Wilson discuss this with Ambassador Nolting who arrives for consultation tomorrow. Don and I are taking him to lunch January12.5

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field-Far East (IAF), 1962. Confidential. Initialed by Nielson. Attached to Document 16.

2 Bill Clark, Public Affairs Counselor at the Embassy in London. He had forwarded a letter from the London Observer complaining about the exclusion of one of its reporters from a U.S. press briefing in Saigon.

3 John Anspacher, head of the U.S. Information Service in Vietnam.

4 A Threat to the Peace: North Vietnamʼs Effort to Conquer South Vietnam (Washington, Department of State, December 1961).

5 No record of this meeting has been found.

6. Talking Paper Prepared by Colonel Robert M. Levy, J-3, Joint Chiefs of Staff 6. Talking Paper Prepared by Colonel Robert M. Levy, J-3, Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Washington, January 4, 1962.

SUBJECT

Current Actions and Requirements in Viet-Nam

Background—National Security Action Memorandum No. 111, dated 22 November 1961 to the Secretary of State,2 stated that: (a) the US Government (USG) was prepared to join the Viet-Nam Government (GVN) in sharply increased joint efforts to prevent further deterioration of the situation in South Viet-Nam (SVN), and (b) the joint effort required the undertakings by both governments as outlined therein. The Secretary of Defense on 27 November 1961 in a memorandum, Subject: “First Phase of Viet-Nam Program”,3 assigned the responsibility for developing concepts, plans and specific requirements for carrying out the military actions listed in NSA Memo No. 111 to the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS).

—GVN efforts required: a. Decentralizing and broadening of the government to realize the full potential of all non-communist elements m the country.

b. Vitalizing appropriate wartime agencies with adequate authority to perform their functions effectively.

c. Overhauling the military establishment and command structure so as to create an effective military organization and assure a mobile offensive capability for the Army.

—The USG: a. Has provided increased airlift to the RVNAF in the form of helicopters, fight and transport aircraft.

b. Has an operational aerial reconnaissance and photography unit fulfilling GVN requirements.

c. Is providing air-ground support by presently deploying a PACAF Tactical Air Control System (TACS) to SVN and shipping 30 T28B (Nomads) to the GVN in February.

d. Is providing personnel for Special Intelligence.

e. Has added USN efforts to those of the VNN in coastal control and surveillance.

f. Has a “Jungle Jim” unit in operation in SVN.

g. Has approved and funded certain facility and communications/electronics projects.

—USG decisions are still pending on the establishment of a US Military Assistance Command, reorganization of the MAAG, and the key route defoliation plan.4

—CINCPACʼs revised list of numerous facility and communications-electronics improvements is under urgent consideration by JCS.5

—In early December 1961 Ambassador Nolting reached an agreement with President Diem intended to increase the effectiveness of GVN conduct of the war and UN/GVN relationships and military collaboration.6

—The Secretary of Defense, at the 16 December 1961 meeting at Hqs CINCPAC,7 indicated his intention to provide whatever necessary at this time, short of combat troops, to defeat communist forces in SVN.

Discussion—The USG has pressed on rapidly with the military portion of the overall program of actions deemed necessary in SVN. Receipt of highest level decisions on two pending actions and the establishment of new priorities and funding for the facilities and communications/electronics improvements will set in motion these remaining actions.

—Unfortunately, President Diem has not followed through on the agreed GVN measures as fully as hoped or desired. He continues to resist delegation of authority or to permit concentration of forces under a single commander for fear of a coup. His present stance negates the possibility of attaining an effective command structure. His disapproval of a US backed plan recently presented by Gen “Big” Minh delayed effective action against the enemy.

—There is reason to believe that a close, personal contact, sufficient to win his ultimate confidence in joint US/GVN collaboration, has not yet been effected with President Diem. The groundwork of joint agreement developed by Ambassador Nolting has not produced encouraging prospects of obtaining effective results.

—The personnel, matériel and funds being expended on SVN will in great measure be wasted unless the GVN quickly and conscientiously collaborates with the USG, improves its military system and commences the other required reforms.

—Establishment of a new US command in SVN prior to firm establishment of mutual collaboration with President Diem could prove ineffective and embarrassing.

Recommendations—It is recommended that: a. Ambassador Nolting be asked for a frank and detailed assessment of President Diemʼs present relationships with US missions now in SVN and the possibilities of obtaining the GVN efforts, changes and degree of collaboration required.

b. The attached list of questions and problem areas be thoroughly discussed with Ambassador Nolting.

c. A list of major changes in GVN policy regarding joint military collaboration and its military establishment be compiled in conference with Ambassador Nolting for his urgent development with President Diem.

Attachment8

QUESTIONS AND PROBLEM AREAS

1. Has Diem given a definite date of release of the 5,000 Rangers for the Border Patrol?

2. Has Diem given approval for a joint US/GVN military intelligence system? If not, why not?

3. Is the GVN in fact coordinating closely with us in operations involving US units? Do GVN commanders coordinate with US commanders? If not—is it due to lack of authority or lack of desire on part of RVNAF?

4. At what levels are US uniformed personnel actually participating with RVNAF on operational missions? What is the lowest level officially agreed to by the GVN?

5. Does the VNAF and VNN have suitable representation on the Joint General Staff? If not, what or who is preventing this change?

6. Is General Khanh still at odds with Colonel Vinh, CINC, VNAF? Is he still withholding permission for VNAF to strike at suitable targets in a timely manner?

7. What visible and factual changes have been made to date in the reorganization of the military establishment?

8. What is the status of the Central Intelligence Organization? Has its resources been increased? Has approval been granted for US personnel participation?

9. Are US advisors participating in operational planning-and in what degree?

10. What is the actual status of the National Internal Security Council?

11. What civic action progress is being made under GVN auspices?

12. What is the present status of the Province Chiefs in relation to: a. Command Chain—RVNAF

b. Provision of SDC troops to ARVN during large operations

c. Provision of intelligence

d. Direct line to Diem

13. Do you feel that Diem would be more tractable and more likely to collaborate closely with the USG if Nhu were not on the scene?

14. Does Diem distrust “Big Minh” to a point which negates his value as Field Force Commander?

15. In the event of a coup or Diemʼs death who in your opinion would be best successor? Most likely successor? Effect on US/GVN relations and conduct of war?

1 Source: JCS Files. Top Secret. Prepared for General Lemnitzer, for his meeting with Ambassador Nolting on January 9 at 10 a.m. Nolting arrived in the United States on January 5 and departed with Secretary McNamara for Honolulu en route to Saigon on January 14. During his stay in Washington he was involved in numerous meetings and briefings, some of which are documented in the following pages. Nolting subsequently indicated that his primary purpose in returning for consultations was to discuss the terms of reference for the new military commander in Vietnam. “Department of State, Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Frederick Nolting, June 1, 1984) For the original terms of reference agreed to at the Palm Beach meeting with the President, see Document 9.

2 SeeForeign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 272.

3 Not printed.

4 See Documents 2 and 1.

5 Not found.

6 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 306.

7 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 324.

8 Secret.

7. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 7. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 5, 1962, 7 p.m.

892. Ref: Deptel 838.2 Following is summary actions taken by GVN to implement memo of understanding contained Embtel 756.3

A) National Internal Security Council: no further information since Embtel 834.4

B) Military Command Structure. 1) Dec 28 Thuan indicated to Ambassador and McGarr general acceptance of necessity for Naval and Air Force representation on the Joint General Staff, though he stressed personnel shortage would limit size of representation for immediate future.

2) Assignment of MAAG (Civil Guard) advisors to sector commanders (Military Province Chiefs) has begun.

C) Intelligence. 1) Following transfer of NPSS to CIO, latter has given priority to organizing and overhauling police and security services. however with US assistance good quality weekly intelligence syntheses will begin appearing January 15. …

. . . . . . .

3) Assignment US military intelligence advisors awaiting availability of personnel.

[D)] Joint provincial surveys: pilot project involving provinces in Saigon area began December 28 with Tay Ninh. Second province scheduled be surveyed beginning January 8.

E) Border Ranger Force. December 28 Thuan said 35 Ranger Companies could not be released for border Ranger force. However, stated II Corps Commander has ten Ranger companies available for border patrol. An additional six Ranger companies now training could also be used, and it possible Montagnard companies could augment Rangers for border patrol. In meantime MAAG learned II Corps Commander plans use 10 of his 11 presently assigned Ranger companies and considerable portion 3,000 recently recruited Montagnards to form special battalions for operations in remote areas. Therefore, there no certainty Ranger forces will be made available solely for border operations in near future, though one of several missions these special battalions would be border patrol.

F) Military Coordination. 1) American helicopter, SEA patrol and Air Force units have for some time been working in coordination with Vietnamese forces. Coordination has been satisfactory and no problems have arisen.

2) On Dec 28 Thuan agreed to proposed joint tactical air control system and to introduction of the necessary equipment

3) GVN has agreed to assignment of five MAAG advisors per battalion.

G) Administration. No additional US advisors have yet been requested to serve with GVN civil agencies … .

H) In addition those contained pare 6 Embtel 756 following measures to broaden sense of popular participation in war effort have now been taken. 1) Wide range of economic measures announced by Vice President in Dec 30 press conference to put economy on sounder basis should have important austerity effect, hit upper classes harder than lower, and restrict availability luxury items.

2) National Economic Council, created in Dec, has been convened to meet on Jan 8.

3) Government has announced that henceforth only emergency or sick leave will be granted civil servants.

4) Government agencies recently instructed survey personnel needs with view making additional people available for duty in provinces.

5) Assembly debates on civil budget showed greater freedom of expression than in past. Speakers did not hesitate to cite government ministries for acts considered inefficient or wasteful, and several deputies flatly accused senior officials of unethical or immoral conduct. Unfortunately, this expansion of assemblyʼs role comes at time when public taking more than usually dim view of body as result passage social purification bill.

6) Constitutional Court, another recently created institution, has for first time received (limited) funds for activities. This constitutional review body will probably hear first case this year.

7) Military training program for government employees announced late December. Program now getting under way in Saigon area. City also being divided into “self defense” sectors with groups local Republican youth groups responsible for patrol and possible defensive actions.

I) Measures to develop more contacts between government and people. As in years past President spent Christmas in countryside, this time visiting two remote ARVN posts and island off coast never before visited by Chief of State. Recent acquisition two small helicopters should increase capabilities for informal travel.

J) Develop more effective information service. 1) Recent appointment well and favorably known Dang Duc Khoi as special presidential press liaison officer big step forward this field. Initial reactions of American journalists highly favorable.

2) Official VN Presse coverage security situation has improved in quality and credibility.

3) Civic Action Ministry established special information and civic action teams several SVN provinces. USIS info indicates these having good effect.

K) Bring non-communist prisoners promptly to trial. No developments.

L) Develop and announce an amnesty policy. Early in Dec Assistant SecState for National Defense generally approved an ARVN amnesty plan which had been submitted several months earlier. Plan now being translated for Task Force Saigon assessment.

M) Development of democratic institutions. See above.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-562. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to Bangkok. At the top of the first page, presumably in Woodʼs handwriting, was: “COT [Sterling J. Cottrell]-IMPT Answer to Taylorʼs Query re Progress on Joint Agree. W” No record of Taylorʼs request has been found, but telegram 838 to Saigon, January 3, requested a summary of Vietnamese actions in response to the Joint Memorandum of Understanding for discussions with Ambassador Nolting when he arrived on January 5. (Ibid., 75 l K.00/12-462)

2 See footnote 1 above.

3 Telegram 756 from Saigon transmitted the Joint Memorandum of Understanding, December 4, 1961; see the enclosure to Noltingʼs letter to Diem, Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 307.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 332.

8. Telegram From the Task Force in Vietnam to the United States Information Agency 8. Telegram From the Task Force in Vietnam to the United States Information Agency1

Saigon, January 5, 1962.

6794. Task Force Vietnam.

1. Recent appointment Dang Duc Khoi as GVN Press Representative especially, but not exclusively, for foreign correspondents most encouraging step taken to try improve GVN image abroad in recent months. However, he needs more professional assistance than is likely to be available to him here to handle not only foreign press but also general public relations, edging into political-psychological warfare field. He will need experienced propagandists whose ideas can be implemented by Khoi, back stopped by SecState Thuan who supports him.

2. Possible answer to personnel problem would be to assign several Americans via individual contracts with GVN, such as took place in Ortiz case. These should be experienced French-speaking press and public relations experts who could work not only in Saigon but in outlying regions. Preferably they would work as elements of GVN rather than in advisory “outside” status of incumbent USIS, USOM and MAAG personnel.

3. Since best professional talents likely to be found among USIA personnel, would suggest that up to four selected individuals might be made available to GVN … . They should be prepared to serve at least one year in Vietnam and expect extensive travel and perhaps residence outside of Saigon. Arrangements would be necessary to insure that neither salaries nor careers in USIA suffer… .

4. Aside from assisting GVN relations with foreign press, we would hope these officers would improve GVN relations with Vietnamese press and serve as source ideas and initiative for psywar activities in areas in which they work. Could also substantially assist in proper exploitation of proofs of North Vietnamese infiltration, subversion and covert aggression.

5. If this proposal accepted in principle, we will raise with appropriate circles of GVN to secure GVN reaction. Chance of positive answer seems worth at least initial examination of possible candidates for assignment. Please advise.

6. FYI, above originated by USIS and Station, then cleared with Task Force Saigon. Please deliver to Task Force Vietnam.

End of message

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8. GVN. 1962. Information & Civic Action. No classification appears on the source text.

9. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 9. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)1

Washington, January 6, 1962, 1:40 p.m.

061840Z. Top Secret Eyes Only for Admiral Felt and General McGarr From Lemnitzer.

1. Purpose of this message is to inform you of decision pertaining to U.S. command organization in Vietnam made during Presidentʼs conference with Sec Def and JCS at Palm Beach on Wednesday, 3 January.2 Strict instructions at that time forbade any dissemination whatsoever of the discussion or decision. Sec Def has now modified these instructions to permit informing you on a strictly personal, not-to-be divulged-to-others basis.

2. In attendance at Palm Beach conference were President, Vice President, Sec Def McNamara, Dep Sec Def Gilpatric, Gen. Decker, Adm. Anderson, Gen. Smith (representing Gen. LeMay who was ill), Gen. Shoup, Gen. Taylor, Gen. Harkins and myself. Harkins invited by President to attend.

3. There was a thorough discussion of the situation in Vietnam and of the proposition that a reorganization of the U.S. military set-up was desirable in order to create in the minds of Diem and other Vietnam officials an awareness of the gravity of the situation, the increased support to be furnished by the U.S. and the necessity for greater acceptance on the part of the GVN of U.S. guidance, advice and counsel. Inherent in the proposed reorganization was the appointment of a senior U.S. military commander with terms of reference which would give him a position of greater authority and influence than that heretofore given the Chief, MAAG.

4. After full consideration of the pros and cons of the proposition, and particularly of the specific terms of reference (quoted below) which had been drafted jointly by the Sec Def and Sec State, the President approved the recommendation of the Secretaries of State and Defense that a U.S. Military Assistance Command should be established in Vietnam at an early date. He approved the terms of reference as drafted. He also approved the nomination of Lieutenant General Harkins to be commander of the new command with rank of general.

5. The question of timing of the release of this appointment was discussed. It was decided that no announcement would be made until after discussions with Ambassador Nolting who was due to arrive Washington 5 January.3 It now appears that any announcement will be delayed until after return of Amb Nolting to Saigon in order to permit him to accomplish the necessary preliminary contacts with Diem. (Note: For your information, Sec Def is planning next general meeting, such as was held 16 December, for 15 January at Honolulu.4 Nolting would presumably attend enroute back to Saigon.

6. Approved terms of reference follow: “1. The Senior U.S. Military Commander in South Vietnam will have the direct responsibility for all U.S. military policy, operations and assistance in that country, and the authority to discuss—both the U.S. and Vietnamese military operations directly with the President of Vietnam and the leaders of the GVN. The Senior U.S. Military Commander will also furnish advice to the GVN on all matters relative to security and maintaining internal security in South Vietnam and to the organization and employment of the RVNAF and of counterinsurgency or other paramilitary forces.

“2. The Senior U.S. Military Commander will have the title ‘Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command—Vietnam.’

“3. The Senior U.S. Military Commander will have direct access to CINCPAC and through him to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense.

“4. Since the U.S. Ambassador is responsible for political and basic policy matters, the Senior U.S. Military Commander will consult with him on such matters. In case of differences of view, both representatives would be free to communicate such differences to Washington for decision in accordance with already existing procedures.

“5. The Ambassador and the Senior Military Commander will keep each other fully informed, especially on all high-level contacts with the GVN, and including major military plans and pending operations.”

7. It is of utmost importance that you hold contents of this message strictly to yourselves until further instructions are issued here.

1 Source: National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers, Folder 24. Top Secret Priority; Eyes Only. A handwritten draft by Lemnitzer, dated January 6, is ibid., L-211-71.

2 See Document 2.

3 Regarding Noltingʼs visit, January 5-14, see Documents 14-16.

4 Regarding the first Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu, December 16, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 324; regarding the second, see footnote 1, Document 6.

10. Editorial Note 10. Editorial Note

An undated talking paper, published in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pages 428-439, was prepared for a briefing of President Kennedy by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Lemnitzer, scheduled for January 9, 1962. Neither President Kennedyʼs log nor General Lemnitzerʼs appointment book indicates that the two met on January 9 on the subject of South Vietnam. They did meet on January 6, but the subject at that meeting was Laos.

11. Paper Prepared by the Task Force in Vietnam 11. Paper Prepared by the Task Force in Vietnam1

Saigon, January 10, 1962.

OUTLINE PLAN OF COUNTERINSURGENCY OPERATIONS

Table of Contents

1. Over-all Concept of Operations

2. Operations Control and Coordination

3. Military Counterinsurgency Operations

4. Political, Economic, and Psychological Counterinsurgency Operations

5. Time Phasing of Counterinsurgency Operations

6. Geographical Phasing of Counterinsurgency Operations

Annexes

A. Operations of Control and Coordination

B. Political, Economic, and Psychological Counterinsurgency Operations

C. Concept of Operations for Restoring Security in Red and Pink Areas

D. Concept of Operations for Maintaining Security in White Areas

E. Geographical Priorities for Restoring Security in Red and Pink Areas

1. Overall Concept of Operations

The concept of counterinsurgency operations envisions combined use of political, economic, psychological, military and paramilitary efforts to maintain security and government control and support where they still largely exist (white areas) and to restore them in areas where they have broken down to a greater or lesser extent (red and pink areas).

For purposes of definition a red area is considered one where the VC operate with virtual impunity, enjoy the support, voluntary or not, of the populace, and are susceptible of expulsion only through a major military effort. A pink area is one in which the VC and the GVN are competing for dominance and in which, for example, the VC may control by night and the GVN by day. In white areas the GVN by and large exercises normal control and VC activities are mostly harassments rather than more significant actions.

It is clear that in each and every province the gamut of security runs from white (at least in the area of the provincial capital) through pink to red. It is also clear that the type of counterinsurgency operations conducted will differ substantially, depending upon the degree of security in a given area.

The main considerations which should govern the priority of counterinsurgency operations are the following: 1. Every effort should be made to keep existing white areas white through appropriate political, economic, psychological and paramilitary measures. Military forces should not be diverted for use in white areas, but effective paramilitary forces are essential for maintaining security in those areas.

2. Simultaneously, to extend security control from white to pink and red areas in application of the amoeba principle, combined political, economic, psychological, military and paramilitary efforts should be mounted on a carefully coordinated, phased basis in successive selected geographical areas. Flexibility is necessary in the choice of these areas.

3. At the same time constant pressure should be maintained (essentially by military means) on the Viet Cong in other pink and red areas in order to keep them off balance, and psychological/civic action efforts should be carried out to convince the populace in these other areas that the Government is still aware of their existence. Gradually these areas would become the targets for major coordinated, phased actions of the type outlined in 2, above.

2. Operational Control and Coordination

Planning, control and coordination of all counterinsurgency operations (whether in white, pink or red areas) are a key to success. Policy should be made by the national-level Internal Security Council under the direction of the President. Execution of this policy through planning, controlling and coordinating the combined political, economic, psychological, military and paramilitary operations should be performed by a Central Director of Plans and Operations under the Internal Security Council. The Secretary of State for the Presidency could serve as this official provided he is relieved of other functions.

Security committees should be established at the regional, provincial and district levels, to insure thorough coordination at all stages of operations. These committees will consist of the appropriate officials at each level responsible for military and civil affairs.

3. Military Counterinsurgency Operations (see MAAG paper on “The Tactics and Techniques of Counter-Insurgency Operations”2 for description of military counterinsurgency operations).

4. Political, Economic and Psychological Counterinsurgency Operations

Political, socio-economic and psychological counterinsurgency measures at the local and village level will vary in nature depending upon the degree of security in a given area. These measures are spelled out in Annex B, and are summarized below.

In the political field they include steps to improve the compensation, selection and training of village and hamlet officials; a continued training program for district officials; and the establishment of advisory councils of notables at the village level. These steps appear practical only in white and pink areas, and can be extended to red areas only as they are made whiter.

In the socio-economic field expansion and acceleration of regular village-level programs in areas now white or light pink or which become so as a result of military operations should be conducted in order to demonstrate to the people that the Government offers them real hope for improvement of their living standards. This program should be designed to give each and every village a basic minimum of government-established facilities. The aim should be to do this within a matter of weeks, not years. This program should be executed through the regular economic and social ministries of the GVN down through the provinces and districts. At the top a Cabinet subcommittee would provide for coordination, and at the bottom civilian civic action teams would assist village officials.

In addition, certain special programs would be useful in areas where regular programs cannot operate. These special programs include the rural reconstruction teams now operating under the control of the Ministry of Civic Action, special military task forces consisting of military civic action and psychological warfare teams and protecting troops, similar “hit-and-run” civic action operations by the Ministry of Civic Action, and a special impact flying-doctor program.

In the information field the military psychological warfare forces should be responsible in red and dark pink areas because of the protection required by operating units. This would parallel military responsibility for civic action in the same areas. On the other hand, information activities in existing white or light pink areas and in areas where security has been restored should be handled by the civilian agencies of the GVN. Civilian information specialists should operate in conjunction with civic action specialists working on the breakthrough program at the village level since the most credible information will be that based on actual accomplishment.

5. Time Phasing of Counterinsurgency Operations

Major phased, coordinated actions aimed at restoration of security in red and pink areas will center around military operations, but will also require plans and operations in the political, psychological, economic and paramilitary fields (see Annex C for detailed outline). Those actions against any given red and/or pink target area can be visualized in three successive phases: preparatory, military, and follow-up. Careful coordination of all aspects of the action—political, socio-economic, psychological, military and paramilitary—is required at each phase to insure that military effort will not be wasted.

Maintenance of security in white areas will also require coordinated action (see Annex D for detailed outline). In these areas the focus should be on providing village and hamlet protection through paramilitary action and helping the villagers to improve their standard of living through socio-economic action. Political and information action should be closely related to these two programs. All of these activities should be executed forthwith and simultaneously if white areas are to be kept white.

6. Geographical Phasing of Counterinsurgency Operations

It is essential to preserve as white areas those areas which are still relatively white, and simultaneous action should be taken in all such areas. This should include, as a minimum, all areas adjacent to provincial capitals, most district seats, and the lowlands area of Central Viet-Nam.

Concomitantly major actions aimed at the restoration of security in red and pink areas through the application of the amoeba concept should be initiated on a selected, successive basis (see Annex E). First priority for such action should be given to those areas which are essential to the continued existence of the Government of Viet-Nam. To preserve the national entity it may be necessary to give priority to areas which by themselves do not contribute materially to the over-all strength of Viet-Nam, but which are controlled by the VC as potential areas from which to attack. In determining geographical priorities for preserving the base of government and eliminating the treat to security through application of the amoeba concept, several factors will need to be considered (population density, economic importance, area strength of the Viet Cong, suitability to isolation from Viet Cong, etc.). It is believed that on balance first priority should be given to the provinces which surround Saigon to assure a secure primary base for further GVN operations. The second priority should be given to the remaining Southern provinces because of their population, their importance as the rice basket of Viet-Nam and the greater difficulty confronting the VC in that area in reinforcing their strength through large scale infiltration from North Viet-Nam. The red and pink areas in the coastal low lands north of Saigon to the 17th parallel should also be given simultaneous second priority since this area includes a large segment of the population and controls the major route of land communication to the North.

This does not mean that other areas are to be neglected. Simultaneous action will continue toward the establishment of a border force aimed at reducing infiltration. Concurrently, major military actions will be taken in other areas against Viet Cong targets of opportunity as they arise, since it is necessary to keep the Viet Cong from consolidating their hold in any area. However, phased across-the-board military, political, socio-economic, and psychological action would be concentrated in the first instance on the area surrounding Saigon.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 65 F 115, Counterinsurgency Plan. Secret. The annexes are not printed. Transmitted under a January 18 memorandum from Mendenhall to Nolting, which indicated that all agencies represented on the Task Force in Vietnam had approved the plan and that the Task Force now awaited permission from Nolting to present the plan to the Government of Vietnam. Also attached was a second memorandum of January 18 from Mendenhall to the Task Force noting two changes recommended by MAAG and USIS, which are incorporated in the source text; another memorandum of January 10 from Mendenhall to the Task Force transmitting copies of an earlier draft; a handwritten note from Mendenhall to Nolting of December 15 specifying various changes from earlier drafts; and a covering memorandum from Mendenhall to the Task Force transmitting the first draft on December 1.

The plan was transmitted to the Department of State as an attachment to despatch 429, April 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-662) The despatch, signed by Mendenhall, reported that the plan was designed to implement the “Counterinsurgency Plan” developed and approved for all of South Vietnam in 1961 (Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 1), but that it was not submitted to the Government of Vietnam because in the interim the British Advisory Mission had submitted the Delta Pacification Plan (Document 51) for approval. The despatch reported that the two plans were compatible, but that the Embassy saw merit in avoiding swamping the Government of Vietnam with too much paper at once. Finally, it stated that the U.S. Interagency Committee on Province Rehabilitation, established in late March 1962, was using the Plan as its basic guide.

2 A manual written by General McGarr and distributed to all field advisers, first published in November 1960. Reference here is presumably to the third revision, dated October 1, 1961. The fourth revision, February 10, 1962, is in Washington National Records Center. RG 84. Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 66 A 870, Internal Security, 1961.

12. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Johnson) to the Director (Rostow) 12. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Johnson) to the Director (Rostow)1

Washington, January 11, 1962.

[Here follow items 1 and 2.]

3. U.S. Economic Program for Viet Nam. Despite regular pressure by me, General Taylorʼs staff and a member of the Task Force staff, Washington still did not, as of last week, have a clear picture of what kind of economic programs are planned by the USOM and Country Team (or Task Force Saigon as it is called) to complement the new military and political effort. Last week AID did receive a 300-page statement on the FY 1962 program2 and, at my urging, plans to prepare a summary of it for general distribution. The first impression of those who have seen it is that it is not a carefully worked out selective program, but rather a general compendium.

The general feeling in Washington seems to be that the USOM tends simply to retail to Washington the proposals it receives from the GVN. A particular aspect of the program which may be subject to this criticism is Diemʼs road program which the field now proposes that we support. I was assured by the Deputy Director of the USOM who was present at the last Task Force meeting that the MAAG had carefully reviewed the program and concurred in it. However, a member of a military civic action team who talked to a Task Force group last fall was quite critical of the road program both on the general grounds that it was much beyond GVN capacity and on the more specific grounds that past GVN road planning had left much to be desired.

Somehow, the Task Force needs to get hold of the economic program and attempt to make some sense of it. One problem in this regard is that, for understandable reasons, the Taylor report3 did not contain specific recommendations in this area, though it did contain a discussion of possible areas of concentration.

4. Other Programs in Viet Nam. Among the other important programs in Viet Nam on which we still lack much evidence of progress are the military civic action program and a Montagnard program. In both cases, I believe, a U.S. proposal has been submitted to the GVN and we are awaiting a response. I am not clear on the status of reforms in the intelligence area though I know that some progress was made initially. The problem of command structure is discussed just below.

5. How much more failure of performance do we tolerate from Diem? We have recently recommitted ourselves to support of Diem. While this was necessary and proper under the circumstances, we must, if he now fails to perform adequately, give serious consideration to alternatives to him. The situation in Viet Nam is too precarious to permit a prolonged delay in making such an assessment and determination.

While no single factor can be made the basis for decision, programs on the problem of command structure is central. If Diem refuses to yield any significant authority over military operations to his military commanders it will be very difficult to mount effective operations against the VC. As you know, Diem promised to take action, but his conversation with Nolting at the time that the recent agreement was consummated cast considerable doubt on his real willingness to act. (I prepared a paper4 which is in my files on alternative coup situations that may develop and how we should react to them. Walt Rostow sent this paper to State where it was favorably received by those concerned.)

[Here follows the remainder of the memorandum.]

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron. Secret. Johnson, who had just left the National Security Council Staff for the Department of State, indicated in a covering memorandum that he had prepared the study in an effort to fill in his successors in the NSC and that it provided a picture of where the United States stood on various issues at the time.

2 Not found.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 210.

4 SeeForeign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 292.

13. Memorandum for the Record 13. Memorandum for the Record1

Saigon, January 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting—President Diem and General McGarr, 11 January 1962

The meeting, which took place in the Presidentʼs office, was marked throughout by the Presidentʼs unusually attentive and receptive mood.

General McGarr opened the discussion by telling the President that he was leaving the following day to attend a meeting in Hawaii which would be attended by the U.S. Secretary of Defense, Ambassador Nolting, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Mr. Bundy—a special advisor to President Kennedy, and by CINCPAC and members of his staff. He explained to the President that there were some matters which would probably come up which could be discussed profitably by the two of them before his departure, with a view to getting the Presidentʼs ideas before the conference.

One of these items was the need for a concrete military plan to defeat the insurgency in Vietnam as a prerequisite to the consideration and authorization of support for an augmentation in Vietnamese forces beyond the presently agreed 200,000. That a concrete, phased plan would be evidence that the best possible employment was being made of all forces now in being. General McGarr recalled the plan to the President—describing it as the geographically phased plan which had been developed here prior to General Taylorʼs visit and which was used as a basis for the “Campaign Plan.” That the initial plan had been submitted to Mr. Thuan for consideration at that time. In answer to the Presidentʼs question about the “Campaign Plan,” General McGarr said it had been submitted to the JGS about two weeks ago and that Mr. Thuan had a copy. General McGarr then reminded the President that a joint RVNAF and MAAG study had indicated that there would probably be a need for 15 divisions—amounting to some 278,000 men by the end of 1963. Although he did not want to press President Diem, the General suggested that the Presidentʼs ideas or an approval of the plan would be most welcome. The President agreed to discuss the plan with Secretary Thuan who would inform General McGarr of his decision before his departure on the following day.

Brief mention was made of the overall Counter Insurgency Plan2 which had been given to the President by the Ambassador last February and which, of course, was more encompassing than the purely military “Campaign Plan.”

General McGarr next mentioned Admiral Feltʼs sense of urgency, which he shared, over the increasing VC build up and the need to contain the threat as rapidly as possible. That in this connection, he felt one of the most urgent tasks was the proper training of military and paramilitary forces. Admittedly, the most serious obstacle to adequate training was operational commitments. The General suggested that if the armed forces were asked to follow the Presidentʼs example of dedication and the work days were increased to nine hours—six days per week—much valuable time could be gained for training. Also, that the Presidentʼs declaration of a State of National Emergency constituted a good preparatory move for such an action. The President stated that he thought an increase in work hours to be desirable and promised to consider it.

Another item which General McGarr felt would be discussed at the meeting in Hawaii was the carrying out of a major military operation in Zone “D.” He told President Diem that, during the previous meeting at CINCPAC Headquarters,3 he had briefed the Secretary of Defense on the preliminary plans for this action. That the current status of General Minhʼs Plan would therefore be requested due to U.S. interest in a significant military victory as an indication of concerted military action and as a psychological stimulus to the Vietnamese people. It was agreed that Binh Duong Province and Zone “D” operations were of primary interest because of their importance with regard to the safety of Saigon. When General McGarr referred to a briefing on these operations which he believed had been given by General Minh to Secretary Thuan and possibly to the President himself, President Diem said that General Minh had talked to Secretary Thuan but that nothing really concrete had been discussed. He added that he would always agree to any plan which would help to achieve a permanent victory but that he felt the Zone “D” operation would still require a great deal of technical analysis and careful consideration by the “technicians” if meaningful long range success were to be ensured. The President stated that failure in such an important engagement could destroy the confidence of his people in the ability of the government to achieve victory, even with increased American assistance and also harm American prestige as well.

General McGarr agreed that the Zone “D” operation was a difficult undertaking, but he pointed out that timing was important. Not only would the actual operation take time but the preparation for it must be considered, including a short period of special training for the troops to be committed. To meet the needs of preparation, coordination and execution, at least two or three months would be required. General McGarr then briefly reviewed the plan for the President. Initially, in accordance with the Presidentʼs own idea, a blocking force (6 battalions taken from the 5th Division) would isolate Zone “D” from the Province of Tay Ninh by military action in Binh Duang. General McGarr expressed the opinion that Zone “D” was militarily feasible but required immediate action to release the first increment of three battalions and four Ranger companies for two weeks of special preparatory training in unconventional warfare prior to starting the attack. This initial increment would be employed to clear the first designated entrapment area. Subsequent phases requiring additional troops would complete the encirclement of the Zone “D” area on three sides. This would result in a sack being drawn around the area except in the Northwest corner. The phased action in Binh Duong Province would also assist by forcing the VC from the periphery into the center of Zone “D.” In the final phase of the military action, the 23d Division and three or four Airborne battalions would drive Southwest into the pocket to annihilate the enemy. To capitalize on mobility, helicopters would be used to move troops in each phase, to include the movement into position of the 23d Division. Two special helicopter-borne companies and airborne units would stand by to assist wherever needed and to deny access or exit to the entrapment area by the encircled VC. River Forces would assist in a blocking role along the Song Be. In the final phase of the military operation, air bombardment would be carried out by AD-6ʼs on air alert, directed to the target by radar or by the newly acquired TAC System. The ability to vector planes into the target by radar would give them an all weather capability.

In connection with the Zone “D” operation, General McGarr told the President that with final approval, defoliant would be used in the operation. When the President said that he had given Ambassador Nolting his approval for the use of defoliant several weeks before, General McGarr explained that originally, approval from higher American authorities to conduct a test only had been received.4 That this test defoliation along Highway 15 from Bien Hoa to Vung Tau could be started as soon as the necessary material, maps and aerial photos were received (about the 12th to 15th January). If approved as part of the Zone “D” operation, it was intended to spray along roads where needed and along the banks of the Song Be. Since the results of killing vegetation requires two weeks, and in some cases, may have to be repeated, it was essential to start as soon as possible. The President agreed.

The next major point raised by General McGarr was the preparation of a plan for the clearing of Viet Cong from a “Test Province.” This had been suggested by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the December meeting in Hawaii, at which time, the General had understood that the plan could be implemented in any province acceptable to the Vietnamese Government and for which resources could be made available. U. S. authorization for increased Civil Guard and Self Defense Forces strength above presently agreed ceilings would be approved for selected province. After a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of carrying out the “test” clearance in Binh Duang rather than in some other province, the President said that he would interpose no objection, but pointed out that this would be a lengthy operation and would have to be closely supervised over a long period of time. Binh Duong is a heavily infested province with only ten of the forty-eight villages under government control. In his view, initial action of establishing an infrastructure in “defended” villages, already underway, together with a forced resettlement of the people to strategic or more densely populated areas was an act of surgery which would, at first, require a sizeable military force. This resettlement was necessary to ensure that the people would not return to the “bush.” President Diem said the final success of this operation would depend on the provision of sufficient bulldozers to permit the clearance of land on which to produce crops by September. This entire action would require about 8-12 months.

Further, the President expressed the thought that Binh Duong could not be considered an isolated operation but must be thought of as part of an overall plan to free the entire crescent formed by the Provinces of Phaoc Thanh, Binh Duong, Tay Ninh, Long An and extending into the Plaine des Joncs in Kien Tuong and Dinh Tuong Provinces. He said that otherwise the province of Binh Duong would not be permanently tenable. General McGarr agreed that to clear and hold Binh Duong Province would require effective, dedicated action by the military, much time and all available national resources. Because of the likelihood that it would be some time before Civil Guard and Self Defense Forces could safely be recruited from the local population, there would be a requirement to station either regular military forces there or that paramilitary forces be taken from other provinces and stationed in Binh Duong. This would violate the basic “local area—home guard” principle of the Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps. The President said this operation would only be worthwhile if part of a larger clearing action and if backed by necessary construction and road building equipment to carry out the required resettlement plans.

President Diem next told General McGarr that his people in Kien Hoa had killed the secret secretary of the Communist Executive Central Committee for South Vietnam and had seized a considerable amount of Viet Cong records. From the seized minutes of a Communist meeting, it was learned that instructions had been issued to increase guerrilla strength in all villages—up to company strength where necessary. The President stated that the documents were being closely examined by a newly created Joint Committee consisting of three members of what he called his CIA and three members of the RVNAF J-2. The new procedure which the President had ordered following his reorganization of the Sureté a week before, was that all seized documents would be screened by the capturing force for information of immediate value and then turned over to the joint committee for careful study. General McGarr commented that this implementation of the proposed Central Intelligence Organization concept was a valuable step forward. Commenting on the information that orders had been issued to the Viet Cong to increase its strength at village level, the General said that this was further evidence that the Communists had to be separated from the people at the lowest level. The President agreed and then went on to say that the seized documents also revealed VC plans to establish a series of fortified villages in the I and II Corps, particularly in the foothills of the mountains along the coast and that their plan appeared to be to leapfrog these strong points closer and closer to the vital coastal plain. Additional information obtained from the “Kien Hoa” papers was that the VC were having serious trouble because of desertions. Their forces were complaining about their physical fatigue, the fact that their families were living in poverty and neglect, and the idea that they were rarely permitted to visit larger villages to find amusement and relaxation. Further, there was an increasing fear on their part to regroup into larger units because of their vulnerability to artillery and air attack. The overall result was low morale.

The President next commented that, in war, one should not expect an unbroken chain of continuous victories. General McGarr agreed that sound planning must always consider that there will be ups and downs before final victory is achieved. The President then continued by saying that the most immediate action required in Vietnam is in the villages. He spoke of his desire to implement a plan which he admitted to be dangerous but which he considered essential—the establishment of strong posts in the provinces of the Center and in the foothills—patterned after the one at Mamg Buk. These would require helicopter support for supply and relief of personnel, but they would permit ARVN forces to radiate and control surrounding areas. This was the original concept of the frontier posts which were too small and inadequately supported—now the President felt that the strategic concept should be adapted to the establishment of 5 or 6 such posts in the Center where the Viet Cong were concentrating their diversionary efforts. General McGarr reminded the President that this was the principle of the deep penetration battalions previously agreed upon and the Mobile Forest Forces which MAAG had proposed. As for the West, the President stated the need for more and better trained Civil Guard and Self Defense Forces—and the establishment of an adequate infrastructure in the villages. That this would free the Army which would, however, still be needed to fight the VC and to clear bases in isolated areas such as the Plaine des Joncs and Cau Mau where the lack of population made the “defended village-Strategic Hamlet” concept absolutely inapplicable. At this point, the President repeated his thought that overall planning should not be restricted to the idea of small augmentations. There should be a mass increase to meet immediate needs. It is easier to demobilize than to recruit and train piecemeal. For this purpose, there was need of an increase in instructors who could train Vietnamese instructors, who, in turn would then train additional cadres. A major problem was the relief of men held too long in combat or in isolated areas. In Malaya the President added, the British had well trained professional soldiers and leaders from outside—and they still had to be relieved periodically. A French Admiral had once told the President that troops, even when fighting a withdrawal action, must be provided with echeloned rest areas or physical fatigue would result in lowered morale and loss of combat effectiveness. General McGarr commented that the MAAG recommended establishment of the three infantry training regiments under the 20,000 increase was to meet this specific requirement. He also told President Diem he sincerely hoped they would be trained and used in their intended role of a “rotational training base.”

Reverting to the need for leadership, the President commented on what he described as inadequate leadership in some military operations. The cause of this was that commanders had not had enough troop experience and had been advanced too rapidly. In the opinion of the President, the training of company grade officers—to the point where they can clearly understand the capabilities of their men was of utmost importance. Of equal importance was the need for quality as well as quantity in cadres for the Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps.

In a somewhat bitter tone, the President next made the statement that his detractors, when they indicated his lack of plans, never mentioned the fact that, for years, he had asked for increased army strength, the establishment of an adequately trained and armed Civil Guard and bulldozers sorely needed in his strategic road building and village infrastructure projects. General McGarr reminded him that working together, they had succeeded in overcoming objections and obstacles in securing these needed resources, but agreed fully that much valuable time had been lost. The President remarked that we were now paying the penalty for the lost time and stated emphatically that there should be no more delays. He said that contrary to his detractors, he did want a plan. That he would agree to any plan which would lead to victory. He insisted strongly, however, that any plan of action had to be realistic and sustained rather than fast and spectacular.

The President next repeated some of the information which had been gleaned from the papers seized in Kien Hoa, adding that the Communists are concentrating on mine warfare. Materials are brought in from North Vietnam and the mines are manufactured locally.

Once again, reverting to the subject of plans, the President stated that his problem was not the lack of plans, but the lack of men and means to implement them fully and properly. Another serious handicap was that RVNAF leadership is not mature. General McGarr assured him that the “Campaign Plan” for which he had suggested approval was a good guide—to which the President responded that ultimate victory depended primarily on assuring the good will of the people. When General McGarr repeated that his authorities would like a formal plan in broad terms showing the coordination of effort by all available GVN forces, the President replied that he would examine it immediately and that he was sure that he could accept it, in principle, since General McGarr was present in Vietnam during the most critical periods and understood what the problems were.

The next subject raised was that of the implementation of the Border Control Plan which had been agreed during General Taylorʼs visit. The President said that there simply was not enough military strength to meet all requirements and that he could not see how a 5000 man force could be made available at this time, but he did agree that a start should be made along the border between Vietnam and Laos. For this purpose, he agreed to release to General Dinh six Ranger companies now in training and to make an additional four companies available to him. The total Ranger strength in that area would then be 20 companies, 10 of which, as is now the case, formed into Ranger battalions, the other 10 companies to be used as a border force. (General Khanh feels it will be most difficult to release additional Ranger companies to Dinh at this time because of the battle for “rice” in the Delta.)

In conclusion, the President again expressed his ideas on plans and reminded General McGarr that he had been following one for five years. He was convinced that prime importance should be attributed to the establishment of a suitable infrastructure in the villages, since it was at this level that the VC mobilized by terror to separate the people from the government. Before any success could be achieved, it was first necessary to restore confidence by taking care of the problems at the lowest level. Toward this end, he had recently increased the salary of the village notables. In order to establish a workable infrastructure, it was necessary to resettle the people. Following this, energetic action could be taken, but it must be realistic and part of a long range operation.

As the meeting ended, the President told General McGarr that he could assume that approval would be given to the “Campaign Plan,” official concurrence and any possible reservations would be made known to the General by Secretary Thuan, the next morning.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 GVN. Secret. Transmitted to Ambassador Nolting under a memorandum of January 19 from McGarr; also attached was a talking paper of January 15 for McGarrʼs use at the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu, January 15, based in part on this conversation. McGarr stated in the transmittal memorandum that Nolting might want to review the papers before his meeting with Thuan on January 20. No record of the January 20 meeting has been found.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 1.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 324.

4 See Document 1.

14. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 14. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Ambassador Frederick Nolting, 10:00 a.m., January 12, 19622

Following a week of calls and briefings about town, Ambassador Nolting from Saigon will call on you at 10:00 a.m., Friday. I gather that all has gone well during his visit except possibly for his early reservations over the changed military set-up in Saigon. Although these have probably been allayed by this time, you may want to ask him how he views his future relationship with General Harkins.

Among other topics which you may wish to discuss are: a. Noltingʼs impression of Diemʼs intentions and capabilities to fulfill his part of our bargain with him.

b. The priorities as he sees them among the many measures planned for South Viet-Nam.

c. His views of the defoliant program.

d. The help we might seek from other countries.

Maxwell D. Taylor3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-026-69. Secret.

2 No record of Noltingʼs meeting with the President has been found. President Kennedyʼs log book indicates that Nolting, Harriman, and Taylor met with the President from 10 to 10:55 a.m. on January 12 and Secretary Rusk joined them for the last 10 minutes of the meeting. During an interview Nolting indicated that President Kennedy agreed during the meeting that the Ambassador should have overall authority in Vietnam and that the military commanderʼs terms of reference should reflect this relationship. President Kennedy, according to Nolting, directed General Taylor, in the course of the meeting, to revise the draft terms of reference along these lines. (Department of State, Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Frederick Nolting, June 1, 1984) A record of a telephone conversation later on January 12 between Rusk and McNamara indicates that the President was presented a paper incorporating Noltingʼs views on the relationship between the Ambassador and military commander. The record says that the President handed the paper to Taylor. (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations, 1/1/62-2/19/62) Possibly this paper is Document 17. For an account of the specific points at issue between Ambassador Nolting and the Department of Defense, see Document 18.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

15. Editorial Note 15. Editorial Note

On January 12, 1962, from 2:10 until 4:20 p.m., Ambassador Nolting testified in Executive Session before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. He was accompanied by Sterling Cottrell of the Vietnam Task Force and John P. White of the Congressional Relations Office, neither of whom contributed in any substantive way to the discussion. In his opening remarks Nolting emphasized the minimal extent of United States involvement in Vietnam and discussed the condition of the Vietnamese Government and the low level of public morals. In response to questions Nolting speculated on whether the motivation for the upsurge in Viet Cong/North Vietnamese activity during the preceding 2 years was economic or political, discussed the viability of the Diem regime, expressed his feeling that the situation in Vietnam was primarily the result of Chinese Communist expansionism, commented on biased press coverage in Vietnam, and answered queries from Senator Fulbright on the need for social reform in Vietnam. Some of the discussion was off the record and therefore not recorded. For text of Noltingʼs statement to the Committee and related questions and answers, see Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, volume XIV, pages 31-64.

16. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, United States Information Agency (Neilson), to the Deputy Director of the Agency (Wilson) 16. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, United States Information Agency (Neilson), to the Deputy Director of the Agency (Wilson)1

Washington, January 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Your Appointment With Ambassador Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.

PAO John Anspacher has briefed the Ambassador to discuss the following topics with us: 1. Washington News Leaks: Anspacher expressed concern about leaks of classified details of U.S. activities in Viet-Nam to the press in Washington. He argued that while it may be necessary to get some things on the public record for the benefit of the American people, it also would be desirable to inform the mission when such a leak is in the making so it can be prepared for press questions there. He also suggested that some people may be merely talking too much and these apparent leaks are actually slips. Comment: It is true that both leaks and slips have occurred in the Department, the Pentagon and the White House. There is, however, little this agency can do about either controlling such events or alerting the post before the fact. This is a matter that should properly be taken up with the agencies concerned. We have no choice but to go with the news as it develops.

2. Information Advisors in Viet-Nam: It has been suggested to the Ambassador that there is a need for American information/psychological operations advisors at the Presidency level in Saigon and at the province level throughout the country. Anspacher contends that while this is probably a proper role for USOM, in practical terms USIA is the Agency with the competent personnel in this field ….

. . . . . . .

3. British Cooperation in the Advisor Field: Anspacher initiated talks with the British Embassy in Viet-Nam, suggesting that the British and Americans in Viet-Nam concert efforts to improve the whole Vietnamese information/psychological effort here. The British reportedly showed considerable interest and said they would write a letter to the Foreign Office on the subject. Comment: We think that the U.S. should keep control of the information/psychological operation in Viet-Nam and the British should not be involved at the policy level. If they wish to offer assistance at the operating level we might welcome it depending upon the circumstances and terms of reference. The British paramilitary mission has already caused us trouble by moving beyond its proper role.

4. Anspacher also suggested a week-long survey trip by Mr. Murrow to look into information/psychological problems the GVN faces and to make recommendations on how to solve them. He further suggested that one of the recommendations emerging from such a survey could be the appointment of an American information advisor to the Presidency, as mentioned above. Comment: The GVN has been surveyed by a great number of U.S. missions already. Another one is hardly in order at this time on such a touchy subject. Certainly there is no need for an official of Mr. Murrowʼs level to get involved in this, although IAF still is trying to get the Director to the Far East.

. . . . . . .

6. Critical News Coverage of the GVN: The Ambassador is rather exercised about critical items appearing in the commercial media. He feels that whereas the GVN is far from an ideal instrument it is all we have to work with and because of the sensitivities in the Palace a critical press has a directly adverse effect on our efforts to get our job done since the GVN is harder to negotiate with after each critical item appears.

A particular case in point is the recent Newsweek story by Bob Elegant that caused that issue of the magazine to be banned. (Without mentioning Newsweek he expressed this general view at the Viet-Nam Task Force meeting yesterday.) After the banning of Newsweek we received a telegram from our PAO saying that Newsweek had decided to suspend distribution in Viet-Nam. We sent back a Task Force telegram instructing them to protest this censorship to the GVN. At this point the VOA carried the story on Pham Vuy Co. In his sharp protest to us about the VOA broadcast, the Ambassador referenced our telegram asking them to protest the GVNʼs censorship. As you know Mr. Murrow assured the Ambassador that there would be no repetition of this sort of VOA transmission.

Anspacher has counseled the Ambassador that the image of the GVN in the world press can be no better than the face the GVN presents to the public and until it is willing to improve its press relations there is not much we can do about it. He also told the Ambassador that our media could not ignore stories that were getting attention in the domestic and foreign press without damaging credibility of our news coverage.

We suggest that the following topics might be taken up with Ambassador Nolting: 1. What is the Ambassadorʼs view of the role and mission of USIS in such emergencies as exist in Viet-Nam? How far should USIS go in support of the GVNʼs information/psychological activities? Do we have enough, and the right kind, of personnel?

2. What are his views on the problems of relations with foreign (British, French, etc.) correspondents in Saigon? (cf my memo to Mr. Harris of Jan. 4)2 We should take this opportunity to point out the pitfalls of American—only briefings and emphasize the idea that the best way to get a cooperative press is to offer all possible cooperation.

3. Is USIS-Embassy coordination adequate in his opinion? Is he getting the support he needs?

4. Is Washington support to the information program adequate?

5. Should we be looking to an expanded program in the next year?

6. Would it be useful to institute an adaptation of the Lao Muong Information Program in Viet-Nam?

Ambassador Nolting will be accompanied by Mr. Sterling J. Cottrell, Director of the Viet-Nam Task Force.3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field—Far East (IAF), 1962. Secret. Initialed by Neilson.

2 Document 5.

3 No record of this meeting has been found.

17. Terms of Reference for the Senior United States Military Commander in Vietnam 17. Terms of Reference for the Senior United States Military Commander in Vietnam1

Washington, January 12, 1962.

1. The preservation of the independence of South Viet-Nam in the face of Communist attempts to take control of South Viet-Nam requires that all arms and agencies of U.S. policy operate in relation to each other and to the Government of Viet-Nam in intimate and effective coordination. To assure such coordination, the representatives of the various U.S. agencies in Saigon will continue to operate as a unified Task Force under the chairmanship and overall direction of the Ambassador.

2. Within this concept, the Senior U.S. Military Commander in South Viet-Nam will have the responsibility for all U.S. military policy, operations and assistance in that country, and the authority to discuss both the U.S. and Vietnamese military operations directly with the President of Viet-Nam and the leaders of the GVN. The Senior U.S. Military Commander will also furnish advice to the GVN on matters relative to maintaining internal security in South Viet-Nam and to the organization and employment of the RVNAF or other paramilitary forces.

3. The Senior U.S. Military Commander will have the title “Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command—Viet-Nam”.

4. The Senior U.S. Military Commander will have direct access to CINCPAC and, through him, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense.

5. The U.S. Ambassador, who as representative of the President is the senior U.S. representative in Viet-Nam, will be kept apprised by the Senior U.S. military commander, in advance, of plans in the military field, in order to assure proper coordination of U.S. activities and advice vis-à-vis the GVN. In case of differences of view, any member of the Task Force would be free to communicate such differences to Washington for decision in accordance with already-existing procedures.

6. While the Ambassador and the senior military commander will keep each other, and where pertinent other members of the Task Force, fully informed on all high-level contacts with the GVN and on major political and military plans, the operational command of U.S. military personnel will be the direct responsibility of the senior U.S. military commander.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam 1961: Taylor Recommendations, Command. Secret. A covering note on White House letterhead, dated January 12, indicates that the revised terms of reference were transmitted to McNamara from General Taylor. The revision may have been the paper handed to Taylor by President Kennedy during the meeting with Nolting, Harriman, and Taylor by January 12. (See footnote 2, Document 14) Also on January 12, presumably in response to directions by Harriman acting on the Presidentʼs instructions for revision, draft terms of reference were prepared in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs for use in a meeting with Secretary Rusk on January 13. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam 1961, Taylor Recommendations, Command) These were sent to Secretary McNamara in a letter of January 13 from Secretary Rusk. The changes made by the Department of State in the original terms of reference approved by President Kennedy on January 3 were less extensive than those in the version printed here, consisting only of the addition of the first paragraph, as printed here, and not including any of the changes made here in the fifth and sixth paragraphs (see Document 9).

18. Memorandum by the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 18. Memorandum by the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, January 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Points at Issue with Regard to the Command Structure in South Vietnam

Ambassador Nolting wishes the directive to the Senior U.S. Military Commander in South Vietnam to include specific language recognizing the Ambassador as the senior U.S. representative in Vietnam. He also wishes the Senior U.S. Military Commander to serve as a member of a unified task force under the chairmanship and over-all direction of the Ambassador. Finally, he wishes to make clear that the operational command of U.S. military personnel and units is the direct responsibility of the Senior U.S. Military Commander.

The Secretary of Defense would be agreeable to specific language covering the first and third points of the Ambassador. That is, he does not argue the point that the Ambassador is the senior U.S. representative, nor that the command responsibility for U.S. Forces in South Vietnam rests with the Military Commander. He does not agree to placing the Commander under the over-all direction of the Ambassador as a member of the Country Team. He feels that this blurs the responsibility for the military program. He would meet this point by clearly setting forth the direct responsibility for military policy, operations, and assistance of the U.S. Military Commander, but would require him to keep the Ambassador informed in advance of his plans for the future so that the Ambassador could appeal to Washington if he disagreed with the U.S. Military Commander.

MDT

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-628-71. Secret.

19. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 19. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Visit of Secretary McNamara at 10:30 a.m., 13 January2

It is my understanding that Secretary McNamara will discuss the following points with you during his visit this morning: a. Actions in the Department of Defense to further the counter-guerrilla program. I delivered your memorandum3 (copy attached) to him last night and discussed your feeling of the need to mobilize all of our resources behind this program. He understands and shares this feeling of urgency, and would like to indicate some of the actions he has set in motion.

b. Trip to Honolulu. He will discuss what he intends to do over the week end in his visit to Honolulu with General Lemnitzer.

c. The directive to the U.S. Military Commander in South Vietnam. After Ambassador Noltingʼs visit to you I went into the issue which Nolting raised. I found that Noltingʼs paper which you read4 was a complete rewrite of a carefully drawn agreement worked out personally by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara.5 Secretary McNamara considers that it is not feasible to re-open this issue in its entirety in the short time remaining before McNamara and Nolting depart for Honolulu. I think that Secretary McNamara will recommend to you, with Ruskʼs concurrence, that the agreed directive be promulgated with the understanding that it will be reviewed after a short test period. Personally, I do not think there are any great issues at stake, provided Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins behave like the sensible people I believe them to be.

M.D.T.6

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-026-69. Secret. At the top are written the words: “Read by HA.” “HA” stands for “Higher Authority” and was regularly used in referring to President Kennedy.

2 No record of this meeting has been found. According to the Presidentʼs log, McNamara and Taylor met with the President on an “Off the Record” basis from 10:50 to 11:20 a.m., January 13.

3 Not attached to the source text; presumably a reference to a memorandum of January 11 from the President to McNamara on the importance of counterinsurgency operations. (JCS Files)

4 Possibly a reference to Document 17.

5 See Document 9.

6 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

20. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 20. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, January 13, 1962.

JCSM-28-62

SUBJECT

Increase of GVN Forces

1. Reference is made to memorandum by the Deputy Secretary of Defense, dated 18 September 1961,2 which requested: a. An interim report by 15 January 1962 of the assessment by the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the Government of Vietnam (GVN) Forces and Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) capabilities, and recommended changes in force objectives.

b. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff concerning the adequacy with which certain points included in the 4 August 1961 decision3 by the President on Joint Programs of Action with the Government of Vietnam had been met.

2. This memorandum responds to subparagraph 1 a above. Subparagraph 1 b was answered by JCSM-321-61, dated 30 November 1961.4

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the currently authorized nine division equivalent force objective for Vietnam should not be increased at this time. However, provision of 5,000 working spaces in addition to the currently authorized 200,000 man force level is urgently required to provide Chief MAAG, Vietnam, flexibility in planning for many minor but important force structure changes such as augmentation for the RVNAF school system, support for additional light aircraft, scout dog handlers and cadre personnel for junk and river forces.

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe the current pressing military problems are to persuade the GVN to: (a) train, organize and utilize properly their existing military and paramilitary resources; (b) develop a counter-insurgency campaign plan; (c) implement clearing actions on a province by province basis; and (d) retain control over cleared areas.

5. A subsequent assessment by the Joint Chiefs of Staff of strength requirements will reflect GVN and RVNAF capabilities and limitations, associated with implementing actions discussed at the Secretary of Defense Conference on 16 December 1961 in CINCPAC Headquarters5 and related to the problems indicated in paragraph 4 above.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend: a. That the currently authorized nine division equivalent force objective for Vietnam not be increased at this time.

b. Approval of 5,000 working spaces in addition to the currently authorized 200,000 man force level for Vietnam.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L.L. Lemnitzer

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489, VN (Sensitive). Top Secret. A stamped notation indicates that the Secretary of Defense saw the paper.

2 Not printed.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 113.

4 Not found.

5 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 324.

21. Editorial Note 21. Editorial Note

On January 13, 1962, the Joint Chiefs of Staff transmitted to Secretary McNamara JCSM-33-62, which in 14 numbered paragraphs stated the strategic importance of the Southeast Asia mainland. For text, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pages 448-454.

22. Editorial Note 22. Editorial Note

On January 15, 1962, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Ambassador Nolting, Admiral Felt, General McGarr, and numerous other officials met at CINCPAC Headquarters in Honolulu for the second Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference. A full record of the meeting is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SGN (62) 19-GVN-DEFSEC-CINCPAC. For a summary record, see Document 29. Regarding the first Honolulu Conference, December 16, 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume I, Document 324.

23. Memorandum of Conversation, Saigon, January 16, 1962 23. Memorandum of Conversation, Saigon, January 16, 19621

Saigon, January 16, 1962.

POINTS OF SPECIAL INTEREST IN PRESIDENT DiemʼS MEETING WITH A.I.D. ADMINISTRATOR FOWLER HAMILTON ON JANUARY 16

PARTICIPANTS

Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam

Hoang Khac Thanh, Minister of National Economy

Truong Buu Khanh, President of Air Vietnam (acted as translator)

Fowler Hamilton, Administrator of AID

William C. Trueheart, Chargé d'Affaires ad interim

Arthur Z. Gardiner, Director,USOM

Henry Koren, Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State

(This [is] not an attempt at a complete memorandum of conversation, which will be supplied for the record by Mr. Koren who took notes throughout the four-hour conversation. The purpose of this memorandum is to highlight certain points that were new to the drafting officer, and to comment on some of them.)

1. Diemʼs Anti-communist History

Diem went to very considerable lengths in describing his role in Vietnam beginning in 1922 when he started in as a district official, and eventually rose to be a province chief and Minister of the Interior. As early as 1922, he had made a point of reading communist literature published in Switzerland, and this enabled him to obtain a true insight into the activities of the communists who were active throughout Central Vietnam in the ʼ20s and ʼ30s. Despite the fact that the commies then operated through various front and cover organizations, his knowledge of their techniques enabled him to be always alert, and his anti-commie tactics as a government official soon earned communist enmity.

He was extremely critical of French policy at the time. The French government thought that local communists might be a force which could help contain and control the rising spirit of nationalism in Vietnam. This view was a sadly mistaken one. Communists here were actually in touch with Moscow headquarters only through Paris, and the presence of left-wing government in France in the 1930s, and the emergence of the Front Populaire in France in the mid-thirties, was a great encouragement to communist activity and dissidence in all of Vietnam.

Diem spoke of his early connection with the VC General—Giap—whom he described as a person of great industry with great pride in self. Diem and Giap were born in neighboring villages, and Diem had known him, and known of him, for years, despite the fact that Giap is about ten years Diemʼs junior in age. Diem also mentioned his contacts with Ho Chi Minh, and emphasized the long absence from the soil of Vietnam which had characterized Hoʼs career.

Diemʼs anti-colonialist and anti-communist convictions led to his withdrawal from the French civil service, and subsequently to his detention by the VC in the mountainous regions of North Vietnam. He emphasized that for all those forty years, from 1922 to 1962, his anticommunist convictions and purpose had never wavered.

II. U.S. Errors

Diem mentioned three major errors in United States policy since 1955 with considerable bitterness, although he said that he did not wish to engage in polemics. He implied, however, that present newspaper attacks on him and his regime were designed to cover up these errors of Americans whose careers might otherwise be prejudiced.

The first error was the refusal to accept his proposal which he made to the JCS in 1957 in Washington2 to expand the military forces by 20,000 men. The second error was U.S. insistence on treating the Civil Guard as a rural police force rather than as a military force. This second error had only recently been corrected. The third error was refusal of the Embassy and USOM to accept his program for development of rural roads in 1957. Rapid expansion of the road network was an essential element in the struggle against communism.

The President remarked that in the Staley/Thuc Report3 his road program had been accepted, but that he was still disappointed at the extent of action so far in carrying it out.

[The Thuc/Staley Report, in referring to the road program, mentioned the “construction of village roads with heavy use of local labor.” That is all. The implementation of various measures contemplated in the report, of course, is dependent to a large extent on the availability of local currency funds, and six months were required for action by the GVN to take the steps in establishing the fiscal policy contemplated in the Thuc/Staley Report to provide the necessary finances for counter-insurgency efforts in both military and civilian

In looking back at the history of the road program, it is important to note that the operations of the American contractors, who constructed three highways designed to meet military priorities as they were then established, resulted in training hundreds of Vietnamese workers in the use of road-building equipment, starting from scratch. The development of an adequately manned and staffed Highway Department was a prime object of USOM policy from 1958 onwards, and the reluctance of the ICA to provide unlimited new highway equipment was conditioned throughout by considerations of ability of Vietnam to utilize, maintain, and repair equipment with a reasonable degree of effectiveness, as well as by the fact that 2,000 pieces of heavy equipment, used by U.S. contractors, were intended to be turned over to the GVN—as has been done. Throughout most of 1960, the GVN had stored near Tan Son Nhut airport, unutilized, great quantities of earth movers bought with their own funds but kept idle pending use for the Da Nhim Dam project. During the summer of 1960, it was reckoned by MAAG that the ARVN engineers could have been 50% more effective in the use of their men and equipment had active steps been taken by ARVN to maintain units, 30% of which were then deadlined for one reason or another.]4

The President also spoke with conviction on the need to regroup people in the countryside into defensible units, rather than having them scattered in homesteads remote from one another. Such a regroupment was an essential counter-guerrilla element at the present time, combined with appropriate village guards dedicated to the defense of their homes. Some progress was being made along these lines. He did not agree, however, that it was necessary to pay for the labor involved in this regroupment. It was characteristic of the agricultural economy of Vietnam that following varied activities in connection with the cycle of farm operations' labor had spare time on its hands, and at these periods it could and should be used for community improvements such as were involved in a program of regroupment.

He also noted that the government had considered an increase in pay for both Civil Guards and village guards a year ago, but that he had been informed by his financial counsellors that the government could not afford to make increased funds available for these purposes.

In another category of criticism which appeared to be directed primarily at USOM, President Diem referred to our reluctance in the early stages of the aid program in 1955 to believe that the Vietnamese, as distinct from French or Chinese, could play a useful and effective role in business enterprise. He pointed out that at that time there were only two Chambers of Commerce in Saigon, one the French and the other Chinese. Efforts which he had made had resulted in the establishment of a Vietnamese business group, who began as importers and who now were established with their own Chamber of Commerce and were working effectively in industry and trade.

[Underlying this criticism, one might detect great sensitivity at frequently expressed American opinion that technical, industrial and commercial problems in Vietnam do require advice at the present time from those trained outside of the country.]

In considering the use of military equipment now being made available in such large quantities through U.S. military aid, however, the President took a completely different view. He emphasized that it would be a great error to expect quick results despite the fact that this military equipment is now being made available in admittedly satisfactory quantities. The reason why he could not promise results was that Vietnamese military forces lacked the leadership to put it to full, immediate use. The reason for the lack of leadership was that the French had never trained an adequate number of officers, so that Vietnam was left with the problem of finding enough well trained generals, colonels and majors to mount substantial operations. The officers who are now in command lack sufficient knowledge of the abilities and resources of their troops, and this has led to frequent failures in operations. He sketched on paper, as an example, three columns of soldiers advancing on a given point. He said all too often the estimates of time required for each to reach the given objective were incorrect. The columns either arrived late, or else punctually but at the point of exhaustion, and therefore the operation would be ineffective.

President Diem spoke with very great bitterness of the criticisms of himself and his administration written by journalists who lived off the fat of the land either here or in Hong Kong or in the United States, and who had no responsibility whatsoever for the conduct of the campaign against the communists. He was contemplating writing a letter to President Kennedy, asking for President Kennedyʼs views on the way to handle such unjustified and unwarranted criticism. He implied that this type of criticism played right into the hands of the commies. Communist propaganda could not usefully and effectively criticize the very adequate domestic programs of the GVN which had done so much to build up the economy of the countryside in Vietnam. It was very advantageous for the communists to be able to find material ready made by Free World journalists with which to criticize Diem himself and the top government officials.

AZG
Director, USOM

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814, USIS, 1962. Confidential. Drafted by Gardiner.

2 Regarding Diemʼs visit to Washington in 1957, see Foreign Relations, 1955-1957, vol. I, pp. 792 ff.

3 Not printed, but see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 93.

4 These and following brackets are in the source text.

24. Memorandum of Conversation, Mendenhallʼs Residence, Saigon, January 16, 1962 24. Memorandum of Conversation, Mendenhallʼs Residence, Saigon, January 16, 19621

Saigon, January 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Wesley Fishel, Professor, Michigan State University

Mr. Thomas J. Corcoran, Deputy Political Advisor, CINCPAC

Joseph A. Mendenhall, Counselor for Political Affairs

Mr. Corcoran and I had a conversation with Dr. Fishel at my house following up the conversation (already reported by memorandum2 ) which I had with Fishel on January 5. The main points emerging from this conversation were as follows: 1. Dr. Fishel said that he had now talked, during his two weeks here, with about 100 Vietnamese, of whom only three were supporters of the Diem Government, and two of those supported it with reservations. He said that these conversations included persons he had talked to on a 4-day trip he has just concluded to the Kontum area, Quang Tri and the 17th Parallel, and the Nha Trang area. Even outside of Saigon he said he often encountered the attitude, “I am willing to fight for my country, but why do it for the Ngo family.” He said he knew 90% of the persons talked to from his 5-year stay in Viet-Nam from 1954 to 1958, and many of them were at that time strong supporters of Diem. He said that these conversations have reaffirmed the impression he expressed during our previous talk about the grave deterioration of the political position of Diem since his last visit in 1959. Fishel said he was so depressed by this that he almost wished that he had not come to visit Viet-Nam.

2. Fishel asked whether I was aware that thousands of officers in the armed forces had been converted to Catholicism because they consider this the way to get ahead under the Diem Government. I told him I had not been aware of this, and he said he received this information from Diemʼs own Father-Confessor, who was one of the original supporters of Diem and told Fishel this in great sorrow. Fishel said that he had direct experience bearing on this point during his travels the past few days in the countryside when a major he had known previously told Fishel about his conversion to Catholicism and cynically indicated that this was the way to get ahead under this Government. Fishel said he had also learned that three Cabinet ministers have taken up Catholicism, including Thuan.

3. Fishel described the discouraging, depressing atmosphere among the personnel of the Presidency, most of whom he has known closely for years. He said two of them even described with tears in their eyes the deterioration in the administration of the Government. He said they indicated to him that they are continuing to hold on to prevent “them” (meaning the Ngo family and close adherents) from taking over everything, and in the hope that some kind of change will occur.

4. Fishel said that his trip through the countryside had shown him that there are some basically hopeful factors in the situation (for example, the excellent training and morale of the Rangers he saw at the Ranger Training Center in Nha Trang, and the obvious dedication of many of the military personnel whom he encountered on this trip). He stated, however, that the military and economic reforms recently undertaken by the Government will not alone produce any fundamental change in the trend against the Government. What is needed in addition is a psychological shock. When asked just what he thought was necessary he decided to remain discreetly silent (obviously because it comes very hard for him to put forth suggestions adverse to the political fortunes of Diem to whom he has been close for so long).

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, 350-GVN. Confidential. Drafted by Mendenhall on January 17. The meeting was held in Mendenhallʼs Residence. Another copy is in Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 14,GVN, 1962, Political Situation, General. Distributed throughout the Embassy, to CINCPAC, and to the Department of State.

2 Not found.

25. Telegram From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Nolting) to the Department of State 25. Telegram From the Ambassador to Vietnam (Nolting) to the Department of State1

Honolulu, January 17, 1962.

8140. CINCPAC/Polad has requested that we pass the following. Eyes Only SecState from Nolting. Will you be good enough to discuss the following with Secretary McNamara and, if you and he have no objection, pass it to the President.

Dear Mr. President:

I am presently on my way back to Saigon still unclear in my mind on how the US operation in Viet-nam is to be conducted. You recall the brief discussion of the matter in our meeting last Friday.2 In several long discussions with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, we have been unable to clarify the matter to our mutual satisfaction. Mr. McNamara and I achieved at Honolulu what is perhaps an agreement on words, but, I am afraid, not a meeting of minds, which is more important.3

Like everyone else, I am concerned only to find the way to hold Viet-nam. I think this can be done without intervention of US combat forces; but the margin is not great. Clarity of concept, mutual confidence, team work, and a balanced, many-sided effort are required.

I believe clear US organizational arrangements are essential to our chances of success. As you know, we must work through and with a sensitive sovereign government and a difficult man. We are trying to help them mount a many-sided effort to win and hold the allegiance of the Viet-nam people. In my view, this is essentially a political job under present conditions. The military component is very important and our military contributions large and increasing, but this fact should not, in my judgment, alter our basic concept nor our basic organization to carry it forward. I feel that one person must be clearly in charge of the conduct of our affairs in Viet-nam and of our relations with the Government of Viet-nam. If that person does not have good enough judgment to stay out of the line of operations of the various US agencies involved, he should be replaced. Especially is this true of military operations. I also think that the concept and function of the US Task Force (or Country Team) in Saigon ought to be continued under the chairmanship and overall direction of the Ambassador to assure proper coordination of US policy and action. Conversely, the ambassador should be held responsible for not infringing the operational responsibilities of the other agency heads, most especially that of the senior military commander.

Finally, I believe that the direction you set in your letter to President Diem (in connection with the Staley-Thuc report),4 in which you imposed greater authority and flexibility in your representatives in the field, is sound and profitable. I do not think best results can be obtained from detailed direction of the effort from Washington or Honolulu. Needless to say, I consider the vigor and speed put into the military effort by Secretary McNamara and the Defense Department is all to the good, and I hope it will be matched by other agencies to keep the total effort in balance.

I write this letter, Mr. President, because I feel there have been differences of view on essential matters of organization bearing on my responsibilities to you and to our government, and that efforts to reconcile them may have left scars. If the views expressed above do not accord with your own, or if there are scars which you think will impair my own effectiveness, I hope that you will tell me so and accept my resignation, which is, of course, readily available. In terms of personal relations with all concerned in this matter (including General Harkins with whom I had dinner last night), I feel that they are excellent, and that it is essential that they remain so if we are to succeed. A clear understanding on the above matters will, I am confident, assure this.

With my high regard and respect.

Sincerely, Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-1762. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Priority. Attached to the source text was a note from Battle to the Secretary indicating that U. Alexis Johnson had action on it and that no other distribution had been or would be made pending Johnsonʼs recommendations to Rusk. The letter was never submitted to the President. For Ruskʼs reply, see Document 40.

2 See footnote 2, Document 14.

3 Ambassador Nolting subsequently indicated that McNamara had stated to him during the plane trip to the Secretary of Defenseʼs meeting in Honolulu that his hands were tied on the terms of reference for the commander of MAC by JCS opposition to placing a four-star general in a position subordinate to an ambassador. As a result, the basic problem of who had overall authority to conduct U.S. relations with the Government of Vietnam remained unresolved in Noltingʼs mind. (Department of State, Office of the Historian, Vietnam Interviews, Frederick Nolting, June 1, 1984)

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 114.

26. National Security Action Memorandum No. 124 26. National Security Action Memorandum No. 1241

Washington, January 18, 1962.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Attorney General

The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

The Director, United States Information Agency

The Military Representative of the President

SUBJECT

Establishment of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency)

To assure unity of effort and the use of all available resources with maximum effectiveness in preventing and resisting subversive insurgency and related forms of indirect aggression in friendly countries, a Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) is established consisting of the following members: Military Representative of the President, Chairman

The Attorney General

Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Deputy Secretary of Defense

Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Director of Central Intelligence

Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Administrator, Agency for International Development

On invitation: Other department and agency representatives, as deemed necessary

The functions of the Special Group (C.I.) will be as follows: a. To insure proper recognition throughout the U.S. Government that subversive insurgency (“wars of liberation”) is a major form of politico-military conflict equal in importance to conventional warfare.

b. To insure that such recognition is reflected in the organization, training, equipment and doctrine of the U.S. Armed Forces and other U.S. agencies abroad and in the political, economic, intelligence, military and informational programs conducted abroad by State, Defense, AID, USIA and CIA. Particular attention will be paid the special training of personnel prior to assignment to MAAGʼs and to Embassy staffs in countries where counter-insurgency problems exist or may arise.

c. To keep under review the adequacy of U.S. resources to deal with actual or potential situations of insurgency or indirect aggression making timely recommendation of measures to apply, increase or adjust these resources to meet anticipated requirements.

d. To insure the development of adequate interdepartmental programs aimed at preventing or defeating subversive insurgency and indirect aggression in countries and regions specifically assigned to the Special Group (C.I.) by the President, and to resolve any interdepartmental problems which might impede their implementation.

In performing the above functions, the members of the Special Group (C.I.) will act on behalf of their respective departments and agencies, and will depend for staff support upon their own staffs, and upon such country or regional interdepartmental task forces (normally chaired by a State Department Assistant Secretary) as may be established. The Group will confine itself to establishing broad lines of counter-insurgency policy, subject to my direction and decision as appropriate, insuring a coordinated and unified approach to regional or country programs, and verifying progress in implementation thereof. It will also undertake promptly to make decisions on interdepartmental issues arising out of such programs.

The critical areas initially assigned to the Special Group (C.I.) pursuant to paragraph d of this memorandum are set forth in the attached annex.

John F. Kennedy

Annex To National Security Action Memorandum No. 124

I hereby assign to the cognizance of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) the following countries: Laos

South Viet-Nam

Thailand

JFK

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Secret. Attached to the source text were a memorandum to all Assistant Secretaries of State for regional affairs, January 26, from U. Alexis Johnson establishing State Department liaison with the Special Group; copies of letters to Ambassadors in Southeast Asia asking for views on counterinsurgency; a copy of a letter from Rusk to Lemnitzer, June 16, establishing a Task Force for Southeast Asia to complement the Vietnam Task Force and other papers from 1965 and 1966 relating to the revision of NSAM 124 and abolition of the Special Group (Counterinsurgency).

27. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 27. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, January 1862, 1962.

Dear Max: Thank you very much for sending me a copy of the letter you received from Thompson,2 in Saigon. I have read it with much interest and trust that you will pardon a few personal reflections.

While I defer to those who know more about Viet-Nam than I, I am impressed with what seems to me to be the reasonableness of Thompsonʼs emphasis on the importance of cutting the link between the villages and the guerrillas at the first stage rather than expecting to seek decisive military victories against the Viet Cong regulars. This is, as he points out, a slow, methodical process which will require much emphasis on the Self Defense Corps, with the Civil Guard and the armed forces in a supporting role. However, I am encouraged by his independent assessment that the villages are in the main basically anti-Communist. While there is, of course, nothing new in the thought of strengthening village defenses, I am struck by his thesis that only when the population is protected and a steady flow of good intelligence obtained will it be possible to undertake the elimination of the Viet Cong regular units, and that thus, initially, the role of the Army should be to keep the Viet Cong regular units occupied and off balance. It is my understanding that the French attempted to pursue the opposite course.

Such a strategy will, of course, not produce any immediate spectacular results, but my own feeling is that we will have to restrain our natural impulse to expect such results. I known this is also Fritz Noltingʼs feeling, and I think he is right.

Sincerely,

Alex3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-1862. Secret. Drafted by Johnson. Copies sent to Lemnitzer, Rostow, Harriman, Cottrell, and Nolting.

2 Dated January 3, not printed. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-026-69)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

28. Editorial Note 28. Editorial Note

On January 18, 1962, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lemnitzer, transmitted to Secretary McNamara, CM-491-62, a four-paragraph memorandum on the Vietnamese command problem. For text of this memorandum, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pages 440-441.

29. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) 29. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)1

Honolulu, January 19, 1962.

Dear Cot: Encouraged by your letter of thanks for my letter2 reporting highlights of the first SecDef Conference last month, I thought I would repeat the performance for the second conference held Monday.3 However, if you have full access to the Record of the Conference (as you indicated) and feel that my reporting letters are therefore superfluous please let me know.

I continue to think the confrontation of Washington, Honolulu and Saigon in an intensive all-day session produces a lot of worthwhile results, not only in terms of SecDef decisions but also in terms of mutual education and enlightenment. The Secretary several times expressed great satisfaction with the accomplishments of PACOM and MAAG Viet-Nam since the last meeting, particularly for what he called an “extraordinary effort” in the “movement of men and material”. He indicated, however, that at the next meeting he would want to know what results had been accomplished in Viet-Nam by this splendid effort.

At one point during the conference General McGarr presented the views of Diem and Thuan on counterinsurgency.4 They felt that all forms of action, including military, should be designed to achieve permanent results. While U.S. efforts are greatly appreciated, we are pushing the young GVN too hard and too fast. GVN leadership cannot react as quickly as the Americans wish. American concepts, policies and capabilities do not always fit the oriental mind. Permanent victory depends on restoring the confidence of the people in the GVN and in themselves. It is necessary to separate the Viet Cong from the people; communism cannot be defeated by military means alone. The U.S. is pushing military plans faster than they can be absorbed, and they cannot achieve permanent results without a long-range approach.

The Secretary, I believe, recognized the validity of these GVN views, for he said we must move speedily to support Diemʼs program. He stressed the importance of holding on to areas that have been cleared militarily. He also recognized that the process of clearing and holding would be a long one. Thus in approving a 12 1/2 million dollar communications package for Viet-Nam, he commented that the U.S. would probably be involved in Viet-Nam for a long time.

While agreeing entirely with Diem that permanent victory cannot be won by military means alone, and that to hold areas cleared militarily the necessary “civic” infrastructure must be installed, I am skill convinced that the most urgent need now is to strengthen the military (including paramilitary) capabilities of the GVN. It does not yet appear capable of clearing and holding a substantial key area (such as the province of Binh Duong) without drawing off military forces from other areas to an unacceptable degree. It must reach at least this level of capability before the tide will turn.

I have summarized below some of the other principal decisions and opinions of SecDef.

On defoliants the Secretary wanted further experimentation to continue so that we could ascertain how effective the spray was on all types of vegetation. Only when this was done would we have a sound basis for judging the operational effectiveness of defoliants.

In discussing training and personnel the Secretary manifested great interest in speeding up the arrival of advisers. He wanted them to get out to Viet-Nam as fast as they could be processed in Washington, even though the Vietnamese units to which they were to be assigned were not yet ready to receive them. He agreed with General O'Donnell that too many of our military personnel in Viet-Nam are on TDY with the result that tours are too short. More personnel should be sent on PCS rather than TDY.

There was considerable discussion of the Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps. Both the Secretary and General Lemnitzer felt the CG and SDC should be given high priority attention. The Secretary expressed the opinion that the order of priority for expansion of size and training should be the CG, SDC and ARVN. He wanted recommendations on this by the next meeting.

The Secretary also wanted to get carbines into the hands of the SDC as soon as possible. Rather than wait for the completion of a 12-week training cycle before such weapons are issued to an SDC unit, he suggested they be issued following a preliminary training phase just sufficient to teach them how to handle these weapons. He authorized the shipment of another 40,000 carbines to Viet-Nam (in addition to the 37,000 already on hand there) for the use of any GVN military or paramilitary units which could properly use them.

During discussion of the province survey teams, the Secretary expressed regret that these teams were being confined to military and intelligence matters. He wanted the American members of the teams to send in comprehensive reports as soon as possible (without waiting for the combined US-Vietnamese report) which would give the American membersʼ observations on political, economic, civic action and other matters as well as on military and intelligence questions.

There was considerable discussion of plans for clearing and holding a single province or area. It was decided to eliminate Zone D as an immediate target, since it did not lend itself to the concept of clearing with the ARVN and holding with civic action teams, CG and SDC, being a sparsely populated, heavily forested area. Moreover, its military significance has decreased with the apparent evacuation of the Viet Cong “Nambo headquarters”. The Chief MAAG is to work up a plan for clearing and holding an area where permanent results can be achieved. Such an area may or may not be confined to one province.

The Secretary expressed great concern about the US press treatment of the GVN. He felt that the pessimistic anti-Diem line of the press was hurting our cause with Congress and the public. He directed that we step up public information programs at all levels—Washington, Honolulu and Viet-Nam. He left to the judgment of CINCPAC and Chief MAAG Viet-Nam what could be declassified to assist in these programs. Fritz Nolting cautioned that in briefing the press we should give full credit to the GVN and not make it look as though the U.S. were running the war in SVN, making the plans, or pulling all the strings.

In a brief discussion of aid from third countries, Admiral Felt mentioned the interest of the ROKs in sending some of their forces to assist the GVN. The Secretaryʼs reaction was that we would have to pay for this, and we might as well pay the Vietnamese to do the job themselves. As for Australian help, however, the Secretary said that if it were politically wise to accept Australian help we should do so. General McGarr said he would be glad to have small numbers of Australians if they were willing to serve under the MAAG.

Sincerely,

Ed

P.S. It strikes me that the concern expressed in Deptel 890 to Saigon5 re “leak” on helicopters is inconsistent with attitude of SecDef on declassifying as much as possible of our aid to GVN and our operations there in order to get better press. Unless State and Defense coordinate on this, I can see State frantically investigating items purposely “leaked” by Defense, MAAG, etc.

E

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5-M SP/1-1962. Top Secret; Official-Informal.

2 Neither found.

3 January 15.

4 For an account of Diemʼs views, see Document 13.

5 Telegram 890 to Saigon, January 18, asked the Task Force in Vietnam to consider whether to try to track the source of the leak concerning the introduction of U.S. helicopters into South Vietnam, in violation of the Geneva Accords. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-1862)

30. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 30. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, January 20, 1962, 4:03 p.m.

899. Recent NSC directive to Departments of State and Defense2 reports Presidentʼs concern that we may be missing opportunity for contribution by military forces to socio-economic development and his hope that civic action projects can be included in MAP and AID programs wherever practicable. Directive requires report to NSC by 31 March regarding programs built into FY 62 aid programs and by September 1 on activities included in FY 63 program.

To spur civic action effort and be in position report resultant progress by 31 March, it is proposed that in immediate future (early February) small DOD-AID teams visit small number selected countries designated for development pilot programs. Teams would work with country team to assist in organization for new or expanded civic action effort. Though scale of activity and expenditures would necessarily be modest for FY 62, any required financing would be additional to presently scheduled assistance.

Civic action defined as use indigenous military forces for projects useful to the populace in such fields as training, public works, agriculture, transportation, communication, health, sanitation and others helpful to economic development. Properly handled, such projects can serve important aim of promoting close friendly relations populace with military so essential to inhibiting or combatting insurgency.

Believe new or expanded civic action effort might make important contribution to achievement our objectives Viet-Nam, that proposed team might provide organizational boost to necessary effort and that undertaking logical follow-up to recent visit Army Civic Action Survey Team. Request Country Team views. No discussion with GVN at this time. Immediate reply necessary to meet deadline for designation pilot countries. Embtel 305 Sept 1 is pertinent.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-2062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Drafted by Peters on January 19; cleared by Cottrell, Peterson and Maechling; and approved by Rice.

2 Document 26.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5-MSP/8-3161)

31. Memorandum of Conversation Between Dr. Wesley Fishel of Michigan State University and the Counselor of Embassy in Vietnam (Mendenhall), Saigon, January 23, 1962 31. Memorandum of Conversation Between Dr. Wesley Fishel of Michigan State University and the Counselor of Embassy in Vietnam (Mendenhall), Saigon, January 23, 19621

Saigon, January 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet-Nam

Dr. Fishel dropped by the office to correct certain information which he had passed on to me about conversions to Catholicism within the Vietnamese Government and Army (see memorandum of conversation dated January 16, 19622 ). He said that he has since learned that the information indicating that three Cabinet Ministers, including Thuan, had been converted to Catholicism, is incorrect. There has been only one conversion to Catholicism among the Cabinet Ministers, and that is Huynh Huu Nghia, Secretary of State for Labor.

Fishel said that he also believes that the earlier information that “thousands of officers in the armed forces” had been converted to Catholicism is an exaggeration. Nevertheless, he said that the best information he has been able to get indicates that the number has been large. It has often been based on the expectation that promotion comes faster to Catholics, but he has heard that this is by no means necessarily the case, since he has been told that Catholics are often passed over.

In passing along this correction, Fishel specifically said that he had no reason to change any of the other information or conclusions which he had given me earlier.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 14. GVN 1962, Political Situation, General. Confidential. Drafted by Mendenhall on January 24.

2 Document 23.

32. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) 32. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, January 24, 1962.

Dear Bill: The January 21 attack on a Cambodian village by Jungle Jim aircraft2 has greatly increased our concern over the implications of recent messages from the Chief MAAG in Saigon concerning the use to which these aircraft are being put in attacking villages in Vietnam. While we must heavily rely on the judgment of the people on the spot in the selection of suitable aircraft targets, it seems to us that the error made with respect to the attack on the Cambodian village and the civilian casualties resulting therefrom, point up the extreme difficulty of selective use of air power against native villages.

I note, for example, in recent CHMAAG VN SITREPS that in response to VNAFL-19 identifications, apparently similar to those in the case of the Cambodian village, napalm bombs, rockets and 50 caliber ammunition have been employed against villages. Our fear is that unless identification of the target is very certain, the civilian casualties resulting from such air action may do severe damage to the basic objective of winning the people to the side of the government against the Viet Cong, whether or not the village is willingly or unwillingly sheltering some Viet Cong.

I fully appreciate the extreme difficulty of identifying targets and assuring that only Viet Cong are the victims of attack. However, the stakes of winning the population to the side of the government are so great that it seems to me we should err on the side of caution in the selection of targets. It does not seem to me that we can afford to alienate people in the countryside even though at the moment it may appear that they are temporarily controlled by the Viet Cong. I would hope that our guideline could continue to be to separate the Viet Cong from the people, not to destroy people as a byproduct of the effort to kill the Viet Cong.

If you agree, I suggest that it would be desirable to have this point of view translated into appropriate instructions to the military commanders concerned.

Sincerely,

Alex3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2462. Secret. Drafted by Johnson; a copy was sent to General Taylor.

2 Telegram 956 from Saigon, January 24, reported that U.S. Jungle Jim aircraft, carrying mixed U.S. and Vietnamese crews, had mistakenly attacked a Cambodian village while on a mission against a Viet Cong concentration in an area west of Binh Hoa. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SGN (62)19, GVN, Jan-Jun)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

33. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 33. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 24, 1962—8 p.m.

963. Reference: Deptel 907.2 Informed Thuan today (Jan. 24), for President Diem, designation of General Harkins and new title for US Military Assistance Command, Viet-Nam. Asked that Thuan inform Diem preliminarily, and requested to see President personally if he had any questions or problems. Thuan asked purpose of US move. I said purpose was to increase efficiency, effectiveness, and speed of US assistance to Viet-Nam in military matters. Thuan inquired what relationship would be between US Commander and Ambassador. I said that this remained to be worked out in precise terms; but that I thought relationship would be similar to present relationship-i.e., Ambassador would be senior US representative, US Commander would work in close contact and coordination with Ambassador and Task Force.

When Thuan asked whether General McGarr would remain, I said I believed that he would remain as Chief MAAG. Thuan again asked what was purpose of move, implying that he felt Diem would have questions on score of US giving appearance of moving in on Vietnamese conduct of war. I explained that we felt need to bring heavy and increasing MAAG activities and substantial US military operations in Viet-Nam under a single military chief, in view of the importance of the operation and the increased workload; that this did not imply any US desire to “take control”, our respective positions on this point being well understood.

Thuan said he would take the matter up with President Diem and let me know. I told him that we intended to issue a low-key press release, which I would coordinate with him when prepared, and that General Harkins, who is in opinion of those who know him an outstanding officer for this important position, was available to come to Saigon as soon as necessary preparatory arrangements had been completed.

(Pouched message referred Deptel 8983 not yet received.)

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2462. Secret Priority; Eyes Only.

2 Telegram 907, January 23, reads: “Assume you are promptly discussing with Diem designation of General Harkins and new title for US command. Also awaiting your recommendations on handling public announcement and when Harkins may proceed.” (Ibid., 751K.00/1-2362)

3 Telegram 898, January 20, drafted by Rusk, reads: “Eyes Only reply your telegram from Hawaii coming first available air pouch. If any problems arise meanwhile, please let us know.” (Ibid., 751K.00/1-2062) Reference is to telegram 8140, Document 25.

34. Editorial Note 34. Editorial Note

On January 26, 1962, Deputy Under Secretary of State Johnson sent a letter to Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric agreeing to an increase to 200,000 men in the Vietnamese Armed Forces. For text of this letter, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pages 445-446.

35. Draft Memorandum by the Assistant to the Director for Regional Affairs (Far East), Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense (Kent) 35. Draft Memorandum by the Assistant to the Director for Regional Affairs (Far East), Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense (Kent)1

Washington, January 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

President Diem

1. Introduction

The outcome in Vietnam depends primarily on the risk analyses and resultant policies of the Communist Bloc and the United States. The current situation is the natural result of the opposed policies, marked by mutual caution. The Communists regulate their attack to preserve its ambiguity and avoid prompting increased external assistance for the GVN, and the U.S. limits its support to avoid being directly involved in combat. While these policies continue, the efficiency with which the GVN conducts the campaign against the Communists is a decisive factor. The effectiveness of the GVN will depend, as long as he remains in office, almost directly on the performance of President Diem. This paper is an analysis of the prospects for success in Vietnam under President Diem.

2. Characteristics

The GVN directly reflects the personal characteristics and philosophy of President Diem. It is allegedly a corrupt government, but charges of high-level corruption have not been substantiated. Corruption may exist, but with the possible exception of Malaya, it is probably the least corrupt government in Southeast Asia. It is certainly authoritarian and over-centralized. It is not a popular government to which the population rallies in spontaneous support. This results in part from President Diemʼs aloof paternalism, and in part from the characteristics of the Vietnamese people. It is not an efficient government, but it has provided for its severest critics a demonstration of progress in the face of adversity. This progress is a testimonial of President Diemʼs ability and a clear indication that South Vietnam would have continued to prosper and develop under his leadership in normal times. The added burden of the growing Communist attack has arrested progress—not the deficiencies of President Diemʼs administration.

President Diem is a man of notable strengths, admired for his austere dedication and courage, but he is also handicapped by several unswerving convictions which are critical weaknesses in the present phase of the emergency. They directly affect his capability to manage the military campaign in Vietnam. Only these weaknesses need be examined for the purposes of this paper.

First, he is psychologically unable to delegate authority. Suspicious of the loyalty of all but a few of those around him, he deprives himself of required assistance and governmental efficiency inevitably suffers. He foregoes the services of able men who have incurred his displeasure and treats subordinates so harshly that they are overawed and afraid to present their views or unpleasant facts. In sum, though outstanding in personal ability, he lacks the characteristic of leadership most vital in the current circumstances—the ability to tap the superior collective capabilities of his subordinates.

He is unable to compromise. This rigidity has lost him the support of nationalist politicians and impeded his conduct of foreign relations. But this characteristic has also been responsible for his most notable achievements in developing and unifying South Vietnam.

He has illusions of omniscience. He is mandarin by training and inheritance. This, coupled with his natural personality, results in a reserve that can not arouse spontaneous public enthusiasm. In the society of Vietnam and during the current emergency, this characteristic may not be as serious a weakness—if a weakness at all—as it is sometimes considered to be by American observers incapable of empathic analysis. However, the real significance of this background is his growing conviction of self-righteousness.

A series of experiences wherein he has rejected advice outright and later been proven right left a lasting impression with Diem. Some observers believe that he now is convinced that he enjoys something close to divine guidance. The following are selected important examples: In 1955, he attacked and won against the sects despite conflicting recommendations of some U.S. advisors. He was undoubtedly aware that General Lawton Collins had at that time recommended his replacement by someone more acceptable to the sects and the French.

He saw the U.S. country team accept during 1960 his long-standing and long-opposed recommendations for the training and support of the Civil Guard along lines emphasizing their military rather than police function. At the same time his equally long-standing plea for increase of the Vietnamese armed forces was recognized. Moreover, for several years he had tried to convince both responsible U.S. officials resident in Vietnam and those who came as visitors that the internal security situation in Vietnam was a grave problem. U.S. actions in 1961 were [a] tacit admission that the threat existed as Diem had contended. And finally, until 1960, in the administration of the Military Assistance Program Diem gained the impression that U.S. officials believed that their problem was to prepare the VN armed forces to resist external aggression in a role consonant with U.S. contingency plans while the problem of counter-insurgency was not a basic U.S. concern. He has long understood and been alert to differences of opinion within the country team. This knowledge of conflicting opinion—even conflicting advice—has affected his evaluation of advice received.

As a result of these experiences, he is cautious of U.S. advice. He is also probably incapable of concluding that the best interests of Vietnam would be served if he relinquished power.

From the attempt by the Chief of the General Staff to overthrow the government soon after Diemʼs appointment as Premier, he has retained the conviction that military authority must be splintered and focused only in his own hands. His survival against coups and plots testifies to the effectiveness of the control that he has maintained, but the development of leadership in the armed forces and their efficient employment have seriously suffered as a result.

He lacks military background. He has had little experience, even by observation, with the proven principles of military management. He has no real conception of staff work. When seeking recommendations from his own military officers he either goes to a selected individual, often heading the last men with whom he has spoken, or has a convention of all the Vietnamese Generals. At these latter formations “face” is at stake and generals of limited ability state sweeping generalities without the benefit of facts that normal staff procedures could develop. The faulty decisions thus derived have deepened Diemʼs mistrust of the ability of his military subordinates.

3. Prospects

The Communist campaign against the GVN is now clearly in a critical phase because a series of reverses suffered by the GVN could cause a collapse of the will to resist before the effects of the measures to improve security now approved are felt. Only effective employment of all available military resources can assure a reasonable chance of GVN survival. Continuation of past practices by President Diem in handling of the military program would almost certainly seal the fate of Vietnam. The absorptive capacity of Vietnam for U.S. aid can only be increased to a limited extent—and that increase depends largely on efficient utilization of the resources being made available by the U.S.

Attention then centers on the possibilities—and methods to realize them—of causing President Diem to accept advice and reforms. Past performance in this regard is not encouraging. The reforms of military significance which are now being urged upon Diem by U.S. representatives are the same ones that have been urged upon him for at least five years. Gradual progress has been made, but significant reform can not yet be identified. There are a series of encouraging signs, but each must be examined closely to determine whether it is a superficial or fundamental change. Unfortunately, the time required to observe reliably whether important changes are actually being made by Diem can not be risked. Recent creation of a national security council has been evaluated as an encouraging sign, but essentially the same body was in existence even before Chief,MAAG first formally proposed it to President Diem 13 April 1960. But its function was then described by participants as one where the “ministers assembled to take notes and not to talk”. At the same time, creation of a central intelligence agency was proposed. It appears that real progress is being made with this vital program though the appointment as chief of the CIA by President Diem of an officer whom he had relieved from responsibility for the delta area, leaves doubt as to whether he will now permit a single effective intelligence agency.

Most discouraging is the matter of delegation of authority to military commanders. Since assignment to the CG Field Command of responsibilities for control of field operations was recommended in 1959, no real control has been delegated. And more important, the position—and personality—of the Chief of the General Staff remain unchanged. As commander of all of the armed forces, his role should be more significant than that of the CG, Field Command. The steadfastly loyal but incompetent incumbent remains, not permitted to retire despite his personal desires, and serving no useful function except to exert a stabilizing influence on younger generals and restrain them from plotting against their superiors. Any real intention to place the military establishment on a sound basis must begin with the appointment of a functioning military chief.

The question of removal of the province chiefs from the chain of command is debatable. Arguments have been presented to support both sides. However, U.S. officials have steadfastly urged over the years that the authority of the province chief be curbed. There is little indication that the U.S. view is now being accepted.

Opinion of U.S. representatives over the years has been divided on the feasibility of exerting pressure on President Diem to cause him to adopt reforms. It has been generally held that an ultimatum to withhold aid could not be effective because Diem, fully aware of U.S. national interests involved in Vietnam, and knowing that the U.S. could not afford to let Vietnam fall, could not be bluffed. Only in the current critical phase has an U.S. ultimatum been credible. It has become credible because only in the present deteriorating situation was it plausible that U.S. officials were convinced that Vietnam would fall unless reforms were made. President Kennedyʼs message to Diem following the Taylor mission2 was couched in language that, judging by VN press reaction, was interpreted to be an ultimatum. President Diem did not yield. No fundamental concessions were made, and U.S. officials made clear that no ultimatum was intended. While it can not be assumed that Diem would have yielded had the U.S. position been resolutely maintained, it is highly probable that no future ultimatum would be seriously regarded.

4. Alternatives

A U.S. policy toward Diem based on compulsion through regulation of the level of U.S. assistance can not succeed. The crisis in Vietnam is presently too grave—and time is too limited—to determine whether Diem is now making the substantial changes in his administration that he has through the years declined to make except in superficial form. But changes must be effective if South Vietnam is to have reasonable chances of weathering the current crisis. There are consequently only two general lines of action: (1) to seek replacement of Diem and (2) to seek more effective means of influencing him.

Replacement of Diem would gravely risk chaos at a time when chaos can only benefit the Communists. Though a replacement could be found in Vietnam, as in every nation in every age, the stakes involved in engineering a change that could not be directly controlled to ensure smooth transition are too great to risk now.

Means to influence Diem then must be sought. Two general areas are most promising—to send senior U.S. officials to Vietnam in whom Diem has confidence and to seek to increase his confidence in U.S. advice through gradual but clear demonstration of its value. The first promises most immediate results. On the military side, individual military ability of the senior U.S. military representative is of secondary importance in comparison with his ability to gain quickly the confidence of Diem. Through the years even the most junior member of the MAAG has quickly recognized the deficiencies of the VN military establishment and no unusual qualifications are required to formulate a program for their correction. But the military representative in Vietnam is the member of the country team on whom Diem will most rely. If the military representative is accepted in Diemʼs “inner group” he will have value; if not, he could not succeed though he were a military genius. In the present crisis, selection of an individual whom Diem has known and in whom he already has confidence is the most promising alternative. Regardless of whether an effective senior U.S. military representative is assigned, progress can be made by demonstration that U.S. advice is sound and that recommended methods are applicable in Vietnam. Diem will respond to proven successes, particularly if U.S. proposals are tailored to his situation. For example, with full knowledge that Diem will not accept a proposal concerning the military chain of command that would dangerously increase his vulnerability to a coup, U.S. representatives must tailor their recommendations accordingly. They must seek to include in their recommendations provisions—checks and balances—which are a compromise acceptable to Diem. Otherwise only a paper facade will—as in the past-result.

In these two areas lies the greatest promise of effective U.S. action at present. A third consideration might be to give Diem full ungrudging support of his programs once he has made his decision. Even though he may not have accepted U.S. advice, once he has made his decision he should have full U.S. support. The U.S. cannot now disassociate itself from Diemʼs success or failure. It is in our interest to ensure that he succeeds even in programs which do not fit our conceptions.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam . Secret. No addressee indicated. Attached to the source text was a note from Kent to Lansdale stating that Haydn Williams, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Regional Affairs), had requested the paper and asking for Lansdaleʼs comments on the draft.

2 Regarding this issue, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 257 ff.

36. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 36. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 27, 1962—7 p.m.

980. Refs: Deptel 907 and Embtel 963.2 Thuan told me today he had taken up with President Diem question new U.S. Military Assistance Command; said he had explained idea to Diem thoroughly; that President wanted to see me about it. I asked whether there were any particular questions or problems in his mind. Thuan said the only problem that Diem seemed to have was whether the U.S. Mission in Viet-Nam was to have “one or more heads”. He said from point of view GVN it was essential that U.S. activities should head up to one person in Viet-Nam. I told Thuan that President Diem need have no concern on this score; as to details, this was a matter of internal U.S. arrangements which would, I felt sure, work satisfactorily from GVN standpoint.

I have been waiting for ten days for clarification of matter referred to in Deptel 898.3 Pouched message not yet received, and next pouch due late January 30th. I need to be in a position to speak with assurance to Diem on any questions he may raise in connection with new command set-up and would appreciate, if possible, telegraphic summary contents pouched message. Needless to say, I have not raised with GVN, nor with anyone here, question of internal U.S. relationships.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2762. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

2 See Document 33 and footnote 2 thereto.

3 See footnote 3, Document 33.

37. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Assistant to the Director for Regional Affairs (Far East), Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense (Kent) 37. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Assistant to the Director for Regional Affairs (Far East), Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense (Kent)1

Washington, January 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

Your 26 January Memorandum on President Diem2

Thank you for sending me a copy of your thoughtful analysis of President Diem and his relationship to military problems in Vietnam. It has a depth of perception unusual for an American military observer of a political personality!

While you have included some hints of it in your paper, the main U.S. failure in working with President Diem has been our many attempts to squeeze him into an American-type mold labeled “Chief of State.” Most of the Americans who attempted to do this had only the foggiest notion of what is needed in a Chief of State, not only in Vietnam, but elsewhere (including the U.S.). Thus, Diem has come to view most Americans as meddlers and quite naive meddlers. His long talks with U.S. officials, which they find so boring, are usually his attempts to inform them of even the rudiments of local truths.

His real American friends, the ones he trusts, have always been able to speak to him with naked honesty about local problems—as long as they speak from first-hand knowledge. Whenever he has asked my views about a problem I knew little about, I always have told him I would have to look into it first; after I have done so, he has listened intently to what I have said, even when it was unpalatable. His trust and friendship for General Williams was based on this same principle. General O'Daniel arrived at much the same status with Diem. On the other hand, those Americans who just carried tales or seemed to be mere flunkeys for the personal whims of U.S. officials, lost their credibility with Diem—even when he still had an affection for them as old acquaintances. This is hardly unique among leaders of nations.

On page 4, in the last paragraph, you note an adverse reaction in the Vietnamese press to President Kennedyʼs message to Diem. This simply is not true. Yes, there was a bad reaction in the press to U.S. proposals after the Taylor mission. But, these were not reactions to President Kennedyʼs message. They were reactions to a rather naked grab at taking away sovereignty from the Vietnamese, in the terms State instructed Ambassador Nolting to present to Diem. In a top-level meeting, after the Vietnamese reaction was noted in Washington, I pointed out the offending language in the message and asked if it expressed U.S. policy. Our policy-makers (including Secretary Rusk and General Taylor) seemed surprised at the inclusion of the offending phrases, said that this was not U.S. policy, and sent new instructions to Ambassador Nolting correcting the U.S. proposals.3

This is quite different from the picture you have-of a U.S. ultimatum and Diem not budging.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam #5. Secret.

2 Document 35.

3 Regarding this issue, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 257 ff.

38. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 38. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 29, 1962—6 p.m.

983. Departmentʼs 899.2 We completely agree expanded effort in military civic action should make important contribution to achievement our objectives in Viet-Nam. MAAG is trying to get civic action program developed by Army mobile civic action team accepted by GVN and believes supplementary team could not be properly used until program developed by previous team accepted. Embassy concurs MAAG view and will work with MAAG in trying obtain acceptance program by GVN.

As Department aware we expect have what amounts to large scale civic action program in civilian field. Village improvement program announced by joint communiqué 3 weeks ago is civic action par excellence and all other USOM programs also directly bear on civic action possibilities. Progress now held up awaiting Washington approval of 1962 program and other relevant actions which subject separate cable Toaid 431.3 Trust response thereto can be expedited.

Under circumstances do not believe civic action team could be profitably used at this time in either military or civilian civic action field, but quite possible might well be useful in helping organize for implementation in both fields. In meantime would be interested in Departmentʼs views on composition team and specifically what it might do here.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-2962. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 30.

3 Not found.

39. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 39. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)1

Washington, January 31, 1962.

I-25146/62

SUBJECT

Air Operations in South Vietnam

You gave me yesterday, for comment, General Taylorʼs request for a report on the “Binh Hoa” operation of 21 January.2 Action on this request remains with General Lansdaleʼs office.

Our inquiries from General Taylorʼs staff indicate that his concern stems from an account brought back by Roger Hilsman to the effect that the operation was far too much of a “set piece” and was not an effective form of counter-guerrilla warfare.3

I see that Hilsman is appearing before the Special Group tomorrow,4 and urge that you bring out his criticisms to the fullest extent. If necessary, I could arrange to follow up further.

Depending on the validity of Hilsmanʼs criticisms, I think we should reconsider the question of a guidance message to the air people in South Vietnam, responding to Alexis Johnsonʼs letter mildly rebuking us for the Cambodian village incident.5 This came up at the SecDef/JCS meeting on Monday, and you will recall the sentiment was against sending such a message. However, my staff got the draft that had been prepared within the Joint Staff, which I attach.6 It seems to me a quite reasonable message and not to interfere with the necessary freedom of action.

After the meeting tomorrow, I suggest that you reconsider whether such a message would not be a good thing to do. A marginal benefit, of course, would be in our relations with State.

William P. Bundy7

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Sensitive 7-61. Top Secret. Secretary McNamara also received a copy.

2 Taylorʼs request, dated January 30, stated that the President wanted to learn more about the Binh Hoa operation. (Ibid.)

3 For Hilsmanʼs report on the Binh Hoa operation, see Document 42.

4 The minutes of the meeting of the Special Group (CI) on February 1 indicate only that Hilsman briefed the group on his recent trip to Vietnam and outlined his February 2 paper. (Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62)

5 Document 32.

6 Not printed.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

40. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 40. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 1, 1962—11:22 a.m.

951. Embtel 993.2 Following is text Secretaryʼs January 20 letter to you: “I was disappointed to receive your message of January 17 from Honolulu.3 Even before receiving it I had discussed Honolulu matter with Secretary McNamara and covered his personal talk with you. There is now no ‘piece of paper’. There is no doubt you are Senior US Representative in Viet-Nam, responsible for coordination and supervision of US official activities there including, of course, relations with GVN. Further, there is no lack of readiness here to clear up promptly any misunderstanding which might arise as General Harkins settles down to his new job. He will need all help you can give him and I am sure he will want to give you maximum support.

As to whether the background of this unfortunate affair makes it necessary to try to put the existing situation on paper, it is still my view that insistence on point, in absence of any actual misunderstanding, would almost certainly destroy very relationships which are critical to success in Viet-Nam. I would certainly not be willing produce paper effect of which would be make ‘treaty’ on constitutional and statutory responsibilities of President and members of his Cabinet. Letter from President to Ambassadors4 stands as heavy reliance on, and delegation to, Ambassadors in field.

Having said above, let me add that I fully appreciate difficulties which this matter may have caused for you, particularly for your peace of mind, but you can be assured you will have our full backing and support in what is one of most critical tasks in our diplomatic service.

Unless I hear from you again, I do not plan submit your letter to President because I should prefer that issue arise over something quite specific and tangible rather than on some general thesis—for reasons indicated above.”

Imperative that Harkins assume duty soonest. Expect you will promptly clear matter with Diem.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-162. Top Secret, Niact, No Distribution; Eyes Only for the Ambassador. Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson and cleared with Manfull.

2 In telegram 993, February 1, Nolting reported that he had not yet received a reply through the pouch to his letter to the President of January 17. (Ibid.)

3 Document 25.

4 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 1345.

41. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to President Kennedy 41. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to President Kennedy1

Washington, February 2, 1962.

SUBJECT

Defoliant Operations in Vietnam

On 3 January 1962 you authorized initiation of limited experimental defoliant operations in Vietnam.2 These defoliant operations, conducted 13-16 January 1962, included spraying selected segments of road totaling approximately 16 miles along Vietnamese Route Number 15 between Bien Hoa and Vung Tau. A second spraying of each area covered in the initial operation will be required approximately three weeks after the first spraying. Conclusive evaluation of this experiment can be made only after the effects of the second spraying are observed.

The Vietnamese Government carried out a simultaneous public information campaign in the test area. To date there have been no adverse reactions in South Vietnam to the defoliant operations. Foreign reaction in non-Communist nations has been relatively light. However, on 21 January, Radio Moscow accused the U.S.-Diemist clique of ordering a chemical warfare plan to destroy food in South Vietnam. Radio Peking also mentioned the subject on 13 January 1962, and various themes have been used recently by the North Vietnamese. On 19 and 24 January 1962 Radio Hanoi broadcasts emphasized the destruction of natural resources and of crops by toxic chemical spraying. This is an intensification of Communist propaganda noted as early as 6 November 1961.

The great variety of vegetation found in Vietnam includes species never treated in previous herbicide tests. The limited areas already sprayed do not include the variety of vegetation and conditions required for a full evaluation of the effectiveness of the chemicals employed and possible operational concepts for their use. It is important that we test all conditions of vegetation, as well as the effectiveness of defoliant techniques in specific situations, before proceeding with a larger scale program.

To provide the diversified test data needed for full evaluation, CINCPAC and Chief, MAAG, Vietnam have recommended extension of the test program to include six additional specific target areas. These targets have been selected to demonstrate the operational effectiveness of defoliants against types and combinations of vegetation not found in the areas already covered and also to demonstrate defoliant effectiveness in specific situations. The proposed additional targets, indicated by corresponding numbers on the attached map, are as follows: 1. Route from coast to Father Hoa Base at Binh Hung (4 miles).—The vegetation of this area is mangrove. Also defoliation will clear a route from the coast which could be secured by Father Hoaʼs troops, so that cargo now being air dropped could be moved by lighter from coastal vessels to the beach, and thence to Binh Hung.

2. Bien Hoa Air Base perimeter.—The security of the air base requires that fields of fire and observation be cleared in the area. The irregularity of the features of the base will demonstrate the precision with which spraying missions can be flown. The vegetation includes mixed scrub, tropicaI grass, bamboo, and softwood trees.

3. Nham Go Air Field perimeter.—Eliminating surrounding vegetation at this small strip will show to what degree the requirement for security troops is reduced through defoliant operations. Vegetation of this area is dense broad leaf evergreen forest. There is high continuous canopy over intertwined woody vines and dense evergreen undergrowth.

4. Than Tuy Ha Ammunition Dump area.—This ammunition dump is vulnerable to sabotage. Vegetation clearance will improve observation. The vegetation within the depot area is low, moderately dense mixed scrub and rank tropical grass.

5. Route Number 1 (9.5 mile segment).—The vegetation along the previously sprayed segments of Route 15 was mainly mixed scrub growth, palmgrove and scattered hardwood trees. The proposed segments of Route 1 and Route 14 (target 6) will cover the majority of other principal species of vegetation found in South Vietnam. The dense rain forest with moderate undergrowth found along the Route 14 segment is generally typical of the plateau region of Vietnam.

6. Route Number 14 (7.5 mile segment).—The vegetation is mainly open forest with heavy undergrowth.

It is recommended that extension of the present experimental defoliation program, as described above, be authorized. The Department of State concurs in this recommendation.

Robert S. McNamara3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. A memorandum of February 2 from Harriman through Johnson to Rusk recommended that Rusk concur in the Department of Defense plan. (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.8158/2-262) According to a note on the source text, it was approved by McNamara and Rusk on February 2 and sent to Taylor. A memorandum of February 5 from Bromley Smith to McNamara indicates that President Kennedy approved the recommendation. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 370164) Listed as an attachment to the memorandum, but not found attached to the source text, was a map showing the areas contemplated for defoliation.

2 See Document 1.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

42. Paper Prepared by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 42. Paper Prepared by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Washington, February 2, 1962.

A STRATEGIC CONCEPT FOR SOUTH VIETNAM

I. Enemy Situation

1. Present Strength.

Present Viet Cong strength in South Vietnam is as follows: a. Regular forces—12,600

b. Irregular forces—13,300

c. Supporters and sympathizers—100,000

2. Character of Viet Cong Forces.

The regular forces are full-time, relatively well-trained and equipped personnel. The cadres for the regular forces are frequently from North Vietnam, but the bulk of the personnel is recruited and trained locally.

The irregular forces are part-time guerrillas. They work by day and conduct operations at night, or they are brought together for a special operation to supplement a regular unit.

3. Areas of Concentration.

Map 1 shows the present concentrations of Viet Cong strength. It is at once evident that these concentrations are principally in less populated parts of South Vietnam with the notable exception of the two heavy concentrations in the Mekong River delta.

4. Viet Cong Strategy.

At present the Viet Cong forces are in a transitional stage from a guerrilla to a conventional type of warfare. As General Taylorʼs Report2 noted, the Viet Congʼs preferred strategy is one of political denouement,—preparing for conventional warfare, but hoping for a noncommunist coup against Diem that would create confusion and an opportunity for them to take over the country by political-guerrilla action. The Viet Cong have an offensive capability greater than they have exercised to date, but have proceeded slowly in order to consolidate, regroup, and extend their control throughout the countryside.

5. Methods of Viet Cong Control.

In many areas the Viet Cong have established overt or covert administrations, either setting up permanent, full-time government operations, or exercising a kind of shadow administration, functioning at night while the Government of Vietnam functions by day.

We must not assume that the Viet Cong depends solely or even principally on terror. The Viet Cong forces purchase food and other supplies rather than commandeer them. They tax in areas they control and elsewhere raise funds by “squeeze” on bus lines and truck companies operating in or through Viet Cong territory, by robbing government officials and supporters, and by ransom. In the areas south of Saigon, the Viet Cong add to their revenues through considerable export trade by junks with Singapore, principally in tobacco.

6. Reliance on Local Resources.

Much has been made of infiltration from North Vietnam. Except for money, however, very little in the way of weapons or supplies comes in from the North. In fact, the infiltration routes are used almost solely for bringing in trained cadres. These are important, especially to carry out the Viet Congʼs phased objective to transform guerrillas into regular forces, but cutting off the infiltration route would not by itself settle the Viet Cong problem. It is the people and villages of South Vietnam that are the Viet Congʼs real source of both supplies and recruits. Arms are largely those captured from the Vietnam forces, or are manufactured locally.

7. Use of Terror.

The Viet Cong resort to terror in the areas they control on a far lesser scale than has generally been believed. Instead, they seek to win the cooperation of the villagers, and use terror mainly in retaliation against unpopular government officials or villagers who communicate with or aid the Vietnam forces.

8. Conclusions.

a. The Viet Cong position in South Vietnam depends primarily upon maintaining access to the villages in areas under Viet Cong control or influence.

b. Infiltration of supplies and personnel from North Vietnam is only of secondary importance.

c. With their guerrilla tactics based on access to the villages and people, the Viet Cong since the latter part of 1961 have been inflicting roughly 1,000 casualties a month on the Vietnam forces and civilians. There is evidence, however, that the Viet Cong has now entered a transitional stage between guerrilla and conventional methods of warfare in line with the strategy expounded by Mao and Giap.

d. The struggle for South Vietnam, in sum, is essentially a battle for control of the villages.

e. This struggle cannot be won merely by attempting to seal off South Vietnam from the North. It must be won by cutting the Viet Cong off from their local sources of strength, i.e., by denying them access to the villages and the people.

II. Friendly Situation

1. Strength of Government of Vietnam Forces.

The military strength of the Government of Vietnam forces is as follows: a. Regular Army—175,000

b. Civil Guard—67,000

c. Self Defense Corps—54,000

2. Proposed Increases.

It has been proposed to increase the Regular Army to 200,000. President Diem, however, desires a total strength of 278,000. It has also been proposed to increase the Self Defense Corps to 60,000. The present authorized but not actual strength of the Civil Guard is 72,000

3. The Problem of the Regular Army.

The most frequent complaint is that the Regular Army is tied down in static defensive positions rather than used as a mobile force which can take offensive. In fact, however, if the Army units were taken off their defense positions, the villages, bridges, and other protected installations would be at the mercy of the Viet Cong, and the economy would grind to a halt. Furthermore, no amount of regular troops used offensively will solve the Viet Cong problem unless the villagers themselves are protected and the Viet Cong thus cut off from their sources of supplies and recruits. If access is not denied, two or more Viet Cong will be recruited for every one that is killed.

4. Inadequacy of Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps.

As recommended in the Taylor Report, there should be a drastic increase in the Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps. Steps have been taken in this direction, but more United States help is needed. With a population of 14 million there is only one Civil Guard personnel for every 210 people. Some provinces with a population of over one million have only 2,000 Civil Guards. Again, the Self Defense Corps is maintained at the ratio of only one Self-Defense Corpsman for every 240 people. In addition, the training of both forces is longer than is really needed. These men do not need to have all the skills of the thoroughly trained soldier. What they need to know beyond how to fire their weapons can be acquired in actual operations.

5. Conclusions.

a. The Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps should be very substantially increased to provide protection for the villages—not so much to free the Regular Army units, although this would be a desirable consequence, but to provide the villages with physical security and to cut off Viet Cong access to rice and people.

b. The present training period for the Civil Guard is now 24 weeks with a proposed reduction to 12 weeks. The Self Defense Corps is now receiving 6 weeks of training at special training centers. Training for both forces should be much shorter. Civil Guard training should be accomplished at the province or, better still, the district level. Self Defense Corps units should be trained in the villages from which they are recruited.

c. The technical skills needed for the construction of defenses and the skills for training must be supplied by the United States—by getting American non-commissioned officers and lieutenants out to the district and village level.

III. Political Situation

1. President Diemʼs Position.

a. The people of South Vietnam want to fight and are basically anti-Communist. Morale is much better as a result of General Maxwell Taylorʼs mission and President Kennedyʼs decisions to support South Vietnam. But this boost will be fleeting if we do not find ways to continue the momentum.

b. As General Taylor reported, President Diem is an old-fashioned Asian ruler who hesitates to delegate authority. Nevertheless, he does have the respect of his people. With due allowance for his shortcomings, it must be recognized that he is faced with real problems. His country is partly occupied and controlled by enemy forces which have a demonstrated capability of increasing the magnitude of their operations against his government. The very existence of his country is thus at stake.

c. Because of the adverse military situation, Diem is also faced with the real possibility of coup attempts by elements within South Vietnam. He is convinced that the Viet Cong are hoping most of all for a coup which will give the opportunity for them to move in. Diem also occasionally has doubts about the Americans on this score. Although he seems to be convinced that present United States policy is to support him, he is concerned that the United States will someday decide to engineer a coup if he lets American influence in South Vietnam become too great.

d. Finally, Diem does lack trained personnel, particularly at the lower levels. As General Taylor noted, there is no lack of dedication, but there is a great shortage of competence.

2. The United States Missions in South Vietnam.

a. Some United States personnel in all agencies have been in Vietnam too long and carry old grudges and frustrations, or are unduly influenced by the views of various South Vietnamese “dissidents.” These frustrated old-timers feed defeatist talk to the American press. They also talk to and encourage the “dissidents” among the French-educated South Vietnamese intellectuals who are concentrated in Saigon.

b. What is worse, some of these so-called “dissidents” actually are stalking horses for Diem who take criticism of Diem back to him, and thus complete the vicious circle of suspicion of the United States, frustration, and defeatism.

c. Moreover, the United States Missions in South Vietnam do not always work as a team. Each agency has its own views and concepts which have led to inter-agency jealousies and bickering. In all United States agencies, furthermore, much could be done to improve the quality of personnel.

d. While the top United States leadership is rapidly developing knowledge of the strategic concepts for fighting guerrillas, there is as yet no real understanding of these concepts at the working level. The problem here is one of leadership and articulation.

3. Conclusions.

a. Some easing of United States pressure on Diem for major reforms and reorganization of his government at the top seems called for. Although desirable, none of these are fundamental to the problem of cutting the Viet Congʼs access to the villages and the people.

b. We should turn our attention to providing help at the local level. What we need are sergeants, lieutenants, and Civic Action teams, including police trainers and public administrators, to work with the Vietnamese Government officials in the villages and with the troops in the field.

c. As recommended in the Taylor Report, in sum, we need more “working level friends and advisers”—Americans with technical competence, imagination, and human sympathy, and with the willingness and ability to live and work in the villages. As General Taylor said, such personnel exist and can be found and trained for the job.

d. Finally, there is an immediate need to develop a better understanding of the strategic concept for counterinsurgency war among working level Americans in all United States agencies in South Vietnam.

IV. The Strategic Concept

1. Basic Principles.

The strategic concept of an effective counterinsurgency operation in South Vietnam is expressed in the following principles: a. First Principle. The problem presented by the Viet Cong is a political and not a military problem—or, more accurately, it is a problem in civic action.

The objective is to cut the Viet Cong off from their sources of supplies and recruits. Since both supplies and recruits come from within South Vietnam, this means cutting off the Viet Congʼs access to the villages and the people.

Measures must be taken to tie the villages into the network of government administration and control. Channels must be established through which information of the villages' needs and problems can flow upward and government services can flow downward. The instruments for this task are public administration officials, police, public information services, etc.

b. Second Principle. An effective counterinsurgency plan must provide the people and the villages with protection and physical security.

Physical security, coupled with controls on the movement of people and supplies, will protect the villagers from being intimidated into selling the Viet Cong rice and from being persuaded or intimidated into joining the Viet Cong, and will prevent Viet Cong sympathizers from surreptitiously providing the guerrillas with supplies.

In addition, it is only by giving the people physical security that the intelligence problem can be solved. The intelligence problem in Vietnam is one of combat intelligence, not strategic intelligence. Espionage penetration of the Viet Cong will take too long to accomplish. And even then the results will not be satisfactory. For example, an agent in a Viet Cong unit will have a difficult problem in communicating. By the time he can get intelligence to the government on an impending attack, for example, the attack will probably have already taken place; by the time he can pass on information on the location of a Viet Cong unit he is with, the unit will have probably moved on.

c. Third Principle: Counter-guerrilla forces must adopt the tactics of the guerrilla himself. Conventional military tactics are ineffective against guerrillas.

2. Example: Past and Present.

The Third Principle merits elaboration by specific examples. Two have been chosen: the first from operations in Burma during World War II, and the second from the very recent operations in South Vietnam.

a. The Heho-Lawksawk-Taunggyi Operation, Burma.

In the Battle of Mandalay-Meiktila, an OSS group consisting of 4 Americans and 300 natives operated in the mountains along the Japanese secondary supply line, Meiktila-Taunggyi-Bangkok' in the Heho-Lawksawk-Taunggyi triangle (see Map 2). The DSS guerrilla force blew bridges to restrict the movement of Japanese artillery and ambushed Japanese truck convoys. Although the Japanese forces could ill afford it, a Japanese regiment of 3,000 men was taken out of the battle for one month to pursue the OSS guerrilla group.

The Japanese method of operation, however, was conventional—they pursued with regiments and battalions along the major roads and attempted elaborate, set-piece traps. For example, when the guerrilla group was operating in the area just north of Taunggyi, the Japanese moved several battalions into a U-shaped position on the road feeding to Lawksawk and attempted to chivvy the OSS guerrilla group into the trap with the remaining battalion. Although the OSS group could easily have escaped by breaking into groups of two or three and assembling again at a later date, even this proved unnecessary. The OSS group marched north to encourage the Japanese to complete the execution of their plan and, at nightfall, turned west into the jungle and made their way into the mountains. The Japanese closed the trap on air.

At the end of one month the Japanese had suffered something over 100 casualties, and the OSS group had suffered one.

Had the Japanese adopted a different tactic, however, the guerrilla group would not have survived. What the Japanese should have done was to combine their greater mobility and discipline with guerrilla tactics. For example, they could have stationed half of their force at one of the major road junctions with trucks to provide rapid deployment so far as the road-net would permit. Then they could have divided the area in which the OSS guerrillas were operating into zones, and stationed a platoon or company in each of the zones with orders to operate as the guerrillas were operating, i.e., to patrol and ambush on all jungle trails and paths. Sooner or later one of these units would have met the OSS guerrillas. The mobile reserve could then have been deployed in order to ambush along the trails leading into the area and to reinforce troops engaged in combat. It is worth noting that once the OSS group were eliminated as an organized force by some such tactic, the Japanese should then have placed an effective administration over the area and its villages in order to prevent remnants of the OSS guerrilla force from returning as soon as the regular forces departed.

b. The Binh Hoa Operation, South Vietnam.

On January 21, 1962 a joint South Vietnamese-United States attack was undertaken against the Viet Cong at Binh Hoa (see Map 3). According to intelligence reports, there were 300 Viet Cone at Point A and a full Viet Cong battalion in huts around the edges of the Air Drop Zone. These reports were 4 or 5 days old, but air photos showed what appeared to be a munitions manufacturing installation at Point B and possibly munitions storage facilities at Point C.

The plan, prepared by the senior United States Military Advisor to the Vietnamese Army 3rd Corps, called for prepositioning four battalions in boats on the nver during the night before the operation.

At 0755 hours, B-26ʼs bombed and strafed Point A. (The terrain here consists of flat jungle. The bombers actually attacked a village just on the Cambodian side of the frontier, one and a half kilometers away, and killed and wounded a number of villagers.)

At 0800 hours, B-26ʼs attacked Point B and C with 500-pound bombs, while T-28ʼs attacked the huts surrounding the Air Drop Zone with rockets. When the first bomb exploded, the four battalions on boats disembarked. The bombing and strafing continued for 45 minutes. There was then a 15-minute lull, the beginning of which was marked by the firing of flares in front of each of the four battalions, which then began their advance.

The two battalions south of the canal between Points B and C wheeled right into a blocking position along the canal, and the two battalions north of the canal advanced directly to their front. At-00 hours, an airborne battalion parachuted on the Air Drop Zone and attacked in the direction of Point B. In Phase II of the operation, all troops conducted a sweep north of the Oriental River.

The plan was well and efficiently executed. It was, however, inappropriate in counterguerrilla warfare. The basic concept of creating a trap will rarely work against guerrillas. In general, counterguerrilla warfare requires that contact be made with the guerrillas by aggressive patrolling, and at that point troops should be brought up to form a trap by ambushing the trails and roads leading away from the area of contact.

The prepositioning of troops in boats was very likely to give the guerrillas prior warning of an attack.

The preparatory bombing also gave the guerrillas warning. In addition, it ran the risk of hlling innocent or at least persuadable villagers and thus recruiting more Communists than were killed. Preparatory bombing is suitable for attacks on prepared defenses in conventional war, but not for guerrilla war. There are no Siegfried lines in the jungle.

The results of the Binh Hoa operation confirm this analysis. According to after-action reports, no contact with the enemy was made in Phase I of the operation. However, five civilians were killed and eleven wounded. (Reports are unclear as to whether these casualties did or did not include the Cambodians killed in the misdirected strike at Point A.) According to Mr. Socharyk of Life Magazine, who followed the airdrop by helicopter, those killed in action included a two-year old boy, a five-year old girl, and a seven-year old boy. Mr. Socharyk also maintains that he can document his statements with photographs.

In Phase II of the operation—the sweep north of Oriental River—the Viet Cong lost 5 killed, 21 captured, and 60 suspects apprehended. Weapons and documents of intelligence value were captured. South Vietnamese casualties were six wounded.

It seems obvious that such an operation is not only fruitless but creates more Communists than it kills. Let it also be said, however that General McGarr, Chief of MAAG, took strong and positive action to correct the misconceptions apparent in this operation, and spoke to the military personnel involved in strong and unmistakable language.

In fairness, however, it must also be said that this is by no means an isolated occurrence. As a perusal of MAAGʼs military situation reports will show, operations by both Jungle Jim and military forces tend to follow tactics more appropriate to conventional, World War II situations than to guerrilla warfare.

Also in fairness, it should be noted that counterguerrilla operations are both new and radically different from American military experience, requiring soldiers to unlearn old lessons as well as to learn new ones. It would be unfair and unreasonable to expect men to abandon overnight principles learned the hard way in bloody and honorable combat in World War II and Korea. The fact that this is precisely what is needed in no way condemns the soldiers or excuses those who would criticize them.

As it turned out, the intelligence reports were essentially accurate. Local Vietnamese reported that one hour before the air strike an estimated 200 Viet Cong evacuated the Air Drop Zone.

The question is, how should the Binh Hoa operation have been conducted to take advantage of this intelligence?

In general, counterguerrilla operations should be so conducted as to make contact with the enemy through ground patrols before air strikes are mounted.

The intelligence about Viet Cong activities in Binh Hoa was on the whole good. The utilization of this intelligence was ineffective. The operation gave the Viet Cong ample warning and they apparently took full advantage of it.

The rationale for the preliminary air strike was human and understandable: paratroopers in the air are vulnerable, and an air strike will tend to protect them. Nevertheless, a preliminary air strike in counterguerrilla operations is indefensible.

The rationale for the use of paratroopers is less understandable. The rationale was that since intelligence reported a full battalion of Viet Cong, a full battalion of ARVN was needed. The helicopters available, however, could deliver only half of a battalion in the first wave. Thus, an air drop seemed to be indicated.

These arguments seem reasonable, but they are inappropriate to counterguerrilla warfare. In counterguerrilla warfare it is essential to distinguish between hard-core guerrillas and ordinary villagers, even though the latter may be sympathetic to the guerrillas. Contact must be made with the enemy before the air strike, not after, and surprise is all-important since guerrillas do not seek to hold ground but to influence and control the minds and hearts of the people.

A preliminary air strike is therefore inadmissible in counterguerrilla operations. In addition, paratroopers are useful not as the attacking but only as the reinforcing element—after contact is made by patrols or other means, e.g., helicopters. It takes three to five minutes for a paratroop unit to reach the ground, and three to five minutes is time enough for a guerrilla unit to escape to the jungle.

In general, the first contact must be made by units that operate in the same way as the guerrillas themselves—living for lone periods in the jungle, patrolling, ambushing, moving, and never sleeping two nights in the same place.

The one exception to this rule is a force moved by helicopter. Flying three to five feet off the ground along roadways and canals, a helicopter discharges its troops only 12 seconds after the enemy sees and identifies it. The Binh Hoa operation might well have utilized helicopters. The helicopters available could have transported only half a battalion in the first wave. But these could have made contact with the enemy with no warning whatsoever.

Once contact was made, the Jungle Jim unit could have been called in with effect—against a known and precisely located enemy. The paratroopers, orbiting at a higher altitude, could then have been introduced either to reinforce the helicopter unit already engaged or to block the routes of Viet Cong retreat.

If the intelligence was faulty, no harm would have been done with such tactics and no villagers would have been killed. If the intelligence had been correct, however, these tactics would have prevented a warning to the Viet Cong. Their retreat would have been slowed up by the fire of the hoops brought in by helicopter, impeded by the strikes of the Jungle Jim unit, and blocked by the action of the paratroopers.

V. The Plan3

1. General Concept.

The following plan consists of three phases, each of which involves a combination of military, political, civic action, economic, and social measures.

This plan is designed to eliminate the Viet Cong from successive areas through a progression of steps, and to provide the villages with a security framework and a solid socio-political base to ensure that this elimination is permanent.

The people of South Vietnam are the target, and the vast majority of the people live in the Mekong River delta and along the coasts (see Map 4). The first priority should therefore be the delta area and, for obvious international political reasons, the area around Hue, just south of the Demarcation Line.

Phase I provides the security framework and socio-political base for these two first-priority areas; Phase II covers the other areas of heavy population density; and Phase III is designed to provide permanent protection at the borders and to eliminate the remaining Viet Cong in the mountains and jungles of the less populated regions.

2. Phase I.

Zones of strategic villages will be established simultaneously in the two first-priority areas, beginning with provinces least heavily penetrated by the Viet Cong. As each zone is completed, work will begin on additional zones, fanning outwards until the entire province is covered, and eventually, at the end of Phase I, the whole of the two first-priority areas.

Take, for example, the province of Binh Tuong (see Map 5). Let us assume for purposes of illustration that the white area east of zones I and II is virtually free of Viet Cong, that zone I is moderately penetrated, and that zone II is virtually free but subject to incursions by Viet Cong irregulars from the south. In the white area, strategic villages would not be necessary. Zone I would need strategic villages to protect its population from local Viet Cong, and zone II would need them to protect its population from incursions from the heavily penetrated area of the south. After zones I and II have been secured, the teams would move on to zone III.

At the same time as these zones of strategic villages are being constructed work would begin on a belt of defended villages in zone IV along the edge of the population density line to serve as a cordon sanitaire.

The regular forces of the South Vietnamese army would at the same time wage a sustained campaign of patrolling and appropriately conceived offensives against the regular Viet Cong forces with whatever troops it has available after discharging the essential tasks of defending vital installations and protecting the teams constructing strategic villages. Keeping the regular Viet Cong off balance is vital, since the Communists will make every effort to prevent the construction of strategic village zones.

a. Strategic Villages.

The creation of strategic villages in relatively secure areas involves the regroupment of village hamlets into one compact, easily defended area. The difficulties of this regroupment will vary with the village, depending on its size, population, and distribution of its hamlets.

Each strategic village will be protected by a ditch and a fence of barbed wire. It will include one or more observation towers, guard posts, and a defense post for central storage of arms, as shown in the attached diagram (see Sketch). The area immediately around the village will be cleared for fields of fire and the area approaching the clearing, including the ditch, will be strewn with booby-traps (spikes, pits, explosives, etc.) and other personnel obstacles. In these tasks, the help of United States Army sergeants and lieutenants as advisors will be vital.

Each strategic village will have field telephones and an alarm system connecting the watch towers and guard posts with the defense posts, as well as radio facilities enabling it to maintain direct communication with the government administrative and the military-security command structure at the district level, and ultimately up to the central government complex in Saigon. Here, too, the help of American advisors will be necessary.

Each strategic village will be defended by a Self Defense Corps unit of 75 to 150 men, i.e., 1 squad per hamlet and 1 platoon per village. Each Self Defense Corps unit will be armed with carbines, 45 caliber grease guns and shotguns, and its arms and ammunition will be centrally located and guarded.

The primary missions of the Self Defense Corps unit are to defend the strategic village from attack and to conduct daylight patrols outside the immediate vicinity of the strategic village.

The areas between strategic villages will be covered by the Civil Guard. The Civil Guard will conduct night patrols between the strategic villages' lay ambushes, assist in guarding strategic government installations, maintain road check points, and constitute a mobile reserve, i.e., to relieve a strategic village when under attack or assist the Army in larger operations against the Viet Cong. Here, too, the help of American sergeants and lieutenants is vital.

The Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps (along with the National Surete and the Municipal Police, the regular police services in urban areas) will also be responsible for enforcing curfews, checking identity cards, and ferreting out hard-core Communists and provide intelligence on the Viet Cong.

In this respect, it cannot be stressed too strongly that the key to effective intelligence is not penetration of the Viet Cong apparatus (it would be too difficult and take too long to achieve this capability) but rather the mere fact of providing security to the villager from Viet Cong intimidation and terror. This security for him and his family will motivate the villagers to pass on information on the Viet Cong to government officials. The US Central Intelligence Agency should give high priority to the installation of road watchers as utilized in Laos. This is not to say that there is no room for clandestine intelligence operations. however.

b. Defended Villages.

The creation of defended villages will follow essentially the pattern for strategic villages, i.e., regroupment of hamlets, construction of defenses, alarm systems, communications, etc.

Defended villages, however, would be created along the periphery of Viet Cong concentration areas in such a fashion to form a belt of defended villages along a population density line covering roughly one-half of the Mekong River delta area and then swinging eastward toward the coast and running north along the coast to just south of Tourane, and then westward to the Lao frontier.

Another major difference between the strategic and the defended village is that the latter is defended both by the Self Defense Corps and the Civil Guard units and initially, at least, by Army units.

The defended village belt thus constitutes the forward security line against further Viet Cong expansion. The strategic villages constitute rear echelon sectors where mopping up and consolidation take place. The number of both the defended and the strategic villages would be expanded progressively to squeeze and isolate the Viet Cong and increase secured areas.

Once zones of strategic villages with the Civil Guard operating in the intermediate areas are established, the Viet Cong will be effectively cut off from the sources of both supplies and recruits. If a Viet Cong unit ventures into such a zone, it will find itself in what is, in fact, a meat grinder.

Sooner or later, the intruding Viet Cong unit will run into a Civil Guard ambush or patrol. This, in turn, will be followed by reinforcements by other Civil Guard and even regular Army units, called in by radio and transported by helicopter, and by ambushes on trails and roads leading to the area of contact. In addition, the controls on the movements of people and supplies will force an intruding Viet Cong unit to attack strategic villages to obtain food. And such an attack will, in turn, bring still more reinforcements and ambushes on the routes of escape. The Viet Cong, in sum, will be forced to attack and the advantage of ambush will pass from the Communists to the government.

c. Role of the Army.

In carrying out its primary mission of keeping the regular Viet Cong forces off balance, it is essential that the Army adopt the strategy and tactics used by the Viet Cong, exploiting at the same time the Armyʼs advantages of numerical superiority, logistics, and air power.

Mobility, surprise, and small unit operations are basic. The deployment of forces, however secure and well coordinated, along conventional warfare lines and the use of artillery or aerial bombardment for softening up the enemy only give advance warning of an operation, permit the Viet Cong to escape, and inevitably result in the death of uncommitted or wavering civilians whose support is essential for the Viet Congʼs ultimate defeat. Artillery or aerial bombardment, therefore, should be introduced only after actual ground contact with Viet Cong forces has been made.

The Army should also be utilized to reduce infiltration across the frontier. Ranger companies are best equipped to execute this mission. They should be committed to specified zones along the frontier area (see Map 4), particularly in the highlands along the Lao border, for periods of three to four months, at least. They should be highly mobile, never sleeping twice in the same place, and patrolling and ambushing at will. Here, again, US Army advisors are needed to assist and to set an example.

Ranger companies contacting large Viet Cong units would be supported by air drops and paratroop reinforcement.

To sum up, the role of the Army in Phase I is as follows: To continue to defend vital installations, province capitals, and other strategic points until relieved by the creation of local zones of strategic villages.

To provide protection for the teams constructing strategic villages m the more dangerous areas.

To use the remaining forces offensively against the regular Viet Cong units to keep them off balance.

To operate themselves as guerrillas along the Viet Cong infiltration routes.

d. Civic Action Teams.

The single most important element in eliminating the Viet Cong is the so-called Civic Action Team. These teams were apparently originated on the initiative of the South Vietnamese. Each team is made up of 17-18 persons with the following specialties: 3 public administration

1 youth activities

2-3 police training

1 public information

1 agricultural credit

1 medical

1 education

1 intelligence

1 Civil Guard liaison

5 Self Defense Corps training

In this plan the task of the civic action teams is to assist locals in the construction of strategic villages and to build the essenha1 socio-political base.

The public administration members will set up village government and tie it into the district and national levels assuring the flow of information on village needs and problems upward and the flow of government services downward.

President Diem has himself organized a youth movement of 300,000 members. The youth activities man on the civic action team would relate the youth in the village to the national government through this organization and use its members as recruits for the Self Defense Corps and other necessary tasks.

The 2-3 police members of the team perform the essential task of issuing identity cards, instituting controls on the movements of supplies, food and people, and so filtering out the hard-core Communists within the local population.

The public information member of the team has the task of explaining the need for relocating hamlets, the construction of strategic villages, as well as bringing political support to the national government.

The agricultural credit member of the team will assist in solving the problems connected with the relocation of hamlets as well as agricultural credit programs.

The medical technician will look to health and sanitation problems.

The educational specialist will deal with and assist in the reconstruction of schools and school programs.

The intelligence specialist will serve as liaison for channeling information obtained from the villages to district, province, and national levels.

The Civil Guard liaison official will man the radio used for calling forth support of nearby Civil Guard units in case of attack.

The Self Defense Corps trainers will recruit and train Self Defense Corps personnel in the village.

There are now only some 30-40 civic action teams operating throughout South Vietnam. Two hundred are needed. In addition, each team should also include a United States Army sergeant or lieutenant to help in Self Defense Corps training and if possible an American civilian with public administration or police training.

3. Phase II.

In Phase II the same methods would be used to extend the zones of strategic villages to cover the remaining densely populated areas.

Secondly, Phase II will also include a stepped-up program of economic and social development. These measures should be designed to achieve maximum effect at the village level and to build up the progress made by the Civic Action teams during Phase I.

Finally, during Phase II increased attention would be given to the security of the tribesmen in the Montagnard highlands (where it is difficult to apply the strategic village concept because villages are too far apart). For example, rice would be purchased and stored at protected sites and then sold once a week at about half the price to the tribal peoples on a closely controlled ration basis to deny it to the Viet Cong.

4. Phase III.

Suitably hardy, loyal and tough villagers will be resettled in permanently defended, strategic villages along the Cambodian and Laotian borders. (The cost here is higher, since it requires clearing new lands and possibly permanent subsidies in the form of wages for duty by adult males as border guards.)

Continuing its offensive, the regular army will pursue and destroy the remnants of the Viet Cong hiding in the under-populated mountains and jungles.

Special economic, social, and political measures will be undertaken to win and hold the loyalty of the Montagnards.

VI. Estimated Additional Personnel and Matériel Required

1. Civic Action Teams

Now: 30-40

This Plan: 200 (based on the strategic village plan)

Needed: South Vietnamese—1,200 additional personnel

United States Army—250 sergeants/lieutenants (includes 50 trainee/administrative personnel)

United States Civilian—150 police/public administrative personnel

Malayan-British—100 police/public administrative personnel

Training: At several central locations; now largely South Vietnam action and initiative; United States help needed.

2. Civil Guard (full-time amateurs)

Now: 67,000 personnel

Projected: 72,000 personnel

This plan: 130,000 personnel (130 men per company; one company needed for each set of two villages in threatened zone, i.e., 1,000 companies)

Needed: South Vietnamese—58,000 additional personnel United States Army sergeants and lieutenants—400 personnel (Administrative support exists; number of United States personnel needed is keyed to Civic Action plan)

Training: At no higher than province and preferably at district level (now done at 5 centrally located training centers); and by 12 mobile Training Teams.

3. Self Defense Corps (part-time amateurs)

Now: 56,500 personnel

Proposed: 60,000 personnel

This Plan: 150,000 personnel

(Estimate based on 2,000 threatened villages; 75 men per village, i.e., 1 squad per hamlet and one platoon per village)

South Vietnamese required—100,000 personnel, part-time only United States required—200 sergeants/lieutenants (Civic Action teams take care of most strategic villages; the 200 United States personnel are for defended villages)

Training: Now in various centers; planned training course is 6 weeks.

This Plan: In villages proper; two weeks training and several weeks of training—on-the-job.

4. Ranger Companies (For jungle work on infiltration routes)

Now: 75 companies

Projected: 86 companies

This Plan: Same

South Vietnam: No additional personnel

United States required: approximately 150 additional personnel (some companies already have United States personnel attached).

5. a. Total South Vietnamese personnel required

Full-time: 59,000

Part-time: 100,000 Self Defense Corps

b. Total United States personnel required

Military — 1,000

Civilian — 150

c. Malayans/British Personnel required—100

6. Total Equipment required

3,000—radios, village and distant

10,000—field telephones

150,000—carbines, grease guns, and shotguns

15,000—BARʼs

15,000—60 mm mortars

barbed wire, roofing materials, identity cards, etc.

1—additional Helicopter Company

12—4-place Helicopters

light armed boats light armored car (British manufacture)

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, Reports and Memos, 1/62-2/62. Secret. Attached to the source text were a cover sheet, indicating that the original had gone to General Taylor; a transmittal memorandum from Hilsman to Taylor, in his capacity as chairman of the Special Group (CI), stating that the paper had been prepared as requested by Taylor and the President; and a table of contents. The table of contents indicates that maps, not found attached to the source text, were included with the original. At the Presidentʼs behest Hilsman attended the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu on January 15, then went on to Saigon with Nolting to begin an inspection tour of South Vietnam. This report was based on that tour. Hilsman spent the latter half of January in Vietnam. Regarding the background of his visit, see Hilsman, To Move a Nation, p. 427.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 210.

3 The basic approach followed in this plan was developed by Mr. R.G.K. Thompson, who played a major role in directing counter-insurgency operations in Malaya and who is now a Special Advisor attached to the British Embassy in Saigon. [Footnote in the source text.]

43. Telegram From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 43. Telegram From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)1

Saigon, February 3, 1962—12:05 p.m.

MAGPO 779. JCS pass to Task Force VN Wash. Reference: JCS 041835Z Dec 61.2

1. Official GVN request has been received from Secretary Thuan for commencement crop warfare program. In his request, Thuan stated instructions are being given to RVNAF to avoid damage to crops belonging to government supporters and to take such preventive measures as may be required to avoid adverse political or psychological reaction. Action now being taken to determine if instructions meet requirements ref msg for resettlement displaced persons and alternated food supply system. VN Chairman, Joint Planning Committee for Defoliation and Crop Warfare, had previously been made aware of US position as stated in ref msg and is currently trying to ensure that instructions from DOD include appropriate provisions to meet requirement although in the past Vietnamese have been generally cool to idea of specific plans for resettlement and alternate food supply. VN position, not officially expressed, has stemmed from following arguments: A. Crop warfare is primarily a GVN show. All missions to be flown by VNAF personnel in VNAF helicopters against targets selected by Vietnamese.

B. RVNAF is currently engaged in a crop warfare program. In their reparations in the field, VC crops and food caches are destroyed whenever found. Chemicals, therefore, are regarded as just another and more effective means of doing something RVNAF is already doing.

C. Chemicals will only be employed in areas not under GVN control and where population either VC or VC supporters. Food supply has been a major concern of the VC. Denial of food would drive VC and their supporters out of their safe haven at last. They would then be handled as the individual situation dictated. The ideal being to resettle and reorient all except hard-core Communists.

2. After considerable US pressure to get defoliation program going, there are some indications that Vietnamese are now becoming impatient with US restrictions imposed on employment of chemicals. President Diem has always actively supported crop warfare program. Now that chemicals are here, VNAF helicopters equipped and target areas selected, GVN anxious to start.

3. There is always the possibility, no matter how great the precautions, that spray operations may produce an adverse effect among people who would support the government under more favorable circumstances. A similar risk is involved when conventional weapons are employed to reduce an area regarded as a VC stronghold. Even though we may [?] in having the Vietnamese develop a plan on paper that is considered satisfactory and meets the requirements of ref msg, we have no assurance that the provisions of the plans will be faithfully excused. once chemicals are released to the VN, it will be virtually impossible to determine if those targets scheduled to be hit are the ones that are actually sprayed. US can participate in planning for crop warfare but US participation in its execution has already been ruled out.

4. American Embassy has decided to take another hard look at crop warfare program to see if political disadvantages outweigh military advantages. They are currently in process of drafting a Task Force message on this subject to be coordinated in the near future. Above information submitted as background in the event Embassy now takes a position against any crop warfare. At such time as draft of Task Force msg received, MAAG will make specific comments and recommendations. At present time feel there are military advantages to be gained in crop warfare and that a complete reversal of US position would be hard to justify to Diem.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Top Secret. Repeated to the JCS, which was requested to pass it to the Vietnam Task Force This telegram was also passed to the White House. A handwritten note at the top of the source text reads: “Bundy—See last para.”

2 Not found.

44. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 44. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 3, 1962—2 p.m.

1007. Reference: Embassy telegrams 7562 and 8923 and Embdesp 299.4 Following is summary January developments relating GVN implementation joint memorandum of understanding.

A. National Internal Security Council. NISC met January 5, 8 and 27 (Dec. Meetings on 13th and 22nd). Problems discussed included road construction, strategic hamlet program, population resettlement, and situation in Quang Nagi Province. Council appears at this moment to be primarily briefing forum rather than decision making or discussion body. MAAG aware one or two occasions where NISC apparently contributed toward solving particular problems, but still too early for more general assessment of institution.

B. Military Command Structure. GVN considering abolishing field command and making corps directly responsible JCS. Impact and implication of such move now being studied.MAAGʼs initial reaction is that this is regressive step, but strong JCS might be preferable phantom field command.

C. Intelligence. [1.] Preoccupation of key Vietnamese personnel with a wide scope of organizational and operational problems tended limit progress and precluded spectacular advance in any one field of endeavor.

Previously programmed training courses for CIO, domestic inter service and police units, however, continued per schedule, and in general liaison arrangements were proceeding satisfactorily.

2. First military intelligence advisors arrived January for duty with corps and divisions. Future arrivals to be assigned provinces to work with sector commanders (province chiefs).

D. Joint Provincial Surveys. Pilot project phase completed with Bien Hoa survey January 20. Reports now being compiled and recommendations studied. After allowing time observe utilization team recommendations, results will be evaluated to improve instructions to teams for further surveys.

E. Border Ranger Force. January 11 President Diem agreed make available 11 corps total 10 Ranger companies for deployment along Laos/Viet-Nam frontier. January 23 DOD directed JCS implement Presidentʼs decision. However, formation order Ranger Force not imminent. Availability Ranger units directly related ARVN force increase and CG/SDC ability assume security duties now being performed by Rangers. Moreover, provincial authorities actively opposing release of Rangers to border patrol.

F. Military Coordination. 1. Joint Operations Center began functioning end January with limited VNAF participation. (Center controls air operations on basis RVNAF target selections.) It has functioned satisfactorily so far, though it recognized participation other services desirable. U.S. Army representative has been assigned to the Center.

2. Joint air, naval and helicopter operations continued during month. Coordination was satisfactory and no command problems arose.

3. MAAG advisors now participating all important ARVN operations. Working relationships excellent.

G. Administration. No additional U.S. advisors yet requested by GVN.

H. Measures to win public support and broaden sense of participation in war effort. 1. Provincial councils said to be in process formation, and Embassy told they will be in place by end of February.

2. Military training program for women concluded first phase January 26 with graduation ceremony which President attended. Of 1,450 trainees completing course only top 900 to be used immediately for provincial training programs; these scheduled begin March 1.

3. Military training program for government employees continues to spread, though GVN official described progress as slow.

4. National economic council adjourned January 30 after studying 5-year development plan and effect of January 1 economic measures. Group has received wide publicity. Next session probably July.

Though too early evaluate effectiveness, its existence alone appears be having somewhat favorable effect.

5. GVN continuing take measures improve military morale. Nationwide campaign provide Tet packages for front-line soldiers and collect funds for other support activities being given wide publicity. Principal beneficiaries appear be soldiers in field.

6. Continuing to develop provincial service program for government officials, GVN announced late January calculation of seniority for promotion would henceforth be weighted to favor those with service outside cities.

7. Controversial and unpopular “Social purification bill” returned to National Assembly by President for amendment.

8. GVN has announced official Tet observances will take place within framework austerity. Usual celebrations at palace have been canceled and festivities in government ministries discouraged.

I. Improvement of contacts between government and people. No special developments during period, but Cabinet ministers continue to travel (most by air) widely in country.

J. More effective information program. DirGen info official told Emboff his office planned devote greater attention in future to vernacular press with view toward improving quality and standing local newspapers.

K. Trial Non-commie Prisoners. 1. A close associate of leading oppositionist Dr. Den, under arrest since 1960 coup attempt, released by GVN early January.

2. Diem told … mid-January he considering releasing Den. However, no action so far.

L. Amnesty Policy. DOD has developed four-part amnesty program relating (1) treatment of VC surrenderers and prisoners, (2) safe conduct system, (3) practices for inducing VC surrenders and (4) reindoctrination ARVN personnel captured by VC and released. Thuan has approved program and General Ty has instructed RVNAF to implement it, but necessary inter-ministerial coordination not yet arranged. While program still needs polishing, Task Force believes it should get under way, and may if necessary try to give it a shove.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-362. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Not printed, but see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 305, footnote 4.

3 Document 7.

4 Dated January 22, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/1-2262)

45. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 45. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 3, 1962—6 p.m.

1008. President Diem today gave his complete concurrence to new U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, and said he is looking forward to meeting and working with Gen. Harkins.

He said he had been worried about losing Gen. McGarr and hoped that he would remain, remarking that his advice and understanding of situation here were most valuable and appreciated. (I said I thought it likely that Gen. McGarr would continue here to perform MAAG functions.)

Diem said my letter of yesterday2 (which he had received upon return from field trip) had reassured him on several points; that it was very important not to give credibility to Viet Cong propaganda, nor his own people reason for thinking that the U.S. has taken over direction of the war effort. It was for this reason that he insisted on “civilian head” of U.S. mission. (I told him this was clearly understood.)

We did not directly discuss press announcement of new command. Believe, however, announcement should be in low key, giving name of new command and commander and general purpose, but otherwise appearing to indicate business as usual. We will devise text and check it with Thuan, if desired (and if he is available over Tet holidays).3

Diem was in optimistic and rather philosophical frame of mind, saying he felt that our “closer partnership” was working well, having good effect on SVN popular opinion as well as on morale and aggressiveness of Vietnamese Armed Forces. He then said he hoped our fellows would be on their good behavior vis-à-vis Vietnamese girls, who are “en principe, tres morales”. I did not pursue subject (not wishing to start a discussion on a Status of Forces Agreement).

See no obstacle to Gen. Harkins' arrival here whenever desired, and we look forward to his coming.

Dept please repeat to CINCPAC as desired.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-362. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. At the top, in Woodʼs handwriting, were the words: “Cot[trell]—good news.”

2 Not found.

3 In telegram 964 to Saigon, February 5, the Department of State concurred in the proposal to clear the announcement with Thuan and provided a draft text. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-362) In telegram 1012 from Saigon, February 6, Nolting approved the proposed press announcement. (Ibid., 751K.58/2-662) Telegram 1018 from Saigon, February 7, indicated that the Vietnamese Government had also given its approval. (Ibid., 751K.58/2-762)

46. Editorial Note 46. Editorial Note

The Government of Vietnam on February 3, 1962, issued Decree 11-TTP proclaiming that the Strategic Hamlets program was now national policy and establishing an “Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets,” consisting of the Secretaries of Interior, Civic Action, and Rural Affairs, the Assistant Secretary of State for Defense, and the Chief of Staff of Vietnamese Armed Forces. The decree also established regional and provincial committees responsible for executing the program. An English translation was transmitted in despatch 355 from Saigon, February 27. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2762)

47. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group Vietnam (McGarr) 47. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group Vietnam (McGarr)1

Honolulu, February 3, 1962—7:31 p.m.

040531Z. Use of offensive air power.

1. Undesirable reactions that grow out of the indiscriminate use of the air arm in counter guerrilla operations has been thoroughly belabored in all reports on the Greek anti-bandit war and the Indochina episode. At one time during earlier part of Indochina war there were two opposing views on exercising tight restraint on use of aircraft against ground targets. One view was usual one of not alienating friendly peoples by making them victims of unjustifiable air attacks. The other view (an extension of a common Foreign Legion attitude) was that anti-guerrilla forces should not hamper their operations by too much purposeful restraint, particularly considering there were certain advantages to be gained from bringing populace to realize that innocent and guilty alike would suffer when Vietminh were detected in their midst. Idea here of course being that all non-communist Indochinese would realize that very presence of Vietminh was a “plague on their houses” and therefore they should specifically direct anti guerrilla forces to the Vietminh unless they wanted to suffer along with communists. French officers in non-Foreign Legion outfits contended such policy was typical of the “boche” influence in the Foreign Legion. In the end, more temperate policies for using air power prevailed—although many tragic errors in target designation continued to be made until end of war.

2. In both Greece and Indochina it was found that normal problems of target location and identification were compounded by fact that friend and foe were intermingled. It was found that only positive system of enemy target location was by ground forces who enjoy facility of positive identification through factor of their being shot at. It was also found, however, that potential for making maximum employment of available air power was considerably curtailed by waiting for footsore troops to run down and fix, in substantial lumps, a will-o-the-wisp guerrilla enemy. Problem was finally handled in both wars by attempting to develop an effective air/ground communication capability for close air support; and as far as independent air attacks were concerned, being as careful as possible when shooting up things around friendly areas.

3. We have been impressed with the expressed concern of several GVN officers that innocent people might suffer from the use of defoliants, mines, etc. They seemed to be well oriented on the undesirable aspects of the indiscriminate use of weapons amongst the civilian populace. Recognizing RVNAF awareness in this direction, I feel we should be confident that all concerned in SVN are applying the element of good judgment in the use of air power. I believe we should also recognize that occasional mistakes will be made as they were many times in WW II and Korea, and they should not be justification for imposing unreasonable restrictions on the use of the VNAF. This may well be a subject for discussion at next SecDef mtg at my hdqtrs.

4. You and your chief of air section should take immediate steps to ensure that sound intelligence and reporting provides basis for launching strikes. Your sitreps should make it clear to me and WashDC readers that positive control is being exercised.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, Secret. Repeated to the JCS; Ft. Ritchie, Maryland; Hickam Air Force Base for PACAF; CINCPACFLT; and CINCUSARPAC.

48. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 48. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 6, 1962—7 p.m.

1013. We are running into increasing difficulties here with US newsmen. They claim they not being given sufficient opportunity to cover US participation in operations against VC, alleging embassy responsible for “blackout”. In effort head off some bad stories about “press censorship” and “clamming up by US officials Saigon”, Anspacher and I had long session today with several correspondents. It developed that they were sore (a) about being excluded from helicopter missions (pursuant CINCPAC instructions to MAAG 050547Z2 ); (b) my disallowal their request to board USS Core tomorrow at Cap St. Jacques; (c) discrimination arising from treatment Souchurek.

I had thought we were making some progress with US correspondents here and am concerned at their present attitude. In talking frankly with them, we drew distinction between coverage of introduction of materiel and personnel into SVN not reported to ICC, and coverage of use of US assistance after arrival in country. To facilitate full reporting of former flouts ICC and makes more difficult ICC decisions favorable to our side. Coverage of US assistance in country, however, where no security risks appear involved, seems justified and desirable.

Pending MAAGʼs reply to CINCPAC message above, request Washingtonʼs urgent consideration and advice re giving Task Force Saigon authority to decide on local correspondents' requests to cover field operations in which US participating, including arrival of equipment when deemed advisable

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/2-662. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to the Department of Defense.

2 Dated February 4, it rescinded earlier authorization allowing newsmen to accompany Vietnamese troops on helicopter combat missions. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 10793)

49. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 49. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, February 6, 1962.

SUBJECT

Binh Hoa Operation of 21 January 1962

The following information is provided in reference to the Binh Hoa operation of 21 January and in response to your memorandum of 30 January 1962.2 It is based on the best information that the JCS was able to provide.

Brief Outline of the Operation Plan. The purpose of the two phase plan was to destroy the Viet Cong, their bases and installations in an area as shown on the inclosed map.3

Phase I called for airstrikes on D-day, 21 January 1962, followed by a parachute assault by the 5th Airborne Battalion to seize objectives in the drop zone. During Phase 1, the 1st and 3rd Battalions (8th Regiment) and the 2nd and 3rd Battalions (11th Regiment) were to cross the Vaico River from east to west to attack and occupy IA and other objectives in the operations area.

During Phase II, the 5th Airborne Battalion was to move from its previous objective in the drop zone to Cu Chi via Saigon for deception purposes and to establish blocking and ambush positions. In the meantime, the 1st and 3rd Battalions were to move from their original objective and seize new objective IIA, while the 2nd and 3rd Battalions were to seize new objective IIB.

In effect, the Viet Cong would then be caught between the 5th Airborne Battalion in the vicinity of Cu Chi, and four Battalions of the 8th and 11th Regiments closing in from the west on objectives IIA and IIB.

Aerial observation by L-19 and fighter aircraft was to be continuous. The 57th (US) Transport Company was to provide an aerial Command Post, medical evacuation, parachute recovery and on call reserve lift.

Composition of Friendly Forces. Ground Forces consisted of elements of the 8th Regiment, 5th Division; and the 11th Regiment, 7th Division. River forces consisted of eight special purpose craft. Air forces consisted of 11 Farm Gate aircraft, 10 aircraft of the VNAF and one U.S. light helicopter company.

Composition of Enemy Forces. Enemy forces consisted of various enemy units with an approximate total strength of 750 men.

After Action Report. The airstrikes were executed as planned on D-day (210 755H). During Phase I, the 5th Airborne Battalion jumped from VNAF C-47ʼs and secured its objective. Four soldiers were killed and many documents captured. Patrolling continued throughout the day. Phase I Battalions of the 8th and 11th Regiments crossed the Vaico River as planned, attacked and seized their objectives. All units continued search operations through D+2. Phase II units continued the attack on 22 January and elements of the 8th and 11th Regiments seized their new objectives. During Phase II the 5th Airborne Battalion was re-deployed and used as blocking and ambush forces in the vicinity of Cu Chi. Operations concluded on D+4. No supply or maintenance problems were encountered. Evacuation of casualties was timely. Lack of external antenna for ground radios created some communications problems.

Planning was detailed and US advisors participated throughout. Intelligence during the planning phase was detailed, accurate and up to date.

Study of CHMAAGʼs report of the entire operation indicates that the plan did not make adequate use of the element of surprise. Troop movements prior to the attack alarmed the VC and the heavy air activity caused a VC alert and evacuation. Had troop movements been carried out gradually over the period of a few days prior to the attack and with some deceptive moves included, VC suspicions may not have been aroused. Aerial reconnaissance and the airstrikes appear too prolonged and without an attempt at deceptive strikes in areas outside the actual objective zones.

Results. While the execution of the ground operation was considered excellent, and the airstrike and airborne operation was carried out as planned, the results were disappointing. The VC in the area had evacuated prior to the attacks and the number killed and/or captured was negligible. Enemy casualties consisted of five killed, 15 captured, and 64 suspects held for interrogation.

Attack on Cambodian Village. On 21 January 1962, an airstrike in nearby Cambodian territory due to faulty target identification was reported. The intended target area is shown on the attacked map, as well as the small village of Bathu on which the attack was actually made.

Foreign correspondents, ICC representatives, the U.S. Army Attaché, Cambodia and SVN officials were flown to the scene on 22 January 1962. Ground reconnaissance showed undeniable evidence that Bathu had been attacked and essentially confirmed the Cambodian account. The U.S. Embassy, Saigon, reported on 24 January 1962 that it appeared that an error in navigation had occurred and that Bathu had been hit by Farm Gate aircraft participating in a GVN action against a suspected VC concentration west of Binh Hoa.

On 25 January 1962 the GVN apologized to the Cambodian Government for the incident and agreed to make indemnification. Though the U.S. had offered to reimburse the GVN for damage payments, Secretary Thuan on 25 January 1962 dismissed the matter of funds as being of minor importance.

On 26 January 1962, the Cambodian newspaper Depeche carried a front page editorial focused on the Vietnamese “gesture of good will” in offering regrets and expressed the hope that this gesture augurs a new era in Cambodian-Vietnamese relations.

Roswell Gilpatric

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-142-69. Top Secret. Transmitted under cover of a February 6 memorandum from Gilpatric to Taylor stating that the Department of Defense was submitting a draft of the events at Binh Hoa that differed from that submitted by Roger Hilsman in Document 42. On the transmittal memorandum was the penciled notation in Taylorʼs hand: “Report to HA 8 Feb '62.” Another copy of the memorandum in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489, Sensitive 7-61, includes a covering memorandum from Lansdale to Gilpatric recommending that Gilpatric forward the paper to Taylor.

2 On January 30, General Taylor sent a memorandum to Secretary McNamara stating that the President had expressed an interest in the Binh Hoa operation. (Ibid.)

3 Not printed.

50. Editorial Note 50. Editorial Note

On February 6, 1962, Philip Bridgham of the Bureau of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense, prepared a paper entitled “North Vietnam and Sino-Soviet Relations” for several officials, including the Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs. Covering the period 1949-1961, it made the point that North Vietnam in varying degrees had cast its lot ideologically with China more than with the Soviet Union, but had tried to mediate the growing dispute between the two in 1960 and 1961. It closed with the following paragraph: “In sum, North Vietnam in the years 1960-1961 achieved a new status of independence and influence within the Communist bloc. As a major beneficiary of the Sino-Soviet dispute in the form of vastly augmented economic and military assistance from both Moscow and Peiping during this period, the North Vietnamese party leadership have every reason to persist in their chosen role of mediator and neutral in the deepening conflict between the Soviet Union and Communist China.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 6214, Vietnam (North and South))

51. Draft Paper by the Head of the British Advisory Mission in Vietnam (Thompson) 51. Draft Paper by the Head of the British Advisory Mission in Vietnam (Thompson)1

[Saigon, undated.]

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

Policy Directive No. …2

Delta Plan

The aim of this Policy Directive is to outline the Plan and the measures to be taken for the clearance of the Vietcong from the whole Delta area Vung Chien Thust 3).

Priority Areas

2. It will not be possible to carry out the full Plan and all the measures proposed in the whole area simultaneously. Where it is necessary to accord priorities, particularly with regard to the allocation of equipment or forces, the first priority area will be as follows (see map attached):3 Minh Long, Vinh Rinh, Kien Hoa, Dinh Tuong (excluding the area north of the road Ben Tranh-Cai Lai to the ferry at My Thuan), Long An (excluding the area west of Thu Thuc thence north along the Vaico river), Gia Dinh Province, Southern tip of Tay Ninh Province, Rinh Duong Province south of Ben Gat, southem tip of Phuoc Thanh Province, Bien Hoa (excluding the area east of the Vung Tau road), southem tip of Phuoc Tuy Province.

Further priorities will be laid down as the Plan progresses.

Aims

3. The aims of the Plan are: (a) to control, protect and win the population with particular emphasis on the rural areas;

(b) to obtain the intelligence necessary to break the Vietcong organisation within the population;

(c) to isolate the armed Vietcong from the population and then to eliminate them;

(d) to establish and maintain “white” dress which have been cleared of Vietcong.

General Concept

4. This is a battle for the control of the villages and the protection of the population. If security and Government control are restored, then, with the assistance of the people themselves, the elimination of the Vietcong will automatically follow. The Vietcong cannot exist unless they can intimidate and gain the support of elements in the population. They depend on these elements for supplies, food, intelligence and recruits. This is a continual traffic and represents the weakest link in the Vietcong organisation. In order to isolate the armed units of the Vietcong from the population it will be necessary to break this link and to eliminate. Vietcong supporters within the population. In order to achieve this it is essential to establish a solid security framework in the populated areas.

Security Framework

5. The foundation of the security framework will be strategic hamlets and defended hamlets: (a) the conception of strategic hamlets is well understood and many have already been established. This policy will be extended as rapidly as possible in all areas where strategic hamlets are sufficient to provide effective protection for the population.

(b) In all areas where villages and hamlets have been under Vietcong control or which are continually threatened by major Vietcong units, particularly on the perimeter of the populated areas (i.e. along the Cambodian frontier and on the fringes of swamp areas which have been lone established communist bases), houses wiI1 be regrouped and defended hamlets will be established.

6. It will be essential to establish the frame work solidly and in depth so that strategic and defended hamlets are mutually supporting. There must be no gaps. Under no circumstances will strategic and defended hamlets be established in isolated groups unless such groups can be rapidly linked together by the establishment of further such hamlets in between. It will normally be desirable to establish strategic hamlets in the more secure areas of each province expanding steadily outwards to the less secure areas where defended hamlets may be required. Chefs de Province will also pay particular attention to the need to coordinate the establishment of the framework with neighbouring provinces in order to ensure that there are no loopholes along provincial boundaries.

Defence of the Framework

7. The framework will depend for close defence mainly on the Self-Defence Corps supported by the Republican youth as part-time members of the Self-Defence Corps. Immediate dose support in a mobile role will be provided by the Civil Guard. Where defended hamlets are established in areas which have been heavily penetrated by the Vietcong it may be necessary to employ Civil Guard in their close defence until such time as reliable Self-Defence Corps units can be called. During the establishment of the framework it will be the task of the Army to keep the regular units of the Vietcong harassed and off balance so that the security framework can be consolidated. The efforts of both the intelligence organisation and of the information services will be directed in support of the Plan

Control Measures

8. In order to establish control over the population and to assist in cutting the supply line to the armed units of the Vietcong, the following control measures will be introduced: (a) Priority will be given to the issue of new plastic identity cards to the whole population in the Delta area. The inhabitants of each house will be recorded and a photograph of the complete household, together with identity card numbers, will be placed inside the house, and duplicate photographs will be available at district and province headquarters.

(b) Permanent check points will be established at selected static posts, on all roads and waterways. There will also be surprise checks at other points.

(c) Curfews will be introduced on certain roads and waterways and in areas surrounding defended hamlets, and any such other areas as may be required, from 7.00 p.m. until 6.00 a.m. The necessary authority will be given for the security forces to shoot on sight at anyone breaking the curfew.

(d) In certain areas of jungle, mangrove swamps and marshland, prohibited areas will be declared and the population will be totally excluded until further notice and all security forces will be given complete freedom to shoot on sight in such areas.

(e) In certain areas, particularly on the perimeter of the populated areas, measures will be introduced to control the movement of rice and other supplies. Where necessary food convoys on certain roads and waterways will be introduced. In certain villages and hamlets rice stocks will be purchased and removed from the area immediately after harvesting and a rice ration will be issued to the inhabitants.

Protection

9. As already stated under the General Concept in paragraph 4, the protection of the population will be based on strategic and defended hamlets with the Self-Defence Corps (now being rapidly expanded, re-equipped and trained) providing the close defence, supported by the Republican Youth, and with the Civil Guard providing mobile support. The Army will at all times be prepared to rescue any post which is under attack by the Vietcong.

Winning the Population

10. There are three main requirements: (a) Great attention will be paid at all times to the behaviour of all government personnel both civil and military in their dealings with the population. Under no circumstances wiI1 punitive measures be taken against any village or hamlet without the prior approval of the National Security Council. Great care will also be exercised when ground attack aircraft or artillery are used in populated areas to ensure that innocent persons are not wounded or killed.

(b) The population should be kept well informed with regard to all control measures and of their purpose. These measures will be relaxed when an area is cleared of Vietcong and declared “white”. Where hamlets have to be regrouped the population should be given every assistance and should be kept well informed of the advantages which will follow from such regrouping.

(c) As the framework is established and an area is cleared of communists, social and economic improvements will immediately be undertaken.

Civil Authorities

11. The main tasks of the Civil Authorities will be: (a) the establishment of strategic and defended hamlets;

(b) the administrative organisation of the villages;

(c) the introduction of control measures;

(d) the provision of social and economic improvements with emphasis on agricultural improvements, health measures, education and minor public works;

(e) publicity for all government measures and propaganda directed at both the population and the terrorists.

Self-Defence Corps

12. The main tasks of the Self-Defence Corps will be: (a) close defence of strategic and defended hamlets;

(b) active patrolling in the immediate neighbourhood of strategic and defended hamlets;

(c) collection of intelligence, particularly on communist supporters within the populated areas, and on communist supply lines;

(d) elimination of armed communist cadres within the population and arrest of communist supporters;

(e) distribution of information and propaganda leaflets.

13. The training and equipment of the Self-Defence Corps will proceed as rapidly as possible and which will be established in all strategic and defended hamlets. Great care, however, will be taken to ensure that such units can be adequately and rapidly supported by Civil Guard units in the event of a Vietcong attack developing and if necessary by the Army, which will be responsible for dealing with any large Vietcong concentration which may develop against Self-Defence Corps units in such hamlets.

Civil Guard

14. The main tasks of the Civil Guard will be: (a) to provide mobile and offensive patrols outside strategic and defended hamlets, particularly on the perimeter of populated areas, including patrols on inland waterways;

(b) to rescue Self-Defence Corps posts when attacked;

(c) to provide the close defence of defended hamlets where the Self-Defence Corps is either inadequate or not yet raised;

(d) to enforce the control measures in paragraph 8.

15. The Civil Guard will be organised to provide for the permanent defence of the security framework within each province. The battalion headquarters will become the provincial headquarters of the Civil Guard, and a company headquarters will be established as the district headquarters of the Civil Guard. Additional companies will be allocated to each province as required for operations. As the security situation improves, these additional companies will be transferred elsewhere. A company headquarters will; however, always remain at district level, though the number of men in that company may be reduced. The total strength, therefore, of the Civil Guard in each province will vary considerably, but the headquarters framework at province and district level will always remain. The retraining of the Civil Guard companies will continue as rapidly as possible, and river patrol units will be trained and established

Military Units (Including Rangers)

16. The initial aim of military units will be to keep the main Vietcong forces off balance and harassed while the framework of strategic and defended hamlets is being established and consolidated. Their main tasks will therefore be: (a) active patrolling and engagement of Vietcong units outside the populated areas;

(b) prevention, by planned operations, of Vietcong concentration;

(c) support of hamlets in bad areas and rescue of them if attacked;

(d) enforcement of control measures, especially curfews and prohibited areas.

17. As the framework is established, military units will gradually be relieved of all static duties (other than defence of their own establishments) and, where any static duties remain, a mobile reserve will always be available. Ranger companies will be withdrawn from the populated areas as soon as they can be replaced (if required) by retrained Civil Guard companies. Those that remain in the Delta area will be retrained for deep-jungle operations in Tactical Zone 31.

Air Force

18. The main tasks of the Air Force will be: (a) to increase the mobility of the military and Civil Guard units in areas where other communications are lacking, particularly for offensive operations;

(b) to provide reconnaissance and communications;

(c) to attack targets of opportunity;

(d) to evacuate all wounded (including civilians) from isolated areas;

(e) to drop information and propaganda leaflets.

Navy

19. The tasks of the Navy will be: (a) to prevent entry into the Delta area of Vietcong supplies, reinforcements, agents and weapons by sea;

(b) to prevent all Vietcong movement by water along the coasts and in the river estuaries in close liaison with the Civil Guard river patrol units;

(c) to transport troops and supplies rapidly in the coastal areas;

(d) to support operations in the coastal areas and in the major channels of the Mekong.

Important Points

20. In establishing the framework great attention will be paid to the following points: (a) The complete co-ordination of all civil and military action;

(b) A clear chain of command

(c) The direction and co-ordination of the intelligence effort, particularly at District level;

(d) The direction and co-ordination of the information services and pay-war units and all information and propaganda directed at both the population and the Vietcong;

(e) The establishment of wireless communications down to the village level and to defended hamlets and other key posts;

(f) The domination of inland waterways to deny their use to the Vietcon2;

(g) The exploitation of the Governmentʼs superior means of communication to achieve mobility, flexibility and economy of force;

(h) The relief of the Army from static defence duties;

(i) The tactical siting of Self-Defence Corps and Civil Guard posts to achieve several objects simultaneously e.g. to defend a hamlet and a bride and to provide check points on a road or river;

(j) The integration of all establishments, installations and training centres of a military nature within the framework

(k) The protection of major food convoys by both road and water;

(l) Supporting action by the Republican Youth Corps and Civic Action teams at the village and hamlet level;

(m) Prompt medical attention for all persons (including civilians) wounded by Vietcong action

(n) Prompt payment of compensation (where authorised) for damage to property or loss of life;

(o) All matters affecting the morale both of the population and Government forces.

Communist Reaction

21. The communists will not be slow to react to the establishment of the framework and will make a determined and violent effort to prevent it being established and to break it. This requires that there should be careful judgement and timing in each Province in the establishment of the framework and that all forces should be ready to counter communist attempts either to break it or to encourage the population to resist certain of the measures. As the framework is consolidated, the communists will be forced to attack it and, at this stage, the Army particularly must be alert to deal with communist concentrations and attacks on defended hamlets.

Responsibility

22. The Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant for Defence will be responsible to the National Security Council for the execution of the Plan and will issue such instructions as are necessary for implementing it. These instructions will cover: (a) the points in paragraph 20;

(b) the establishment of strategic and defended hamlets;

(c) control measures;

(d) such other matters as may be necessary.

Approval4

23. This plan approved by His Excellency the President and the National Security Council on and will come into force on.

Signed:
Secretary of State at the Presidency

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Vietnam, 1/62-2/62. Secret. Sent to Hilsman under an undated memorandum for J.B. Denson of the British Embassy in Washington. At the top of Densonʼs transmittal memorandum is written in pencil: “For 6 p.m. appt 2/7/62.” No record of a meeting between Hilsman and anybody at that time has been found.

2 Ellipsis in the source text.

3 The map is not reproduced.

4 In telegram 1073 to Saigon, March 7, the Department of State asked whether the Task Force in Vietnam agreed with the Delta Plan. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-2462) In telegram 1159 from Saigon, March 9, Trueheart replied that all agencies represented on the Task Force did agree with the Plan. (Ibid., 751K.5/3-962)

52. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 52. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)1

Washington, February 7, 1962—7:57 p.m.

080057Z. Secret for Felt and Harkins from Lemnitzer.

1. Now that we are about to get the new command in Vietnam under way after all the road blocks which have been encountered to delay its establishment, I would like to bring you up to date on the situation here.

2. In drafting the JCS message which you received today2 I attempted to make it clear that insofar as DOD and the JCS are concerned, your terms of reference are those which were agreed to by Secretaries McNamara and Rusk and which were approved by the President when Sec Def, JCS and Harkins visited Palm Beach in early January. As you know Nolting was not too happy with them and for that reason it is desirable that they be handled most discreetly, particularly in your contacts with him. I discussed the importance of doing so with Harkins during our last visit to Honolulu and I am sure he understands the situation in this regard. The importance of holding these terms of reference closely is obvious.

3. As you are aware the necessary arrangements for the establishment of the command and announcement thereof have been made with President Diem. He has given his complete concurrence to the entire project and is looking forward with much pleasure to working with Harkins.

4. It now appears that our next visit to Honolulu will be on 19 Feb. While you are in the best position to judge when Harkins should leave for Saigon and whether he will be able to return for that conference, I believe that it would be most advantageous if he could leave Honolulu fairly promptly and return with McGarr for the conference on the 19th.

5. With respect to Harkinsʼ promotion, he presently holds a recess appointment as general. The President signed the necessary papers during our Palm Beach visit on 3 Jan. Accordingly, the promotion papers to be forwarded by DA will confirm that fact. They have been closely held since Jan 3 for security reasons. Therefore Harkins should wear his fourth star as of 081600Z, the time of the public release. The papers which will send his promotion to the Senate for confirmation are now in the White House and will be forwarded to the Senate by the President at 1100 AM Washington time Thursday, 8 Feb. when the command announcement is made. Assistant Secretary of Defense Sylvester will make an appropriate announcement of the promotion at that time.

6. For Harkins. Again my heartiest congratulations to you on this well-earned and justly deserved promotion. In undertaking your new and challenging assignment you can count on the wholehearted support of the President, Secretary McNamara, Secretary Rusk, the JCS and their respective staffs here. I know that Felt, O'Donnell, Collins and Aides and their commands and staffs will also give you all possible support and assistance.

1 Source: National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers, 1962, Folder 24. Secret; Priority.

2 See Document 53.

53. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) 53. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr)1

Honolulu, February 8, 1962—6 a.m.

081600Z. Establishment of United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam.

1. In accordance with a decision by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a subordinate unified command of Pacific Command, designated as United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (USMACV), will be established as of 1600 hours GMT 8 February 1962. General Paul D. Harkins, USA, will assume command of United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam short title COMUSMACV, with Headquarters in Saigon, South Vietnam, APO 143, San Francisco, California.

2. Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, will: a. Have direct responsibility for all U.S. military policy, operations and assistance in that country, and the authority to discuss both the U.S. and Vietnamese military operations directly with the President of Vietnam and the leaders of the GVN.

b. Furnish advice to the GVN on all matters relative to security and maintaining internal security in South Vietnam, to the organization and employment of the RVNAF and of counter-insurgency or other paramilitary forces.

c. Have direct access to CINCPAC and through him to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense.

d. Consult the U.S. Ambassador on U.S. political and basic policy matters. In case of differences of view, both representatives will be free to communicate such differences to Washington for decision in accordance with already existing procedures.

e. Keep the Ambassador fully informed, especially on all high level contacts with the South Vietnamese, and including major military plans and pending operations.

f. Provide broad requirement guidance to CHMAAG VN as it may affect planning, programming and administration of the Military Assistance Program. In areas wherein responsibilities and interests of COMUSMACV and CHMAAG VN appear to overlap, divergent views which cannot be resolved locally will be referred to CINCPAC.2

3. COMUSMACV will execute the following Mission and Tasks as directed by CINCPAC. a. Mission

The mission of COMUSMACV is to assist and support the Government of Vietnam in its efforts to provide for its internal security, defeat communist insurgency, and resist overt aggression.

b. Tasks (1) Exercise operational command of all U.S. forces and military agencies assigned or attached, including CHMAAG VN.

(2) Plan for and be prepared to conduct military operations as directed by CINCPAC.

(3) Discharge U.S. military responsibility to the GVN in accordance with CINCPAC policies and directives.

(4) Assist the GVN and RVNAF in planning for military operations.

(5) Develop coordinated U.S.-GVN plans as directed by CINCPAC.

(6) Administer and supervise joint frequency coordination in SVN in accordance with PACOM CEI.

(7) Continue development of GVN capabilities to provide such support for U.S. forces as may be required under existing agreements.

(8) Coordinate joint U.S. military intelligence activities in South Vietnam.

(9) Function as CINCPACʼs single U.S. spokesman in South Vietnam for U.S. military policy, planning and contemplated force employment.

4. COMUSMACV is authorized a joint staff of minimum size in accordance with approved Joint Table of Distribution.

5. Support for Headquarters, COMUSMACV, will be provided in accordance with arrangements made by CINCPAC.

6. CINCPAC inst 003020.2B of 16 August 19613 will be amended to reflect the above and further delineate command relationships with regard to US and SEATO contingency planning.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 334, MAC/V Files: FRC 69 A 702, Organization and Planning Files (1963). Secret. Also sent to DEPCINCUSARPAC and repeated to all commands and representatives under CINCPAC. It repeats a message to all concerned parties sent by JCS to CINCPAC.

2 For comparison of these terms of reference with earlier drafts, see Documents 9 and 17.

3 Not found.

II. Consideration of a Civic Action Program for South Vietnam, February 9-26II. Consideration of a Civic Action Program for South Vietnam, February 9-26

54. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington February 9, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Pentagon, Washington, February 9, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172, February 1962. Top Secret. A notation on the cover sheet indicates that it was a Department of State draft that was not cleared with the Department of Defense. U. Alexis Johnson headed the Department of State delegation. The meeting was held at the Pentagon.

55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 9, 1962—4:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/2-162. Secret. Drafted on February 8 by Czyzak and Chapman, cleared with Cottrell, Rice, Chayes, Carlson, and Bamard, and approved by Harriman. Also sent to New Delhi and Ottawa. Repeated to Geneva (FECON), London, Vientiane, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC.

56. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)

Washington, February 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8, GVN, Information and Civic Action. Confidential. Drafted by Johnson. Copies were sent to Harriman, Janow, and Magathan.

57. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)

Saigon, February 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 1-C.1. Secret Official-Informal. A handwritten note on the letter by Trueheart asked Cottrell to pass to Hilsman copies of the draft instructions on Co-ordination and Control Measures, noting that he already had copies of the draft Directive and draft instruction on Strategic Hamlets.

58. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)

Saigon, February 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-2262. Top Secret; Official-Informal.

59. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan)

Washington, February 13, 1962.

Source: Harriman Papers, Vietnam 1962. Confidential. The memorandum was sent to Rowan through Harriman. Typed at the top was: “Harriman said burn this.” In Harrimanʼs handwriting in the border was the following: “I disagree with this memo, but you should read it. I believe our press will build this assistance to Vietnam as our participation in this war—a new war under President Kennedy—the Democratic War [?] Party, so skillfully avoided by the Republican President Eisenhower. The Press do not belong on these aircraft but can be kept fully informed by briefings in Saigon by our military or Embassy. WAH”

60. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, February 14, 1962—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/2-1462. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Saigon, London, Bangkok, Paris, Ottawa, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Vientiane.

61. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 15, 1962—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-1562. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Action was assigned to U. Alexis Johnson, who wrote at the top of the first page: “No reply required.”

62. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, February 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR 11. Confidential. Drafted by Rowan. Copies sent to Murrow, Harriman, Manning, and Cottrell.

63. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Council to the Director of the Council (Rostow)

Washington, February 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam, 1962. Confidential.

64. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, February 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8. GVN 1962, Information & Civic Action. Secret. Drafted by Heavner, initialed by Cottrell, and sent to Johnson through S/S and Harriman, who also initialed it.

65. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, February 16, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field: Far East (IAF), 1962. Confidential. This memorandum is part of a package that included a memorandum of February 19 from Rowan to Rusk, Johnson, and Manning in the Department of State, Bundy and Salinger at the White House, and Wilson in USIA, enclosing a draft telegram that was to be considered at the Honolulu Conference of February 19; and that was dispatched with indicated changes as telegram 1006 to Saigon (Document 75); the memorandum of February 15 from Rowan to Johnson (Document 62); and a chit of February 15 from Rowan to Murrow transmitting the latter, with a handwritten note by Murrow to Wilson indicating that he agreed with Rowan.

66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 16, 1962—5:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2962. Secret. Drafted by Heavner, cleared with Wood and with B/FAC, FE, and AID, and approved by Cottrell. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

67. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, February 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Honolulu Meeting, July 23, 1962. Secret. Drafted by Wood and Silver. The source text lists four attachments: (1) Agenda items for the Honolulu Meeting (held on February 19); (2) the Hilsman paper “A Strategic Concept for South Viet-Nam” (Document 42); (3) A New York Times story of February 16 on a speech by Nolting; (4) a partial text of the Nolting speech, February 15. Only the first was found attached to the source text.

68. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, February 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files; Lot 66 D 307, 1.A-2 Briefing Papers, GVN, 1962. Confidential. Drafted by Wood, Heavner, and Silver.

69. Letter From Wesley R. Fishel of the Michigan State University Group in Vietnam to President John A. Hannah of Michigan State University

Rangoon, February 17, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Personal and Confidential. A date stamp on the source text indicates that President Hannah received it on February 23. Hanna forwarded it under a covering letter to President Kennedy on February 26, noting that the contract with the MSU Group had been terminated by President Diem and expressing misgivings about ever having gotten involved in Vietnam in the first place. Also attached to the source text was a copy of a letter from McGeorge Bundy to President Hannah of March 26 resuming the original, thanking him on President Kennedyʼs behalf, and informing him that copies of the Fishel letter had been distributed to members of the Presidentʼs staff concerned with Vietnam.

70. Memorandum From the Chief Adviser, Michigan State University Group in Vietnam (Fox), to James B. Hendry of Michigan State University

Saigon, February 19, 1962.

Source: Michigan State University, Hannah Papers, H, Viet. fr., 1962. None of the attachments is included with the source text.

71. Editorial Note

72. Editorial Note

73. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, February 19, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Confidential.

74. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, February 23, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret. Drafted by Bagley.

75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 21, 1962—10:01 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam, Country Series. Confidential. Drafted by Rowan, cleared with Wilson, Rusk, Manning, Cottrell, and Johnson of State, McNamara and Sylvester of Defense, and Salinger of the White House, and approved by Harriman; Rowan signed the telegram for Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and COMUSMACV. The contents were discussed at the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu on February 19, as indicated in Document 65. Where significant, differences between this telegram and the draft considered at Honolulu are indicated in footnotes below.

76. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 21, 1962—4:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/11-1661. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Maechling; cleared with TF/VN, S/S, AID/FETA, and AID/AA/F; and approved by Johnson who signed for Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

77. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin), to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)

Honolulu, February 21, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-2162. Top Secret; Official-Informal.

78. Editorial Note

79. Letter From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) to the Vice President (Johnson)

Saigon, February 22, 1962.

Source: Declassified Documents, 1976, 33H. Secret.

80. Editorial Note

81. Telegram From their Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt), to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Honolulu, February 22, 1962—10:15 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. Repeated to CONCPACFLT, CINCUSARPAC, PACAF, MAC/V, and MAAG Vietnam.

82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 23, 1962—4:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2362. Confidential, No Distribution; Eyes Only. Drafted by Johnson and cleared by Harriman, Battle, and Rusk. Signed by Johnson for the Secretary.

83. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, February 23, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Top Secret.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, February 26, 1962—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2662.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 26, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2662. Secret; Priority. A note on the source text in U. Alexis Johnsonʼs handwriting reads: “No action required. Shown to Gov. Harriman.”

86. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, February 26, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam 7. Confidential; Sensitive. Also sent to Gilpatric. Lansdale signed the memorandum “Ed.”

54. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington February 9, 1962, 11:30 a.m. 54. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington February 9, 1962, 11:30 a.m.1

Pentagon, Washington, February 9, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

[Here follows discussion of item I, the situation in the Congo.]

II. Viet Nam

Mr. Johnson opened the discussion of this item by stating that he had asked Mr. Hilsman to make an oral presentation on his report to the President on Viet Nam.2 Mr. Johnson said that he felt such a presentation would allow a personalized approach which would not be reflected in the written report.

Mr. Hilsman stated that he was distressed over any concern of the JCS which might have arisen as a result of his oral presentation to the President.3 He certainly had not intended any reflection on anyone and had not known of the matter until Mr. Johnson had brought it to his attention. General Lemnitzer accepted this explanation for the JCS and stated that the JCS were happy to have Mr. Hilsman present with them.

Mr. Hilsman said that he would like to stress and expand on a few key points contained in his report. First, we must get across to the liberal press the fact that it does not necessarily follow that the existence of guerrilla war in Viet Nam means that the government is unpopular and bad. The village people live an inward existence and are concerned largely with their own immediate problems. They have no regional or national feelings or loyalties, and while they are basically anti-communist, they are still very isolated. The people respect Diem, but they do not have any feeling of love or admiration for him.

Second, the importance of the existence and availability of Viet Cong infiltration routes has been overplayed. The establishment of a completely effective wall across the border would not unduly affect the Viet Cong activities. While the Viet Cong does use these routes to bring new regular Army cadre personnel into South Viet Nam, they do not rely unduly on them for anything else.

Third, the Viet Cong has ready access to the villages, and it does not employ any great degree of terror tactics against the villages. They buy their rice at premium prices from the villagers and do not take property or food by force. The Viet Cong does, however, obtain money and goods through actions against business people such as robbery, blackmail, and ransom. Most of their arms are obtained or manufactured locally and do not come in over infiltration routes. There is a great deal of Viet Cong small arms manufacture taking place in South Viet Nam. The true Viet Cong logistic lines stem out from the villages where they obtain rice, arms, and recruits. The Viet Cong have access to, and are using, about 2,000 such villages.

Fourth, we must institute a program of civic action which will tie the villages to their districts and to the central government. These programs must be designed to assist the villages with their problems and by performance demonstrate to the villagers that they can expect help if they ask for it. The few hard-core Viet Cong supporters in the villages must be removed through aggressive police work. This will require the establishment of a system of ID cards, personnel checks, etc. The villages must be provided effective physical protection which in turn will permit the control of movements of supplies and personnel. The problem is a tactical one involving combat, and not strategic intelligence operations. We must get across to the villages the fact that we will provide them real and adequate protection against revenge if they provide us information and assistance.

Fifth, the regular army is static and relatively immobile as a result of its role of defending strong points. We must free it to act as a mobile force. We must institute a full reorganization of all friendly forces at the working level along the lines of basic guerrilla principles and counter-insurgency tactics. Aggressive patrolling must be instituted. When these patrols make contact with the enemy, they should call in the Jungle Jim units and the paratroopers. We should not rely on helicopters for attacking.

Sixth, Diem is in a difficult political situation. State has been pushing him too hard for reforms. Many of these reforms are not necessary and perhaps some are undesirable. More reforms should be pressed at the lower levels.

Seventh, we need many more U.S. company grade officers and NCOʼs to assist on the spot. We also need effective police type training and assistance. The strategic village is not the key because it really is only a fort of sorts. The key element is the zone. We must establish zones and control them by civil guards with the Army ready to step in to assist. We have to put the Viet Cong in a meat grinder. By cutting off access to the villages, they will have to attack, and we should be in a position to react with superior force.

Eighth, the purely military effort is going well, but we must complement it by equally effective civic action programs. Self-defense units must be established, and they do not require more than minimum training. This must be a rapid program, and it should be conducted simultaneously with a leadership program for selected people from the villages.

General Lemnitzer noted that we had already faced the problem of a lack of native recruits for present programs. Mr. Hilsman said that we need about 1,000 company grade officers and NCOʼs (Special Forces type people) to train personnel and set examples. We must show the way at the bottom and ease the pressure on the top echelons. Mr. Hilsman said that there are no effective gimmicks to substitute for people. He noted that the results of the defoliation program have been marginal. The real solution is men who will go out into the jungle, live there, and close with the enemy. General Lemnitzer said that the U. S. military in Viet Nam had the same objective.

Admiral Anderson asked Mr. Hilsman how much time he had spent in Viet Nam in preparing his report. Mr. Hilsman replied that he was in Saigon for five days.4 General Lemnitzer asked how many police officer personnel would be required for training the Viet Namese. Mr. Hilsman estimated that about 200 would be required and noted that the British and the Malayans would be prepared to provide part of this number of people. General Lemnitzer remarked that we now have about 3,000 U.S. personnel in Viet Nam and that the present program called for a total of about 6,000. He then noted that General Taylor had recommended the institution of provincial civic action studies in Viet Nam.5 However, the survey teams included only military and intelligence people. Mr. Johnson pointed out that Diem had vetoed the inclusion of political and economic people in these study groups. General Lemnitzer said satisfactory progress in civic action required the development of a comprehensive plan of action by the Viet Namese. Mr. Hilsman indicated that such a plan had been prepared by the British and was under study by Diemʼs people. General Lemnitzer said that our USOM people had not been forceful in their actions. Mr. Hilsman agreed that AID should do more and that its Public Safety Division should be improved. He said that AID is the weakest element in the civic action program. Mr. Johnson asked just what we should expect from AID. Mr. Hilsman said that we should not expect too much from AID and that we may have to move the MAAG into the field of police type action and training.

Admiral Anderson asked if he was correct in assuming that Mr. Hilsman did not feel that the U.S. military in Viet Nam had been sufficiently effective, helpful, imaginative, and resourceful. Mr. Hilsman said that our decision to support rather than just advise the Viet Namese was a very recent one and that until that time our people in Viet Nam were merely advisors, as we all were. He said that probably no government ever had so much advice. Accordingly, we cannot blame our people on the spot for any lack of positive action since they were instructed to act as advisors. Admiral Anderson then asked if Ambassador Nolting and General McGarr agreed with Mr. Hilsmanʼs views on the required actions in Viet Nam. Mr. Hilsman replied in the affirmative. General Lemnitzer remarked that we must now build up our resources in Viet Nam. Mr. Hilsman said that while Ambassador Nolting and General McGarr agreed with his general approach, he could not state positively that they agreed with all of the details of his report. General Decker asked if Mr. Hilsman had discussed his report with General McGarr. Mr. Hilsman said that he had not because he did not begin to write it until after he had left Saigon. He had not sent a copy of the report to General McGarr because Mr. Gilpatric had asked him not to make any distribution of the report outside certain Washington Agencies for the time being.

General Lemnitzer noted that the JCS have a strong directive from the Secretary of Defense regarding provision of full support to our effort in Viet Nam. He asked if other Agencies of the U.S. Government have similar directives. Mr. Hilsman said that AID does not.

[Here follows discussion of Items III and IV, the Punta del Este Conference and the Inter-American Defense Board.]

1 Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172, February 1962. Top Secret. A notation on the cover sheet indicates that it was a Department of State draft that was not cleared with the Department of Defense. U. Alexis Johnson headed the Department of State delegation. The meeting was held at the Pentagon.

2 See Document 42.

3 According to the Presidentʼs log, Hilsman and Taylor met with the President from 7 until 8 p.m. on January 29.

4 Hilsman traveled to Vietnam on January 15, following the Honolulu Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference. He witnessed the Binh Hoa operation on January 21 and then returned to the United States.

5 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 210.

55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 9, 1962—4:28 p.m.

974. Saigon 999.2

1. In connection with points made reftel, Department has examined question notification personnel and equipment in light of position taken by GVN in note sent ICC Dec. 9, 1961. (Saigon 769.3 )

As Department views Accords, two obligations are involved: (a) One involves the obligation to notify ICC of any arrivals or departures of personnel or equipment; (b) the other relates to the obligation not to introduce foreign troops, military personnel, arms and munitions, other than as authorized by the Accords.

2. Department now inclined to view that December 9 note from GVN to ICC may be considered as a notification within meaning Accords, since ICC thereby informed of intended USG increased support in men and material over and above that which authorized by Accords. We do not believe specific numbers, figures, amounts, and quantities need be notified as envisaged by Accords, since purpose Dec. 9 notification not to stay within limits provided for in Accords, but rather to place on record fact limits would be exceeded in view existing situation.

3. Second question is whether introduction fresh troops, military personnel, arms and munitions, beyond limits authorized by Accords, can be justified to ICC. On this point, under clearly recognized principle of international law, non-observance of a treaty obligation by one party to that treaty justifies an equivalent corresponding or related non-observance by the other party. This principle is subject to the limitation that aggrieved party may only continue non-observance of its treaty obligations until resumption of observance by other party.

Therefore, in replying to ICCʼs letter of Jan. 64 regarding USG increased support in men and material,GVN might base its answer on foregoing principle. In fact, this point already made in GVNʼs December 9 note which stated, among other things, that “in view aggression being waged by so-called DRV against GVN in flagrant violation Geneva Accords, GVN has requested USG increase support in men and material which it has accorded in past. Right of self-defense being inherent and legitimate attribute of sovereignty, GVN obliged by NVNʼs contempt for life and property of free people of VN and by its breaches of GA to exercise this right and appeal for increased assistance.” At same time December 9 note recognized limitation on this principle by stating that “As soon as authorities in NVN end their aggressive acts and begin observe Geneva Accords, these measures of support can be terminated.”

4. In view of foregoing, it would appear that question of notification has already been dealt with by December 9 note, and that further notifications are unnecessary, since, as noted above, purpose of notification is to permit ICC verify that amounts not exceeded and December 9 notification clearly indicated intention to break ceiling for reasons stated therein. Only question left for ICC to consider is whether action taken can be justified on grounds noted above. This point raises issue of subversion. Subversion then will clearly become issue with which ICC will have to deal and which it cannot ignore.

5. Believe that case on subversion can persuasively be made to Canadians and Indians by using above legal argument and by also setting problem in its broader context as follows: (a) What is at stake in Viet-Nam is question of world-wide concern: how can community of nations identify nature of subversive warfare as a violation of world peace just as flagrant, just as violent and just as dangerous as overt war of Korean style? DRV has trained troops on its own territory and infiltrated them over period time into South Viet-Nam instead of using them in overt and massive attack. Its agents have directed the present insurgency in South Viet-Nam, using newly infiltrated troops, personnel left in place when country was divided and local recruits. Its own General Giap has described the type of war it is waging, placing the world on notice. It cannot be dismissed as not being aggression because the pattern of aggression it presents is new and novel.

(b) The ICC has so far avoided central issue and, months after GVNʼs complaints of DRV subversion, matter is still being sifted through legal committee. US considers ICC must lift its sights to face this issue which is at heart of insecurity in SEA. US believes ICC can fulfill important role in beginning to formulate body of legal doctrine to control subversion.

(c) US policy toward Viet-Nam is clear: US does not menace NVN nor seek its reconquest. US does intend to provide GVN, with all means necessary to preserve its independence. US will cease its exceptional aid once DRV ceases its attempts to destroy GVN.

(d) US appreciates difficulties of Indians and Canadians but considers it would be damaging if ICC cited GVN and US in violation Geneva Agreements without citing DRV for its responsibility for situation in SVN. Record is clear that increased US aid has been answer to increased subversion, regardless of present attempts of DRV to obscure facts. We would hope therefore that ICC would first consider GVN complaints on subversion before considering those of DRV. If this absolutely not feasible we would nevertheless consider two issues linked since GVN in responding to ICC citation would be expected inject issue of subversion by way of defense.

6. For Saigon: Unless you have objections suggest GVN answer ICC letter January 6 in accordance para 3.5 You should also present our views as set forth above to Indians and Canadians.

For New Delhi and Ottawa: Unless Saigon expresses objections you should similarly discuss matter with appropriate officials at high level.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/2-162. Secret. Drafted on February 8 by Czyzak and Chapman, cleared with Cottrell, Rice, Chayes, Carlson, and Bamard, and approved by Harriman. Also sent to New Delhi and Ottawa. Repeated to Geneva (FECON), London, Vientiane, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC.

2 Dated February 1, it recounted a conversation with Canadian ICC Commissioner Hooten in which he expressed the view that the ICC at best would cite both North and South Vietnam for violations of the 1954 Geneva Accords and offered several alternatives to the then-current U.S. practice of not notifying the ICC but overtly introducing men and equipment into South Vietnam. Nolting recommended continuing the current policy, but asked for the opinion of the Department of State. (Ibid.)

3 Dated December 7, 1961, not printed. (Ibid., 751G.00/12-761)

4 Not found.

5 See Document 91.

56. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) 56. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)1

Washington, February 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

Civic Action Teams in South Viet-Nam

At our meeting with the JCS on Friday,2 General Lemnitzer informally indicated to me that he did not feel that State and AID were moving energetically enough on civil aspects of organizing and training civic action teams. As I was not clear on the question of the responsibilities for and the status of these teams, I was not able to discuss the subject. However, I suggest that you will want to look into it with a view to undertaking any corrective action that may be necessary and seeing that Governor Harriman is briefed on the subject prior to the February 19 Honolulu meeting.

There was also some discussion of the failure of the provincial survey teams to include civilian and political elements. Should we be doing anything about this?

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8, GVN, Information and Civic Action. Confidential. Drafted by Johnson. Copies were sent to Harriman, Janow, and Magathan.

2 See Document 54.

57. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) 57. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)1

Saigon, February 12, 1962.

Dear Cot: As you may know, the British Advisory Mission under Mr. R.G.K. Thompson has already submitted to the GVN a draft directive for pacification of the Delta area, which sets out in the form of a NISC directive the concepts outlined in Thompsonʼs earlier papers (Embdes 205 of 11/20/61).2

The Mission has also prepared three draft Policy Instructions for the implementation of the Directive, one Instruction on Coordination, one on Control Measures, and a third on Strategic and Defended Hamlets. Thompson has given these draft Instructions to Secretary Thuan, who told him that he agreed completely with the ideas therein and that the whole plan (presumably both the Policy Directive and the Instructions) would be put up to the National Internal Security Council this week.

The three Instructions have already been cleared with MAAG. I might add that Thompson has been in constant touch with us on this and has meticulously coordinated his efforts with MAAG and the Embassy. His recommendations closely parallel those we have been or would be making to the GVN, and if accepted, they certainly would be a major step forward for all concerned.

Copies of the draft directive and two of the three draft instructions are enclosed in 5 copies, the one on Strategic and Defended Hamlets in single copy; we will forward additional copies of the latter when they are available later this week.3 Also enclosed is a copy of Thompsonʼs letter of February 10 transmitting to Secretary Thuan the latest of the three Instructions; you may find Thompsonʼs comments of interest.

Best personal regards.

Sincerely,

Bill
Counselor of Embassy

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 1-C.1. Secret Official-Informal. A handwritten note on the letter by Trueheart asked Cottrell to pass to Hilsman copies of the draft instructions on Co-ordination and Control Measures, noting that he already had copies of the draft Directive and draft instruction on Strategic Hamlets.

2 Despatch 205 transmitted Thompsonʼs earlier papers (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/11-2062), including a letter from Thompson to Diem, November 11, 1961, and attached memorandum of November 13, 1961, conveying Thompsonʼs impressions of how to clear the Delta area of Communist insurgents. For text, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 11, pp. 345-355. The draft NISC directive is not printed. (Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Vietnam, 1/62-2/62)

3 A letter of February 19 from Trueheart to Cottrell transmitted additional copies of the draft instruction on “Strategic and Defended Hamlets.” It also reported that Thuan had told Nolting on February 17 that Diem had approved the draft instructions and policy directive and was submitting them to the National Internal Security Council. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2048)

58. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) 58. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Trueheart) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)1

Saigon, February 12, 1962.

Dear Cot: Fritz has asked me to make an interim response to your letter of January 26 regarding Farmgate bombing operations.2

The best evidence I can give you that the points which are troubling you have not escaped our notice here is the enclosed draft telegram. The latter is addressed in terms to the question of crop defoliation, but the arguments are of course applicable to area bombing and this is well understood. (This, incidentally, is the draft Task Force message referred to in MAAGʼs MAGPO 779,3 which you may have seen.)

As of now, Fritz is reserving judgement on the conclusions arrived at in this message. He takes a more pragmatic approach and, before reaching a position, would want to see the results of a review such as that suggested in the second paragraph of your letter. Given the fairly desperate position we find ourselves in in Viet-Nam, he wants to be very sure of his ground before rejecting any weapon which might help to win the war, and he is understandably reluctant to draw conclusions on vital questions on the basis of a priori reasoning—which is about all we have to go on at this point. Moreover, he is particularly anxious not to be recorded in Washington as for or against the operation in question until there has been an opportunity for further, objective study. In other words, he is very keen that this not become at this stage—or, hopefully, ever—an inter-departmental issue between State and Defense.

Best personal regards.

Sincerely,

Bill
Counselor of Embassy

[Enclosure]

Draft Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State4

JCS 041835Z Dec.5 TF/VN. Official GVN request has been received by MAAG from Defense SecState Thuan for commencement crop warfare program. In request Thuan stated instructions being given RVNAF to avoid damage to crops belonging government supporters and to take such preventive measures as may be required avoid adverse political or psychological reaction. Efforts now being made determine if plans have been developed which meet requirements ref msg for resettlement displaced persons and alternate food supply system. Vietnamese chairman Joint Planning Committee for defoliation and crop warfare aware US position stated in ref msg and is currently trying to ensure that instructions from VN DOD include appropriate provisions to meet this requirement. Vietnamese have been generally cool to idea of specific plans for resettlement and alternate food supply. They insist chemicals will only be employed in areas not under GVN control and where population either VC or sympathetic thereto. They also feel that chemicals just another weapon in arsenal to be employed against the VC. Since chemicals to be dispensed by Vietnamese in VNAF helicopters, they apparently feel it their show and are ready to go.

Despite this understandable GVN impatience, Task Force has reluctantly concluded GVN concept of use defoliants against crops is ill conceived and, if implemented, would have effect increasing VC strength rather than decreasing it.

As indicated above, GVN proceeds from premise inhabitants areas controlled by VC consist entirely VC troops and “sympathizers”, thus any means may be used against them. Task Force does not accept this premise. On contrary, we believe that even in VC controlled areas populace still susceptible being won by GVN if proper tactics used. Problem in military/political warfare taking place here is to separate guerrillas physically and psychologically from people and to win latterʼs allegiance to government. Admittedly this is lengthy and tortuous process, but it is only means achieving meaningful victory in type of warfare such as that confronting Viet-Nam.

Widespread food denial program, like area bombing recommended by Diem from time to time, is completely at odds with this approach. It might well inconvenience VC units and supporters in areas affected but it would also insure ill will of whole of population these areas, thereby increasing overall VC strength there.

Various ways of mitigating this effect have been suggested, notably resettlement and food distribution programs in areas where crop warfare conducted, but for several reasons we inclined to doubt value such measures. GVN reps have argued VC will simply resettle with afflicted population and will be in forefront those demanding replacement food. These points well taken, we believe, and illustrate difficulties administering such a program. Furthermore, because GVN doubts wisdom resettlement and food replacement, such programs would probably not be effectively implemented, even if accepted on paper.

We therefore now see no alternative but to conclude that type of crop warfare program envisaged by GVN would not contribute to GVN victory and might in fact make such victory even more difficult obtain. This conclusion based purely local factors and is without regard international aspects.

We recognize that Diem may be highly displeased this opinion. However, only alternatives are: a) to permit GVN to proceed with defoliant operations in its own way—which we believe would be counter-productive for reasons stated above; or

b) to insist on detailed case-by-case review by U.S. of proposed operations. Because of lack of independent intelligence, we have no sound basis for making such review and particularly for deciding with assurance that given operation would affect only hard-core VC. This procedure if conscientiously implemented would therefore be source continuing invitation in GVN-US relations.

Task Force therefore recommends Diem be informed we prepared continue road clearance program, if trials demonstrate its effectiveness but that we will not support defoliant food denial operations at this fume.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-2262. Top Secret; Official-Informal.

2 Not found.

3 Document 43.

4 Drafted by Trueheart. There is no indication that this message was ever sent.

5 Not found.

59. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) 59. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan)1

Washington, February 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Saigonʼs 1013 re Press Treatment2

Problem

1. Ambassador Nolting reports that he is in trouble with the press because of a) press exclusion from helicopter missions, b) exclusion from boarding USS Core at Cap St. Jacques and c) discrimination arising from special treatment of Soucherek of Life Magazine.

2. Nolting requests authority “be given Task Force Saigon to decide on local correspondents' requests to cover field operations in which U.S. participating, including arrival of equipment when deemed advisable.”

Discussion

1. A large number of experienced, responsible American journalists are now in Viet-Nam covering a newsworthy development—the participation of U.S. military men in South Viet-Namʼs war.

2. Until recently, our press coverage from Viet-Nam has been on the critical side—a search for a culprit responsible for the downward trend in the war against the Viet Cong. Critics point to President Diem and his tightly controlled government and military services as the impediment to success.

3. In my opinion, the only way this unfavorable publicity—originating mostly from malcontents in Saigon—can be reversed is through registering successes in the security effort. The criticism will then abate and the reporting will be directed to the factual progress in the war.

4. I believe we have almost reached the bottom of the downward curve. The results of our imminent adoption of a coordinated strategic plan (McNamara-Thompson-Hilsman-Diem ideas appear to be converging) plus the men, materials, and training should bring about a gradual upward curve favoring the GVN.

5. Consequently I believe it important that our press representatives in Saigon be treated effectively in order to achieve the best constructive coverage. The attached article from U.S. News and World Report,3 with a “box” entitled “Curtain of Secrecy” saying that this “looks like a U.S. Embassy effort to confuse and disguise the situation” is a sample of the kind of coverage we do not want.

6. Since Ambassador Nolting is on the scene and in constant touch with the newsmen, I believe he should be charged with the responsibility of press relations and coverage, with appropriate advice from Washington. He should be allowed to permit coverage of certain operations, taking into account the military commanderʼs opinion, and he should provide the newsmen with appropriate guidance.

Recommendation

1. That we concur in Ambassador Noltingʼs request for authority (1013)

2. That we provide him guidance, i.e.: a) That he should emphasize to newsmen in backgrounders that we are not taking over the direction of the war; that we are “in support of” the Vietnamese; that therefore they should not over-emphasize the U.S. role.

b) That we do not deal in numbers because we do not want to telegraph our punches in detail to the Viet Cong or provide numbers for DRV complaints to the ICC.

c) That we are in firm support of the GVN and are not looking for a replacement for Diem, and that we believe we can win with Diem by gradual change in the tight controls he previously exercised.

d) We do not want coverage of civilian casualties as a result of government military operations.

e) Any other guidance Washington deems appropriate.

1 Source: Harriman Papers, Vietnam 1962. Confidential. The memorandum was sent to Rowan through Harriman. Typed at the top was: “Harriman said burn this.” In Harrimanʼs handwriting in the border was the following: “I disagree with this memo, but you should read it. I believe our press will build this assistance to Vietnam as our participation in this war—a new war under President Kennedy—the Democratic War [?] Party, so skillfully avoided by the Republican President Eisenhower. The Press do not belong on these aircraft but can be kept fully informed by briefings in Saigon by our military or Embassy. WAH”

2 Document 48.

3 Not found attached.

60. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 60. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State1

New Delhi, February 14, 1962—11 a.m.

2474. Departmentʼs telegram 2692.2

1. As instructed last paragraph reference telegram, I presented views set forth reference telegram in some detail to Commonwealth Secretary Gundevia February 13. He listened attentively and then commented as follows: large-scale influx US aid clearly transgresses Geneva accords. GOI position as made clear informally to USG was that if US assistance could be covered under GA, this was “all right with GOI up to a point”. However, USG has made no effort whatsoever do this. Thus, way things are going, impossible situation being created for ICC.

2. Gundevia went on to ask what USG thought would happen if ICC/VN were to abdicate? He thought open war would result. Added that Parthasarathy sending “frantic” telegrams saying he has already had protest from DRV and USS Core deliveries and matter will be brought up with him by Poles. On issue subversion, Gundevia said ICC bound hand and foot by GA and cannot change rules. If USG wishes see a conference convened and rules rewritten this another matter, but experience at Laos Conference in this respect is anything but encouraging precedent. Gundevia referred to policy statement on subversion agreed by ICC/VN in 1961 after months of wrangling and Polish opposition. Said ICC cannot investigate subversion, as this outside GA, but can investigate breaches of specific GA provisions. (Gundevia, who has been away from MEA for 4 months, did not refer to work apparently currently being done on subversion issue by ICC legal committee—third paragraph Saigonʼs 999 to Department3 —and he may not be abreast of it. Could Department or Saigon summarize substantive status for our background, since Saigonʼs 999 seems indicate some possibility DRV being cited for subversion, which seems contrary to thrust of Gundeviaʼs comments.)

3. Gundevia said acting Canadian Hicom Campbell came in few days ago with proposal that ICC investigate a specific GVN charge each time it takes up a DRV complaint, in order obtain simultaneous citation GVN and DRV. Gundevia admitted DRV concealing violations but said US committing “daylight robbery” and that this not GOIʼs fault. ICC cannot juggle words or ignore what is openly taking place. Thus he saw little chance that simultaneous citation could be achieved or that repeated citations of GVN could be avoided.

4. According Gundevia, Parthasarathy feels that US assistance to GVN outside GA has gone so far that situation heading for crisis and real danger hostilities. Gundevia said he not so pessimistic over immediate situation as Parthasarathy but thinks future black. Parthasarathy holds that “moderates” in DRV weakening and extremists gaining on issue of letting ChiComs in.

5. Gundevia reverted to favorite thesis by asking whether US wants another Korea. In event shooting war, said ChiComs would take over “whole area”. Asked whether US had attempted talk seriously to Soviets on Viet-Nam.

6. Comment: Foregoing summarizes Gundeviaʼs lengthy and often rambling and emotional comments. Gundevia did not contest US view that subversion is at heart of insecurity in SEA, which I pressed hard, but fell back on restrictive ICC terms of reference. He did not address himself to US legal argument regarding increased support. Gundevia clearly worried and uncomfortable, and protested several times that GOI caught in middle of thankless task, which many people wished India were out of, since India being blamed for events over which she has no control. Gundevia concluded by saying he thought matter had been carried as far as possible in this session but he wished have another talk with me in few days. I asked Gundevia what was tenor of MEAʼs recent instructions to Parthasarathy and he said latter had been told to press for early decisions on Nam case and other pending issues.

7. Would welcome Departmentʼs observations and further guidance.

Department will appreciate there is virtual vacuum in MEA at this time, with PM away electioneering and Desai ill. Gundevia, who far from well himself, therefore likely be calling shots on GOI policy toward ICC and Viet-Nam for at least some weeks, which is unfortunate.

Timmons

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/2-1462. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Saigon, London, Bangkok, Paris, Ottawa, CINCPAC for POLAD, and Vientiane.

2 Printed as telegram 974, Document 55.

3 See footnote 2, Document 55.

61. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 61. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 15, 1962—1 p.m.

1047. I am sorry to have to raise again the matter of US organizational arrangements in Vietnam. However, an issue of principle and a question of my personal good faith vis-à-vis the government of Vietnam are involved. On the basis your letter of January 20,2 and in response to specific questioning on this point from President Diem, I gave him written assurance on February 23 that “the US Ambassador will continue to be the senior US representative in Vietnam, responsible for coordination and supervision of US official activities here, including, of course, relations with your government.”Diem stressed to me that it was on the basis of this assurance that he concurred in the establishment of the new Command.

(In response to persistent questions, I also made substantially the same reply to the press on a background basis.)

In the light of your statement that there is now “No piece of paper”, I was surprised and disappointed to see CINPACʼs 081600Z,4 which has just been passed to me. This message, repeated apparently to all military establishments subordinate to CINCPAC as well as to JCS, sets out the terms of reference for the commander, US Military Assistance Command Vietnam, in precisely the same terms as those to which I had made clear to you and Secretary McNamara my objections and which I had understood from your letter were to be dropped.

In the circumstances, I should appreciate a clarification. In view of the personal commitments I have made to President Diem and in view of my belief that the chances of success here depend on clear US organizational arrangements, as explained more fully in my proposed letter to President Kennedy sent you from Honolulu on January 17,5 I cannot, as I explained to you earlier in Washington, accept the responsibility attaching to this assignment on the basis set out in the CINCPAC message cited above. I am not prepared to carry forward on a task of this magnitude and importance under conditions which have unfortunately now developed, where ambiguous or conflicting instructions to US military establishment, on the one hand, and to me via your personal letter, on the other, jeopardize the essential unity of US effort and action here.

I hardly need add that none of this reflects in any way on General Harkins. I am sure that we could work harmoniously and effectively together on the basis of a clear definition of relationships and responsibilities.

Last month in Washington the President requested me to let him know if I thought organizational arrangements here were not clear or satisfactory. I therefore request that this matter be brought to his attention, and that my previous messages on this subject January 17 message … from Honolulu, Embtels 801, December 13, 819, December 19, 963, January 24, 980, January 27, 1004, February 2, and 1008, February 36 ) be made available to him.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-1562. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Action was assigned to U. Alexis Johnson, who wrote at the top of the first page: “No reply required.”

2 See Document 40.

3 Not further identified.

4 Document 53.

5 Document 25.

6 None printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2462, 1-2762 and 2-262)

62. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 62. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, February 15, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S. Handling of American Newsmen in South Viet-Nam

Problem

We seem headed for a major domestic furor over the “undeclared war” in South Viet-Nam and of US imposed “secrecy regulations” that prevent American newsmen from telling our people the truth about US involvement in that war.

Discussion

Our Embassy in Saigon has called to our attention the fact that it is having considerable difficulty with American newsmen who deplore what these newsmen believe are regulations that make it impossible for them to do their jobs. These newsmen specifically want the right to function much like war correspondents and accompany US personnel on various operations against the Viet-Cong Communist guerrillas.

In the hope of easing relations with the press, our Embassy and military commanders in Saigon have requested the right to make on-the-spot, case-by-case judgments as to when newsmen might be permitted to observe military operations.

Our present policy is that a flat rule prevails against newsmen going on helicopter and other military missions, or being permitted into areas where they might report in detail on what US military men are doing.

It has been explained that this rule has been applied in the interest of national security—that we do not want to telegraph our punches for the enemy, and that we do not want news reports to build up a detailed record that might be cited as evidence of our violation of the Geneva accords.

While in complete agreement with this objective, I do believe that our policy is too broadly restrictive, and that it was adopted without consideration of some press factors that must be considered. The current article in the US News and World Report (Tab A),2 the James Reston column (Tab B) and editorial in yesterdayʼs New York Times (Tab C), the charges in the publication of the Republican National Committee (Tab D—article by Jack Raymond, also from yesterdayʼs New York Times), and as yet unpublished reports submitted to Time-Life (I shall have them at the meeting this evening3 ) are all indications that we run the risk of serious domestic political consequences if we fail to give proper attention to our information policies with regard to South Viet-Nam.

I am setting forth my views on four points that I think we ought to bear in mind in reviewing the appropriateness of our present embargo on newsmen in Saigon: 1. This policy almost certainly will not continue for long to deprive the newsmen of the information we want most to keep out of public print.

Covering the Viet-Nam situation are people like Homer Bigart, Keyes Beach, Howard Sochurek, etc. These fellows have spent a good part of their lives covering wars of one kind or another; they have substantial reputations to protect and, if possible, enhance; they aren't going to sit on their hands just because of our embargo. They will pump our returning soldiers, use Viet-Namese sources, and generally get the information they want. Less enterprising reporters there will seize upon rumors and resort to so-called interpretive pieces that the boys in the trade call “thumb suckers”—a kind of story that often can cause more woe than the facts. Their colleagues in Washington will pounce on letters written to Congressmen by relatives of GIʼs injured or killed in Viet-Nam.

Furthermore, a look at the material Sochurek has submitted to Life is proof enough that the press boys already have enough detailed information about troops and material to paint a disturbing picture of US involvement.

2. By imposing unrealistic regulations we will create a completely hostile press and insure that the newsmen will write just the things we hope to prevent.

Even our friends will do pieces that will grieve us. The Reston column and the Times editorial are examples of this.

In a situation like this a government has two possible fundamental approaches: to impose a system of rigid wartime censorship, or

to cooperate with the press enough to maintain rapport and a mood of mutual trust so as to use the leverage of personal contact to influence, if not control, what information the newsmen put out.

3. We presently are inviting a barrage of attacks on President Diem and on our policies and past actions in South Viet-Nam.

Newsmen who feel unjustly deprived of the right to cover military operations will do more interpretives such as the Keyes Beech piece in yesterdayʼs Washington Post. Sochurekʼs file to Life is loaded with rugged criticism of Diem, of Nolting and our Embassy people and of our military personnel.

4. We must not expect the impossible from the press. There is bound to be major emphasis on the activities of US personnel. This is the nature of news. People in Austin, Texas, care a lot more about what US GIʼs are doing in Viet-Nam than about the dirty work of the Viet Cong. Only through good relations with American newsmen can we “infiltrate” their dispatches with some of the information that we want to get to the public.

Nor can we ever muffle all criticism of Diem. Doubts as to our ability to win with him are too widespread among newsmen who have spent months on the scene. With good relations, we can get a wide measure of silence by astutely invoking the national interest—but not otherwise.

Recommendations

1. That we adopt a more flexible policy with regard to the handling of newsmen in Saigon.

2. That the Ambassador be given authority to determine what military operations, if any, newsmen might witness.

3. That we provide the Ambassador with guidance as to the things we hope the press will avoid, and suggest that he brief them confidentially as to our problems and our need for their understanding and cooperation.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, PR 11. Confidential. Drafted by Rowan. Copies sent to Murrow, Harriman, Manning, and Cottrell.

2 None of the tabs referred to in the source text is printed here.

3 No record of this meeting has been found.

63. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Council to the Director of the Council (Rostow) 63. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Council to the Director of the Council (Rostow)1

Washington, February 15, 1962.

SUBJECT

Economic Program for Vietnam

Attached is a paper prepared by Warren Silver of the Vietnam Task Force staff on the FY 1962 and FY 1963 Project AID Programs for Vietnam. This paper illustrates in a very graphic way the fact—known to many of us for some time—that our economic AID program is not in very good shape in Vietnam and has not been well related to our other efforts. Even where new programs are being added that appear to be more closely related to the counter insurgency effort, as in the case of the “rural development” program on the 4th page of the tabular material, we know so little about the intended content of the program in Washington that approval is being given more or less on the basis of “blind faith.”

The paper was discussed at a Task Force meeting which I attended today.2 As a result of that meeting, the following seemed to be tentatively agreed: a. That it would be desirable if at all possible, to send a team, including military as well as AID members to Vietnam within the next two weeks to review both the FY 1962 and FY 1963 programs in order to bring them into closer alignment with our counter insurgency effort. These programs contain a large element of conventional AID activities. Ideally, this team should have the power to make decisions in the field.

b. There seemed to be general agreement that it would not be desirable to adopt the proposal put forth by Silver that the new USOM Director be a military officer who would be a Deputy to General Harkins. It seemed agreed the problem was one primarily of communication between the military and the USOM in Saigon and between the USOM and Washington. It was agreed that this problem could be better attacked in other ways including possibly meetings between Mr. Hamilton and the USOM Director in Honolulu on the order of the regular military meetings there.

In the course of the discussion, I suggested that one approach to the problem of the FY 1962 program would be to provide funds for civic action in support of the sort of program that had been recommended by the U.S. military civic action team that went to Vietnam. It was pointed out that that teamʼs proposals still awaited approval by the GVN. It was also indicated that once a program was established there would be no problem of getting AID funds to support it. A message to Saigon on civic action is presently being cleared.3 It would propose that any civic action undertaken be in the form of “packages” involving little or no local effort.

It was pointed out that our more conventional view of civic action assumed a degree of community spirit and recognition of the social values of community effort which simply did not exist in a country like Vietnam. Vietnamese farmers, when pushed, can be forced to admit that an irrigation project to which they have been required to contribute labor provided them with identifiable benefits. However, their principal reaction to such projects will be to complain bitterly about the personal effort involved. They would like the work done by “American machines”.

The proposed telegram on civic action would, inter alia, propose the creation of travelling medical teams. Vietnamese doctors might be induced to undertake such duties through promising them scholarships for study abroad after completion of a two or three year tour of duty.4

[Attachment]

Paper Prepared by Warren A. Silver of the Vietnam Task Force5

Washington, February 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam Economic Program FY 1962 and FY 1963

Recommendations:

1. The Taylor Mission priorities should be adopted for the projects in the FY 1963 economic program;

2. All FY 1962 projects in the CEP (Country Economic Program),6 both continuing and new, should be approved;

3. The CEP should be reviewed at once in Saigon by Task Force Saigon (including the MAAG) with the collaboration of an officer from AID and from DOD, and in consultation with the GVN, to bring the FY 1963 program into line with the Taylor Mission priorities;

4. Consideration should be given to whether or not, in FY 1963, the economic program in Viet-Nam thus revised and co-ordinated with the military effort, should be directed by a military officer who will be a deputy to the Chief, USMAC Viet-Nam.

Discussion:

1. The Taylor report says that the economic program for Viet-Nam should: a. Expedite projects that are particularly useful in the short run;

b. Continue successful long-range projects but defer new starts for the time being; and

c. Review long-range projects for possible modification or termination.

The Vietnamese Special Financial Group in July, 1961, said that Viet-Nam then had eighteen months to win its survival and in that period should concentrate on those activities designed to achieve it. This view is consonant with the recommendations of the Taylor report, and a similar view was expressed by President Diem to President Kennedy.

The Country Economic Program (CEP) for FY 1963, which includes the program for FY 1962, states valid objectives (page 2): (1) successful counter-insurgency, (2) engage the loyalty of the people, (3) increase economic growth, (4) reach the less privileged groups.

To achieve these objectives, however, the CEP proposes a program that does not use the Taylor priorities (page 37). The CEP says (page 29) that long-range (development) activities and short-range (impact) activities are usually inseparable because no really significant or complete benefits can be conferred in a short time. This point of view rejects the significance of results obtained say, during the period between now and the end of FY 1963 (e.g. mobile medical and evacuation teams, population regroupments) and those results obtained later. The CEP says, indeed, that long-range projects with no immediate benefits demonstrate to the people the value of their country and their government for the future. This approach offers a future promise to people in present need; it overlooks, as they do not, that they may not be here to enjoy the fruits of the promise.

The CEP says, further, that insecurity does not make long-range activities more difficult than short-range activities; but this overlooks the main point that insecurity makes long-range activity less important than short-range activity.

Perhaps if there were no lack of skilled people, technicians and administrators, both the long and short-range activities could be carried out; and the CEP says the existence of this lack is not critical. But the existence of this lack dictates a choice of projects to which to apply the human resources there are in Viet-Nam, and the Taylor priorities give a sound basis for choice.

In this context of prompt effectiveness, the measure of “usefulness” under the first Taylor priority would be support of the war directly (e.g. medical, communications, transportation) or by speedy realization of economic and social benefits.

2. The FY 1962 program:

It is too late to apply these priorities to the FY 1962 project program. (Note that the commodity portion of the aid program, which is the major part, is proceeding independently of the problems discussed in this paper.) The CEP indicates (page 39) that the program has not been worked over with the MAAG, nor (page 40) with the GVN. Washington does not have the information, the documents, or access to the people in Task Force Saigon and the GVN, that would permit review of the FY 1962 projects in time to bring them into line with the Taylor priorities, and there is not enough information presently in the CEP to support such a review. Nor should Saigon alone be asked to do the job in expectation of early results unaided. For FY 1962 it would be more productive to rely on the field and approve the continuing projects and new projects recommended by the field. This keeps the program going and starts new projects that, on their face, seem acceptable.

3. The FY 1963 program:

Approval of the FY 1962 program then leaves the remaining few months of FY 1962 to work out the FY 1963 program on the basis of the Taylor priorities, and in full consultation with the American military and the GVN. When FY 1963 begins, continuing projects can proceed under the usual continuing authority, and any further new projects can be readied for the FY 1963 laws. This process should be started now. An AID officer and a DOD officer should go from Washington to take part in the process. They should go through the CEP FY 1963 projects with Task Force Saigon on the basis of the Taylor priorities, securing additional explanations where not now in the CEP, and taking part in the addition of projects, building up of existing projects or parts of projects, abatement or discontinuance of other projects, and the consultations with the GVN. They should bring back the FY 1963 program for approval, ready to start with FY 1963 itself.

4. Since the FY 1963 program would best be geared to a military operation, whereas the normal AID program is now geared, in substance and in administering, to long-range economic development, it would be inefficient to ask for a special administrative arrangement in AID for the war in Viet Nam. Present operating personnel in USAID would be continued in their work, but the program as a whole would be run by a military officer answering directly to the military commander who, in turn, answers for all operations in Viet Nam to the Ambassador. Additional personnel as required would come from civilian or military sources. The source of financing of the economic program would depend on the decision of the Administrator. Such treatment of the program would distinguish it before the Congress from those programs more capable of treatment under the prevailing legislation.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam, 1962. Confidential.

2 A record of the meeting is in Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security Files, State Dept. 1961-63.

3 See Document 66.

4 At the end of this memorandum was written by hand the following: “Walt—I donʼt know whether you find this kind of informational report useful in your new role—I have tried to limit them to more important items.”

5 Covering this report was a transmittal memorandum by Cottrell indicating that it would be discussed by the Vietnam Task Force on February 15. Attached were a list of projects then under way in Vietnam, a summary of the projects recommended by the Staley-Thuc Report (see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 93), and a list of the economic priorities contained in the Taylor report (ibid., Document 210).

6 Not printed.

64. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 64. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, February 16, 1962.

REFERENCE

Memorandum of February 11 from U. Alexis Johnson to Mr. Cottrell2

SUBJECT

Civic Action Teams and the Provincial Survey in Viet-Nam

The following is in reply to your memo of February 11: 1. Military Civic Action. In October of last year a DOD civic action team completed a study of ARVNʼs civic action program. We have informally seen the teamʼs report,3 but understand that DOD has not yet accepted their recommendations. In any event, neither State nor AID has received a civic action plan from DOD or any request for action.

Embassy Saigon, however, reports that MAAG is trying to get the plan worked out by the DOD team accepted by the GVN and that the Embassy is working with MAAG in the effort to get GVN acceptance. There is currently no indication of funding requirements for this plan.

It was suggested to Saigon January 20 in a State message4 that a DOD-AID civic action team should visit Saigon this month, but Saigon indicated that it saw no value in another team until the GVN has accepted the plan worked out by the first team.5

On February 13 the Department sent out a circular airgram on the need to develop military civic action.6 Saigon was one of the addresses. It is expected that the post will respond with specific projects, for AID and MAP funding. If not, an AID-DOD team may be despatched to Saigon to develop a program.

2. Civilian Civic Action. Much of the USOM program, particularly the rural impact programs envisaged in the January 4 joint GVN-US communiqué,7 are civic action type programs. Progress on some of these projects is being held up pending AID approval of the FY 62 USOM program. One of the delayed projects affects the Montagnards. The Task Force has pressed AID for fast action on the FY 62 program, to the point of loaning one of our officers to them for a week. We are actively studying means for putting USOM Saigon on a war footing.

The GVN has a Ministry of Civic Action which includes responsibility for Youth, Information, and the old department of civic action. The functions of the Ministry are varied and its cadres are involved in propaganda and political organization and control of the population as well as true rural improvement work which we might regard as civic action. Nevertheless, it has an on-going civic action program which probably could be strengthened, and we will ask the field to consider ways of accomplishing this.

3. Provincial Surveys. You also inquired about the failure of the provincial survey teams to include civilian and political elements. The chief reason for this failure is that President Diem agreed to the provincial surveys with the proviso that they not be concerned with political factors, but would confine themselves to the military and intelligence side.

The teams have now completed the pilot phase of the provincial survey, a survey of three provinces (Bien Hoa, Tay Ninh, and Binh Long). The Embassy member of the pilot team has submitted despatches covering the political situation in two of the provinces (Tay Ninh and Binh Long).8 While the political and civilian elements in the provincial situation will not be jointly covered, they will continue to be reported to us insofar as they can be observed by the Embassy member of the team.

The Task Force also regards the failure to cover political factors as a serious shortcoming in the provincial survey, but sees no better solution, given Diemʼs attitude. The Task Force believes the provincial surveys are useful even within their truncated terms of reference.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8. GVN 1962, Information & Civic Action. Secret. Drafted by Heavner, initialed by Cottrell, and sent to Johnson through S/S and Harriman, who also initialed it.

2 Document 56.

3 Not found.

4 See Document 30.

5 See Document 38.

6 Reference is to Aidto 189, February 12, which noted the Presidentʼs interest in the implementation of civic action programs by indigenous military force and provided guidelines for such programs. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/TAP Files: FRC 68 A 1415, C.I.-Civic Action)

7 See Document 4.

8 Not further identified.

65. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 65. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Rowan) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, February 16, 1962.

Attached is a proposed State-Defense-USIA message to Embassy Saigon (responding to their 1013 of Feb. 6)2 in which detailed guide lines are spelled out for handling newsmen there covering the military strife.

It is the view of this Bureau, of USIA, of Mr. Sylvester in Defense and of Mr. Cottrell of Task Force Viet-Nam that press problems in Saigon are of the greatest importance, and that detailed instructions for dealing with correspondents are urgently needed.

Mr. Sylvester makes the point that our major problem arises from the fact that military leaders in Viet-Nam are straining to get out from under Embassy control and deal with the press as they see fit. Significantly, Governor Harriman has pointed to this same problem. Thus I raise the question of whether the instructions to military commanders in paragraph four of the proposed telegram are worded too diplomatically.

Mr. Sylvester, Mr. Cottrell and Mr. Manning each has made independently the observation that the military operation in Viet-Nam is large enough, and the press problems and implications important enough, to deserve the full-time attention of a top-flight information man.

I recommend that prompt attention be given to the proposal that we get a savvy individual who is skilled at dealing with newsmen and assign him to this job. This in itself would go far to show our desire to co-operate with newsmen. Such an individual should have the confidence of Washington to the extent that he would receive the same information given to Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins. He would maintain frequent contact with Washington so as to ascertain any policy shifts, or to be apprised of any informational or propaganda problems growing out of the Viet-Nam operation.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field: Far East (IAF), 1962. Confidential. This memorandum is part of a package that included a memorandum of February 19 from Rowan to Rusk, Johnson, and Manning in the Department of State, Bundy and Salinger at the White House, and Wilson in USIA, enclosing a draft telegram that was to be considered at the Honolulu Conference of February 19; and that was dispatched with indicated changes as telegram 1006 to Saigon (Document 75); the memorandum of February 15 from Rowan to Johnson (Document 62); and a chit of February 15 from Rowan to Murrow transmitting the latter, with a handwritten note by Murrow to Wilson indicating that he agreed with Rowan.

2 Document 48.

66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 16, 1962—5:59 p.m.

997. Reference: (A) Saigon 983 to Dept. (B) Aidto circ x 189.2 Believe civilian civic action at least as important as military civic action in fight against Viet Cong. Present AID program for Viet-Nam has major element of civilian civic action, but Joint Communiqué3 as developed at TFSaigon initiative is clearest present statement of GVN objectives in civilian civic action field, i.e. impact activities by GVN to win prompt peasant support. Would like soonest, therefore, report from Task Force Saigon on status implementation Joint Communiqué together with TFʼs specific suggestions for further such activities, including especially activities by which civilian civic action can support military plans for cleaning out and securing provinces.

Feeling here is that civilian civic action must give direct benefits to peasant population without demanding much effort or resources from them as they already soured and suspicious as result corvee-type civic action projects. Also believe it important carry out work wherever possible by means teams which will live in villages for some period of time.

Assume Ministry Civic Action logical place to mount such a program, in cooperation with USOM. Believe you may wish consider ways strengthening Civic Action Ministry, including employment of US advisors within Ministry. Feeling here is that effective civic action cannot be combined, at least now, with intelligence or propaganda effort.4

Understand Hieu is capable man who works well with Americans. Can he be approached directly for discussion civic action methods and suggestions how US aid could beef up civilian civic action? Understand Vietnamese Civic Action Teams have been operating on shoe string basis under General Cao with some success since August in area from Tay Ninh east to coast. Can they be supported?

Also suggest future provincial survey teams may wish make particular effort study this problem.

Discussion contained Ref B refers to use of local military forces engaged in civic action projects. Distinction should be made between military and civilian effort in civic action particularly in regard to funding. Ref B should provide CT with sufficient information to proceed in developing specific projects for FY 1962-63 for military forces to implement an expanded program for civic action for Washington consideration. Re Ref A do not contemplate sending Joint State-AID-Defense civic action team to Saigon at this time. Team will be available to assist in program development at later time if CT determines such assistance useful. While we prepared accept your judgment that pilot civic action team not necessary now, team will be available in future to assist in FY 1963 program development and implementation.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2962. Secret. Drafted by Heavner, cleared with Wood and with B/FAC, FE, and AID, and approved by Cottrell. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 See Document 38; and footnote 6, Document 64.

3 See Document 4.

4 This sentence was corrected by telegram 1003 to Saigon, February 19, to read: “Washington would not disapprove use propaganda early stages civic action provided it informational only.” (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-1962)

67. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 67. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, February 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting in Honolulu on February 19

A. The Agenda

Attached are the Agenda items for the Honolulu meeting.

As you know we are particularly interested in Item 5 “The Concept of Close-In Air Support”, Item 8 “The Military Civic Action Program”, and Item 9 “The Status of Provincial Surveys”.

The question of close-in air support is one which I discussed with the Air Force planners in the Pentagon Thursday morning,2 stressing repeatedly that they would make more enemies than friends unless they are very careful. Ben Wood also reminded them that the President had delimited the U.S. military role in Viet-Nam quite clearly in his last news conference,3 saying that U.S. troops were engaged in training and logistic support, that they are not engaged in what would generally be considered combat. If there were press stories to the effect that U.S. military are bombing and strafing Vietnamese villages, we would have serious political problems. I gather that General LeMay had talked to them on the same line, that they are willing to cooperate, but wanted a clear set of rules under which to operate. I suggest the following as a simple rule: U.S. planes should not attack ground targets in Viet-Nam unless 1) their assistance is requested by troops on the ground who are engaged, or are about to be engaged, with the Viet Cong, or 2) the targets to be attacked are specifically cleared by the Ambassador or his Deputy in the Embassy. The second provision would emphasize that the political implications of this war are at least as important as the military. I do not think that this would cause serious delay since they would still have a free hand to move in fast when there was an actual fight and I am sure that Ambassador Nolting could work out a system whereby permission or refusal could be given promptly.

As to Item 8, civic action, there has been a great deal of talk but not too many specific ideas. Herewith are three suggestions which you might wish to bring up: (1) that we support existing Vietnamese civic action teams which reportedly have been operating near Zone D since August under the direction of General Cao. We understand they are very short of supplies; (2) that the Vietnamese Government order its troops to automatically and promptly give rewards in rice, salt, or money to persons giving information on the Viet Cong (there is too much tendency to treat persons who give information as suspicious characters); (3) that in the present widespread state of the war in Viet-Nam it will probably be necessary to assign considerable number of American and possibly third country NCOs to work with the Vietnamese in organizing defense and civic action in the villages. This will be a difficult decision since good NCOs who could fit into the Vietnamese way of life are hard to find in large numbers and it will present the political problem of increasing American casualties. The Australians, Malayans, Filipinos, and even the Koreans and ChiNats might also be asked to supply some of their NCOs.

The thinking behind this suggestion is set out most clearly in Hilsmanʼs “A Strategic Concept for South Viet-Nam” which is attached. You might want to review this book on the way out since it is the best statement of how counterguerrilla actions should be conducted in Viet-Nem that I have seen. However, if you use these ideas I would not cite Hilsman or his book since the military are resentful of it.

As to the status of the Provincial Surveys, Item 9, we understand that three provinces have now been surveyed (Bien Hoa, Tay Ninh and Binh Long). While the Embassy has submitted preliminary reports on Tay Ninh and Binh Long provinces,4 we have not received the actual provincial surveys.

B. For Discussion with Ambassador Nolting

1. The Department intends to assign John Plakies (FSO-2) to Saigon as Economic Counselor. He has a thorough economic background and his French is very good. Messages about this assignment will reach Saigon soon.

2. The New York Times story on Ambassador Noltingʼs speech (attached) played it as a major policy statement and headlined the idea of reforms in the Government. However the article itself indicates that Nolting stressed the importance of supporting the GVN and of working with it to make it more effective rather than standing aside and criticizing. This is healthy advice for the Saigon intellectuals.

We are hoping the text of the speech will be received on time to attach with this memorandum.

3. AID-State-Defense intend to send a three-man team to Saigon, arriving about Friday, February 23 and staying about a week. The team will work with Task Force Saigon (including the USMAG) on the FY 1962 and FY 1963 economic project programs to give priority to projects in support of the expanded counterinsurgency program. With the collaboration of Task Force Saigon the team will hold discussions with the U.S. technicians, military, and other personnel at all levels of the Task Force so as to get information not presently available here. Then the team will eliminate projects or parts or build them up in keeping with counterinsurgency requirements. The AID member of the team will have authority to approve some projects on the spot after such discussions.

The job cannot be done in Washington without information, nor in Saigon without the background of Washington discussions. Saigon seems best because that is where the needed information and people are. (Cleared with AID-Mr. Janow.)

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Honolulu Meeting, July 23, 1962. Secret. Drafted by Wood and Silver. The source text lists four attachments: (1) Agenda items for the Honolulu Meeting (held on February 19); (2) the Hilsman paper “A Strategic Concept for South Viet-Nam” (Document 42); (3) A New York Times story of February 16 on a speech by Nolting; (4) a partial text of the Nolting speech, February 15. Only the first was found attached to the source text.

2 February 15. No record of the meeting has been found.

3 See footnote 3, Document 68.

4 Not further identified.

68. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 68. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, February 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

Tuesday2 Senate Foreign Relations Meeting—Viet-Nam

1. Veil of Secrecy

The President has said we have been as frank as we can be, consistent with the security needs of the situation. In his words, “We have not sent combat troops in the generally understood sense of the word”.3 American military personnel are in Viet-Nam to help the Vietnamese with transport, communications, and various technical services. We are providing the logistic facilities and skills that they lack. But it is their war, and they are doing the fighting. We have not publicly gone into details on numbers and kinds of equipment because of military security and because of possible charges of violating the Geneva Accords. Although only five Americans have been killed by the Viet Cong since 1955 we recognize the dangers of this situation. Having helped Viet-Nam since it became independent we do not intend to withdraw our help when it is fighting to survive Communist guerilla attack. Further, the fall of South Viet-Nam would endanger the future of all Free Asian nations. (NB—We understand Senator Morse is particularly dubious about risking American lives in Viet-Nam.)

2. Geneva Accords

The DRV has systematically violated the Accords almost from the day they were signed. Their present campaign against the GVN strikes at the basic raison d'etre of the Accords, which is the preservation of peace in SEA. While neither the Government of Viet-Nam nor the U.S. signed the Geneva Accords, we have respected them.

At the time the Accords were concluded, the U.S. declared that while it would not use force or the threat of force to disturb the situation created by the Accords, it would “view any renewal of aggression in violation of the aforesaid agreements with grave concern and as seriously threatening international peace and security.” The DRV attack on South Viet-Nam must be regarded as such a threat. Our increased military assistance to Viet-Nam is our response to this effort to conquer South Viet-Nam.

In presenting our action to the world, we have stressed the DRV violations. We have publicly pledged that extraordinary American aid to Viet-Nam would be terminated when the Viet Cong cease their aggression. We have avoided specifics in describing our efforts in order not to accuse ourselves of violating the Accords.

3. Military Assistance Command

The new U.S. military command set up in Viet-Nam February 8 was required because our effort there is no longer only advisory but now includes operational personnel such as helicopter and communications people. The old MAAG command structure did not meet the needs of this activity. The new command also recognizes the increased importance of our effort in Viet-Nam by assigning a higher-ranking man toward it.

It does not mean that our people are to seek out and engage the enemy in combat situations. It is not a combat command. It does not mean that we are directing the war in Viet-Nam. This is not a joint command. The Vietnamese are running their own war. The head of our Mission in Viet-Nam is still a civilian, Ambassador Nolting.

4. American Casualties

Five Americans have been killed and twelve wounded by the Viet-Cong since 1955.

Fifteen of these seventeen casualties occurred before December 1961 when our increased military aid began. Three of the casualties were civilians, the rest were military.

Table of U.S. Casualties and Accidental Deaths in Viet-Nam (since 1955)

Total 39 (18 dead, 20 wounded, 1 missing)

Accidental deaths 13 (all military)

Killed by Viet Cong 5 (1 civilian, 4 military)

Accidentally wounded 8 (2 civilian, 6 military)

Wounded by Viet Cong 12 (2 civilian, 10 military)

Missing 1 (military)

5. Importance of Viet-Nam

(a) The loss of Viet-Nam would convince many Asians now on the fence that Communism is indeed the wave of the future. We cannot afford to have American support devalued by the loss of a nation which is covered by the SEATO protocol and to which we are deeply committed in terms both of public statements of support and in terms of a large and long-standing aid program.

(b) The loss of Viet-Nam would encourage the Bloc to use similar tactics of infiltration and subversion in other countries. Southeast Asia would be immediately threatened.

(c) North Viet-Nam has been one of the most aggressive members of the Bloc. If it succeeds in conquering South Viet-Nam, it will solve what is perhaps its most pressing internal problem: food. Given its performance in Laos, it seems certain that any strengthening of the DRV will increase the dangers faced by free Asia.

6. The American Role

The Vietnamese have the will to fight Communism. Total casualties on both sides of 3,000 per month, of which over half are Viet Cong, prove that the Communists are meeting strong opposition.4 Even more illuminating is the fact that the clear majority of Vietnamese casualties does not belong to the Army but to the village defense units (Self-Defense Corps and Civil Guard). Our role is to give these people the technical and logistical assistance they cannot provide for themselves to enable them to win their own war.

The DRV can raise the ante. There are more than 350,000 men in their armed forces—many of them natives of South Viet-Nam as well as veterans of the long guerrilla war against the French. They can be infiltrated into Viet-Nam via Laos with little difficulty across the long and rugged border between the two countries. If the DRV chooses to take the risk, they can compel us to take further measures or lose Viet-Nam. We do not intend to lose Viet-Nam.

7. Why We Support Diem

For thirty years Diem has recognized the Communist threat to Asia. He has done all he can to strengthen his country against it. He is a determined and courageous man. He has been right in emphasizing the importance of defense, education, communication and rural welfare.

If Viet-Nam is not a democracy, neither is any other underdeveloped country. These countries must develop politically as well as economically. Viet-Nam has no democratic tradition. It is divided and at war. Yet Diem has held elections. Opposition candidates were given equal time on the radio. They were critical. They are not in jail. President Diem recently followed his Cabinetʼs recommendation that an unpopular bill proposed by his sister-in-law be returned to the National Assembly.

Diemʼs strong leadership has been needed to prevent factionalism which is endemic in Vietnamese politics.

He has been reluctant to delegate authority, but has recently agreed to our suggestions that he set up a National Internal Security Council (War Cabinet) which meets twice a week and that military chain of command and intelligence operations be reorganized. American advisers are playing a larger role.

We support the Government of Viet-Nam and Diem as the head of that Government. The future is up to the Vietnamese. We do not intend to interfere.

Since the war in Viet-Nam cannot be won without the closest cooperation between our two Governments, public American criticism of Diem only succeeds in hurting our own efforts in Viet-Nam.

8. Our Economic Aid Program

The economic assistance program in Viet-Nam was developed (1) to provide those commodities the GVN cannot afford out of its own resources, but which are necessary—even on an austere basis in which consumer goods are minimized—to keep the economy primed and pumping; and (2) to provide projects for the development of Viet-Nam into a democratic self-sustaining economy. Right now, however, we are in the midst of a very urgent revamping to assure priority to projects in full support of the expanded counterinsurgency program. We want to speed up projects that are particularly useful in the short run because they support the war effort directly or by producing important social and economic benefits in a hurry. While we want to continue successful, long-range development projects, we are going to defer new starts for the time being, and we are reviewing other long-range development projects to modify them or terminate them. We especially want to work out civilian (and military) projects that will have the swiftest impact in winning the peasants to the government, i.e. civilian and military civic action progress.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files; Lot 66 D 307, 1.A-2 Briefing Papers, GVN, 1962. Confidential. Drafted by Wood, Heavner, and Silver.

2 February 20.

3 President Kennedy made this statement in response to questions asked at a February 14 news conference; see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 1101.

4 During 1961 total casualties were: GVN—12,686; DRV—20,390. [Footnote in the source text.]

69. Letter From Wesley R. Fishel of the Michigan State University Group in Vietnam to President John A. Hannah of Michigan State University 69. Letter From Wesley R. Fishel of the Michigan State University Group in Vietnam to President John A. Hannah of Michigan State University1

Rangoon, February 17, 1962.

Dear President Hannah: I have recently left Saigon after spending four weeks there, and given the developments there during that time it occurred to me that you might be interested in my personal report on the situation which prevails there.

Since I left Saigon I have had no word from the MSU people there, and can only assume that the President has not reversed his decision to terminate the Universityʼs contract program in Vietnam. (If he has, of course, you will read the following remarks with a different perspective than otherwise.) As you can easily imagine, the interview at which the President informed me that he had decided against renewing the MSU contract was a difficult one.2 He was obviously ill at ease and made it plain that he hoped the program termination would not affect our personal relationship. At the same time it was clear that he held me at least partially responsible for the fact that MSU people had published what he called “untrue, unfair, and tendentious” criticisms of his government. He tried to depersonalize his decision by telling me that the members of his Cabinet had recommended against our continuation. But since I had already learned that he had consulted only two advisers: his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, and the Secretary of State at the Presidency, Nguyen Dinh Thuan, I called him on this, whereupon he repeated earlier accusations that MSU personnel had been “disloyal.” Both the President and his brother individually voiced implicit accusations in talking with me, to the effect that our professors had used their “privileged position”, which gave them access to government offices, personnel, and files, to engage in intelligence activities in the guise of “research”; and had then used the information they had secured to the detriment of the Vietnamese Government.

I tried to reason with Diem on this, though I recognized from his manner that argument was probably futile. The voice was that of the President, but the reasoning was that of his brother, Nhu. I am sorry to say that Mr. Nhu apparently actually believes his own arguments and persuaded Diem of them. It is also a fact, however, that other members of the government, headed by the Vice President, while sharply critical of the publications in question, were fully convinced of the value of MSUʼs work and wanted very much for our group to continue its programs.

As much as I regret the termination at this time, when all of us should be making a maximum effort to keep the Vietnamese Government afloat, I am relieved that the issue was resolved enough in advance of the termination date to permit an orderly phasing out. And given also the situation which I shall outline in the following paragraphs, it is probably just as well that our work is being brought to a close, at least for the present time.

For the first time in seven and one-half years I have become a pessimist about the fate of South Vietnam. In the two and one-half years since my last visit to that country there has been a most profound and distressing deterioration there, politically, socially, and psychologically. Economically, though some progress is still being made, the gains of the past few years are in many cases being reversed, by a combination of factors of which the major ones have been very serious floods along the Mekong last fall, and sharply intensified Viet Cong activity. As you may know, Vietnam is not exporting rice this year; it will in fact import some. Again, there has been just enough interference in normal business and investment activity on the part of the government-supporting political party of Mr. Nhu to have a monkey-wrench kind of effect on economic operations. Militarily, the recent influx of thousands of American officers and men, and dozens of helicopters, etc., is starting to make a distinct change in the situation already, turning what was a minus into a plus. I would hesitate to predict, however, that the plus will remain that for long, for I find it hard to believe that the Chinese and Viet Cong will allow this challenge to go unmet. Indeed, my travels to the high plateau, the center, and the Mekong delta last month have left me with the impression that a Viet Cong offensive is very likely in the next few weeks. By that I donʼt mean a major invasion out of the north, but rather a heavily intensified terrorization program that may spread even to the cities, with the intent of panicking the population and weakening the Diem governmentʼs hold still more.

Politically and psychologically things are at a low ebb. The commendable programs which were begun a few years ago have been allowed in many instances to lose their momentum by reason largely of a failure on the part of the Central Government to follow through on initial decisions and acts. The hopes and aspirations of 1954 and 1955 have been allowed to die, and a miasma of apathy pervades the atmosphere. I talked more than casually with 118 people during my four weeks in Vietnam. Almost all are people I have known for many years. None of them is politically part of the “opposition.” At least two thirds of them were still Diemʼs strong adherents in 1959. Yet today, only three or four of these men and women support the government with discernible enthusiasm. Then too, there is much popular fear: fear that “the Viet Cong are coming,” and that the government is not going to be able to move to meet the Communist threat swiftly enough to save many people from being hurt or killed. Of course, this is the kind of fear which is surreptitiously encouraged by Communist agents, of whom there are many in Saigon.

Diem himself is linked more and more often with those around him—the “evil influences,” as some call them. After all, he is the Chief of State and must take responsibility for the acts of his entourage, whether he knows of them or not: if he knows of them, he is at fault because they are “evil”; if he doesn't know of them, he should by now. No one yet accuses him of wrongdoing, and in fact he could recoup his former stature and support easily with just a minimum of effort. But he does not see the necessity or desirability of such steps, and no one who does has the courage to tell him. This applies even to those few still with him who are basically courageous, men of integrity and ability who despise the craven flatterers who surround him and insulate him from the realities of his situation. They are reluctant to tell him unpleasant truths because he may dismiss them, and they know that in that case “the evil ones” would put their own men into the vacancies and then even this tiny opening to the outside would be closed off.

Who are these “evil influences?” As always, Diemʼs brother, Nhu, heads the list, but shares his position with his wife. Nhuʼs policies have formed the philosophical basis of the regimeʼs activity for the past six years, and they have failed miserably to win the people to the side of the government. But he doesn't realize this, and one cannot convince him (or Diem) of this. His wife is as brilliant, vivacious, bitchy, and brutal in her Borgia-like fashion as ever—and with (charitably) the purest of intentions she is succeeding in alienating substantial segments of the population from her brother-in-lawʼs regime at a time when it needs the enthusiastic support of everyone. She is the sponsor, for example, of an asinine bill that passed the National Assembly by a questionably secured majority: the “Social Purification Law.” This silly legislation, rammed through the Assembly in the name of “austerity” and “mobilizing the population”, prohibits dancing or the teaching of dancing, even in private homes, bans dissemination of birth control information, devices, or medications, and would regulate all sorts of other activities and practices including public displays of affection, certain kinds of dress, etc.3 Coming from a Catholic it is interpreted to mean that Catholic dogma is being forced on the people, which means that it is creating inter-religious frictions where few have existed previously. Then there is the Secretary of State at the Presidency, Nguyen Dinh Thuan, a shifty, ambitious, clever, and unscrupulous-but able-administrator, who has his eye on even higher position, and some American friends who think he would be easier to handle than Diem. Much as I do not wish to see the influence of the Nhus continue, the elevation of Thuan is not to me the answer either. For this man is as well hated as the Nhus (who put him into his job, incidentally) and a likely candidate for assassination, either by the Communists or by many others who detest him as a man who has tasted power and likes it too well, and who climbed to his present position on the backs of those who were his friends and benefactors.

The US role in all this is, as ever, of mixed quality. The determined military effort we are now making is likely to help a good deal; our economic measures will also help. But these steps are helping only to warm the fingers and the toes; the body itself needs badly to be warmed too if it is to be kept alive. Unless Vietnam experiences a major and favorable psychological shock within the next few months, I doubt seriously whether it will survive, notwithstanding our efforts and our money and our men. The bright spots which were so clearly visible two and even one year ago are now fading into insignificance because the regime still has failed to mobilize the hearts and loyalties of the people. This is ironical, for this is a regime which has based its system of appointment to office on “loyalty.” And ironical too is the fact that this regime, which has a philosophical base (synthetic and unloved) of “personalism,” which teaches that every man has the right to the fullest development of his personality, has failed miserably to enable men to do just that. (I am not speaking of civil liberties here—they are still a side issue, by and large—I speak of the freedom of men to rise in their chosen professions to positions of responsibility, to improve their status by their own efforts, by demonstrating their capacities and their talents.) I think here of all the young men I have known and worked with in Vietnam (including Nguyen Thai, who is once more back at MSU, and Vu Van Thai, who reportedly is now at Harvard), who have the qualities of leadership which Vietnam will need in the years ahead, but who have been alienated and their development stifled and smothered by the heavy hand of their government. (But I must clarify one point here: the Vietnamese Government is not malicious or predatory or vicious or particularly oppressive, especially if it is compared with the regimes of neighboring countries. Rather it is a clumsy and bumbling government which has failed to take advantage of one opportunity after another, and which has not dared to take the risks involved in implementing its avowed ideas, and which has not carried successful programs to their successful conclusion.)

Perhaps my rhetoric has left you with the impression that I have written my friend off. I have not. However, I am firmly of the opinion that unless what I have termed the “evil influences” are removed from the scene in one way or another, Ngo Dinh Diemʼs government is not going to make the grade. Support for the government is dwindling, and one finds evidences of a growing feeling of desperation among the able and hitherto loyal men and women who have supported it. Unless the situation can be changed for the better, we are in for a very bad period in Vietnam.

Sincerely yours,

Wesley Fishel

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Personal and Confidential. A date stamp on the source text indicates that President Hannah received it on February 23. Hanna forwarded it under a covering letter to President Kennedy on February 26, noting that the contract with the MSU Group had been terminated by President Diem and expressing misgivings about ever having gotten involved in Vietnam in the first place. Also attached to the source text was a copy of a letter from McGeorge Bundy to President Hannah of March 26 resuming the original, thanking him on President Kennedyʼs behalf, and informing him that copies of the Fishel letter had been distributed to members of the Presidentʼs staff concerned with Vietnam.

2 The interview between Diem and Fishel took place on January 24. An account of it is in a memorandum of January 25 from Guy Fox of the MSU Group to James Hendry, Assistant Dean of the College of Business and Public Service. (Michigan State University, Hannah Papers, H, Vietnam, 1962)

3 In the margin next to this sentence is written in an unidentifiable hand: “Diem has returned this bill to the assembly for reworking.”

70. Memorandum From the Chief Adviser, Michigan State University Group in Vietnam (Fox), to James B. Hendry of Michigan State University 70. Memorandum From the Chief Adviser, Michigan State University Group in Vietnam (Fox), to James B. Hendry of Michigan State University1

Saigon, February 19, 1962.

SUBJECT

Future of MSUG in Vietnam

This is to review the events of the past few days. We are now notified officially and definitely there will not be a renewal of MSUʼs contract with GVN. Meetings between the President and Secretary Thuan with Dean Seelye and myself have made it clear that GVN does not want MSU to continue here.

Dean Seelye himself intended to write both you and President Hannah this morning but he was called suddenly and unexpectedly to see President Diem. It was necessary for Dean Seelye to go directly from the interview to the aiport. Therefore, he has requested me to report on developments here and to send a copy of my memorandum to President Hannah.

On Thursday, February 15, Dean Seelye and I met with Secretary of State at the Presidency Nguyen Dinh Thuan. The attached memorandum for the record2 gives an account of that meeting. Though Thuan was cordial he made it clear that the President considered the articles by Taylor and Child3 to be so harmful and such a breach of ethics that he believes it inadvisable for MSU to continue here. Thuan said the President realizes MSU cannot exercise control over project returnees and therefore believes it better that the government directly hire advisors who can be prevented from writing “irresponsibly” and “unfairly” on political matters.

President Diem, who was quite friendly during the meeting this morning, revoiced much of what Thuan had said. The President said he was grateful for the assistance and achievements of MSU and praised the good work of the overwhelming majority of our personnel. But he said he was deeply hurt and shocked by articles written by MSUG professors after their return to the United States. The Child and Taylor articles—especially that of Child—urged the forceful overthrow of the government, he said. If Child and Taylor had written the articles while they were in Vietnam the President said they would have been tried before a tribunal for fomenting an insurrection. Diem did not appear bitter, but, rather, shocked and disappointed that “those in whom he had placed confidence and trust” had fumed against him. The President expressed the view that the interest of the government would be served best by having foreign advisors hired by the NIA. This arrangement, he believed, would insure control by the government over the advisors' publications. Of course, Dean Seelye outlined the Universityʼs position, with which you are familiar. He said in effect that whereas he did not agree with much of the material from the Taylor-Child articles the University must recognize the right of returnees to write freely so long as they do not disclose genuinely secret information—he believed GVN would have to weigh the total good of our efforts against the relatively small number of objectionable articles.

The President became sentimental toward the end of the meeting, reviewing the years of warm, harmonious relations with MSUG, again expressing his appreciation for our work here and asking Dean Seelye to convey his best wishes to President Hannah.

There is one other development of which I should apprise you: On February 15 just before our meeting with Thuan, Malcolm Browne, of the Associated Press, called for an interview with Dean Seelye. He said he had heard the MSU contract was not to be renewed because of the writings of our returnees. We haven't the least idea where he received the information, but the news now seems to be all over Saigon. Because he was tied up with various meetings—including one with American Ambassador Nolting-Dean Seelye delayed having a meeting with Browne until the next day. In the meanwhile he took up with Nolting the question of dealing with the press. Nolting said he supposed there was little we could do but tell the truth that the Government of Vietnam did not want a contract because of objectionable articles by former MSUG members. Nolting seemed quite concerned that the President might make a big issue of the governmentʼs position vis-à-vis MSU.

On the sixteenth Dean Seelye met with Browne. Browne said he thought he had a real story here because fundamental principles of freedom of press were involved. He recounted his own difficulties with Vietnamese censorship, which has prevented him, he said, from telling the American people of the actual conditions here. At one point during the interview both Dean Seelye and I emphasized was that GVN has never on any occasion asked MSU to muzzle returning scholars nor indicated it would want a contract renewal in the event we agreed to throttle returnees. The government, he said, simply objected to the writings of our former members and as a result did not believe it advisable to have us continue beyond the expiration of the present contract. Browne asked if we believed the government would have agreed to a renewal if we had agreed to curb freedom of expression of returnees. We said quite candidly we did not know, because the matter had never arisen. The government had never made such a request and we certainly have not and would not make such an offer. I mention this point specifically because in Browneʼs release he has said that Seelye said “the government had asked his university to order returning MSU professors not to write articles criticizing the national administration.”4 There are other inaccuracies in the release. For example, Browne says that Seelye, who has always been on cordial terms with the President, has been unable to confer with the President this time. As I have already mentioned, Dean Seelye did meet with the President. In another place Browne said that Seelye would return to the United States “without the contract renewal he had sought.” As a matter of fact we told Browne that Seelye was here to present the conditions under which the University would accept a new contract and to precipitate a decision from GVN. I am sending you a copy of Browneʼs release, which contains several other minor misrepresentations.

Dean Seelye left today at 2:30. While in Saigon he talked not only with Diem and Thuan but with various other governmental officials, such as the Secretary of State for National Economy, Thanh; Dean Thuc, Director of the Law School; and the President of the Bank of Vietnam. He also had discussions with officials and faculty at the NIA and saw a number of persons in private business such as the President of the Bank of China, President of the Chamber of Commerce.

At USOM several times with Gardiner; Knox and Rome of PAD; Fippin, the Deputy Director. At the American Embassy he met with the Ambassador, with Bogardus of the Economic Section, and others.5

I believe his visit was interesting and profitable in the sense that he precipitated a decision from GVN.

1 Source: Michigan State University, Hannah Papers, H, Viet. fr., 1962. None of the attachments is included with the source text.

2 A record of this meeting by Fox, February 16, is ibid.

3 Presumably a reference to Milton C. Taylor and Adrian Jaffe, “Crumbling Bastion,” New Republic, 644:17-20, June 14, 1961; and Frank C. Child, “Vietnam,” ibid., 645:14-16, December 4, 1961.

4 Malcolm Browneʼs despatch, February 17, appeared in the Washington Post, February 13. 1962.

5 No records of meetings with anyone except Thuan and Diem have been found.

71. Editorial Note 71. Editorial Note

On February 19, 1962, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Admiral Felt, Ambassador Nolting, General Harkins, Assistant Secretary of State Harriman, and numerous other officials met at CINCPAC Headquarters in Honolulu for the third Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference. A full record of the meeting is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 5159, SGN (62) 19 GVN-DEFSEC-CINCPAC. For a summary record, see Document 77. Regarding the second Honolulu Conference, January 15, see Document 22.

72. Editorial Note 72. Editorial Note

On February 19, 1962, President Kennedy signed National Security Action Memorandum 132, a four-paragraph memorandum on the support of local police forces for internal security and counterinsurgency purposes. For text of this memorandum, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pages 455-456.

73. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 73. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, February 19, 1962.

As a follow-up to the recent poor press in Saigon and the moratorium on U.S. newsmen riding in U.S. aircraft,2 State approached the President Saturday, 17 February, to pin down a future policy.

The State proposal gives Ambassador Nolting authority to decide on press participation in U.S. air operations on a case-by-case basis. He will be governed by the policy to emphasize the U.S. support function and the SVN primacy in winning the war. Military and other advice will be rendered through the Country Team.

The State position was developed with the positive interest of Secretary Ball and Secretary Johnson, but was not concurred in by Governor Harriman.3 It was presented to the President by Mr. Rowan.

The President agreed, though apparently grudgingly. It was decided that the approved directive, cleared by Defense, would be discussed in Honolulu with Ambassador Nolting by Secretary McNamara and Governor Harriman. If the Ambassador concurs, the more liberal policy would be confirmed by subsequent State telegram.4

W.H.B.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Confidential.

2 See Document 48.

3 See footnote 1, Document 59.

4 Document 75.

74. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 74. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, February 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam Task Force Meeting, 21 February 1962

1. Items of interest developed at the Task Force Meeting of 21 February are indicated below. a. The organization of the State-Defense-AID economic group to proceed to Saigon for review of FY-62 and FY-63 economic aid programs, decided upon at the 15 February meeting,2 was discussed. The project is bogged down by AID delay in naming a representative chartered to make on-the-spot decisions; AID has asked Saigon USOM director Gardiner for his views on the trip, which will result in additional delay and possible haggling on whether the trip is needed at all. The reason for the trip is basic—to modify the AID programs so that project characteristics are compatible with the C.I. strategy and will support it in proper order of priority.

b. Defense indicated dissatisfaction with the progress and results of the provincial surveys. The military and intelligence objectives now being undertaken are not being met because team membership is too small and not enough time is devoted to each province. For example, there is need of data on numbers and location of CG and SDC. Defense feels there should be economic representation so that later civic action in the province pacification strategy can be properly planned. There should be more teams and a priority approach to parallel the 10 provinces selected for military pacification; the whole project should be speeded up. At Honolulu, Ambassador Nolting was moderately receptive to these criticisms; he was reluctant to push Diem. Governor Harriman indicated State support for any needs the Ambassador indicated. In the Task Force, Cottrell said the Honolulu discussion seemed to focus on the shortcomings and he would assume Ambassador Nolting will get with it; further, he asked the economic group to look into the matter when in Saigon. [This response was not very strong to say the least; I talked to Admiral Heinz and suggested he buck this to the Special Group (C.I.) next week through Secretary Gilpatric.]3

c. The recent RDF intelligence indicating a VC radio station inside the Cambodian border (about 10 miles) was discussed… . [The Honolulu meeting discussed the question of improving DF capability and accuracy in detail; the VC are now using a onetime tape that will be unbreakable so there is a need for pinpoint locating information to destroy rather than monitor military communication facilities.]

d. State asked Defense for suggestions to soften the impact of 900 MAAG personnel scheduled to arrive in SVN in March. [The heavy input is due in part to the Bragg schooling; the first course completes in late March.]

e. The proposed arrangement to handle the U.S. news representatives in SVN was agreed in Honolulu (the Ambassador will make final decision on newsmen going on U.S. helos and aircraft with Country Team advice; in any case where General Harkins says they are not to go, they won't).

W.H.B.4

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret. Drafted by Bagley.

2 See footnote 2, Document 63.

3 At the March 1 Special Group (CI) meeting, it was agreed that the Group would investigate the question of “whether economic programs are being pushed as vigorously as others” and urged that “economic personnel should be included in survey groups for key provinces “ (Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (C.I.) 1/1/62-7/31/62) Brackets in this and following paragraphs are in the source text.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 21, 1962—10:01 a.m.

1006. Joint State-Defense-USIA Message.Embtel 1013.2 State, Defense and USIA concur in view that more flexibility needed at local level in handling of American newsmen covering Viet-Nam operations. We conclude that in absence of rigid censorship, US interests best be protected through policy of maximum feasible cooperation, guidance and appeal to good faith of correspondents.

Recent press and magazine reports are convincing evidence that speculation stories by hostile reporters often more damaging than facts they might report.

Ambassador has over-all authority for handling of newsmen, in so far as US is concerned. He will make decisions as to when newsmen permitted to go on any missions with US personnel, when approved by US military commander.3 They also must approve in advance transport of newsmen on US ships and other US craft, including air, involved in Viet-Nam operations.4 Ambassador should coordinate the information policy with GVN if possible.

Attention called to the following guidelines which we believe in our national interest. US military and civilian personnel must see that they are adhered to scrupulously and that Ambassador given complete cooperation if we to avoid harmful press repercussions on both domestic and international scene.

1. This is not a US war. US personnel, civilian or military, should not grant interviews or take other actions implying all-out US involvement. Important that we constantly reinforce idea that this is struggle in which tens of thousands Vietnamese fighting for their freedom, and that our participation is only in training, advisory and support phases.

2. We recognize it natural that American newsmen will concentrate on activities of Americans. It not in our interest, however, to have stories indicating that Americans are leading and directing combat missions against the Viet Cong.

3. Should impress upon newsmen that purpose of certain classified operations is to flush out and destroy bands of vicious Viet Cong terrorists. Every effort made to avoid harming innocent civilians. Sensational press stories about children or civilians who become unfortunate victims of military operations are clearly inimical to national interest.

4. Operations may be referred to in general terms, but specific numbers—particularly numbers of Americans involved—and details of material introduced are not to be provided. On tactical security matters, analysis strength and weaknesses and other operational details which might aid enemy should be avoided.

5. We cannot avoid all criticism of Diem. No effort should be made to “forbid” such articles. Believe, however, that if newsmen feel we are cooperating they will be more receptive to explanation that we in a vicious struggle where support of South Vietnamese is crucial and that articles that tear down Diem only make our task more difficult.

6. Emphasize to newsmen fact that success of operation requires high level GVN-American cooperation and that frivolous, thoughtless criticism of GVN makes cooperation difficult achieve.

7. Correspondents should not be taken on missions whose nature such that undesirable dispatches would be highly probable.

Think it advisable that Ambassador and General Harkins see newsmen at frequent intervals so as to establish point that they keeping press informed to extent compatible with security. Should consider pre-operations briefing of newsmen by designated spokesman.

The point below for consideration and private use at Ambassadorʼs discretion: It should be possible for Ambassador and/or military to exact from responsible correspondents voluntary undertakings to avoid emphasis in dispatches of sensitive matters, to check doubtful facts with US Government authorities on scene. Seriousness of need for this may be duly impressed on responsible correspondents to extent that, in interests of national security and their own professional needs, they can be persuaded to adopt self-policing machinery. Can be reminded that in World War II American press voluntarily accepted broad and effective censorship. In type struggle now going on in Viet-Nam such self-restraint by press no less important. Important to impress on newsmen that at best this is long term struggle in which most important developments may be least sensational and in which “decisive battles” are most unlikely, therefore stories implying sensational “combat” each day are misleading.

Additional press guidance will be provided from time to time. Your reactions and suggestions welcomed.

Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam, Country Series. Confidential. Drafted by Rowan, cleared with Wilson, Rusk, Manning, Cottrell, and Johnson of State, McNamara and Sylvester of Defense, and Salinger of the White House, and approved by Harriman; Rowan signed the telegram for Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and COMUSMACV. The contents were discussed at the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference at Honolulu on February 19, as indicated in Document 65. Where significant, differences between this telegram and the draft considered at Honolulu are indicated in footnotes below.

2 Document 48.

3 The draft message did not include this last clause.

4 At this point in the draft message was the sentence: “Ambassador to be guided by advice of Task Force Saigon members, particularly General Harkins.”

76. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 76. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 21, 1962—4:10 p.m.

1010. Task Force Vietnam. From Johnson. Department urgently interested in obtaining maximum utilization of National Police structure in counter-insurgency effort. AID currently reviewing your recommendation of $4.8 million police advisory program for FY 62. Understand that CAS program set forth in Embtel 6602 in process implementation.

Would appreciate report soonest on latest status programs outlined in Embtel 660 together your views on following points: a) present function and capability of National Police structure in relation to overall counter-insurgency effort, b) plans for expanding or improving such present function and capability, c) organizational changes in both GVN and country team required to maximize police contribution to overall counter-insurgency effort, and d) any other suggestions or comments on best way of integrating National Police into total counter-insurgency effort.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/11-1661. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Maechling; cleared with TF/VN, S/S, AID/FETA, and AID/AA/F; and approved by Johnson who signed for Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Dated November 16,1961, not printed. (Ibid., 751K.00/11-1661)

77. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin), to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) 77. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin), to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)1

Honolulu, February 21, 1962.

Dear Cot: While Assistant Secretary Harriman was here2 he raised two subjects with me in a brief, private conversation, stressing the importance of my taking the right line on them. This conversation took place during the morning break, and although at lunch time Mr. Harriman said he wanted to have another word with me before he left, the opportunity for one never arose. The purpose of this letter is to find out just what the Departmentʼs thinking is on these subjects.

The first subject is Jungle Jim operations. Mr. Harriman expressed concern about the inadequacy of information as to targets with the consequent danger that innocent people would be killed. He emphasized that such operations should not be conducted in such a way as to alienate the Vietnamese people from the GVN and the United States. He had no objection to close support of ground operations but was worried about other types of air strikes.

I told him that I had had a letter from you3 expressing much the same concern and had discussed it with Admiral Felt. I pointed out that targets were selected in Viet-Nam on the basis of recommendations by the Vietnamese, and I thought that everyone here was conscious of the great importance of hitting the right targets.

My conversation with Mr. Harriman took place before discussion of Agenda Item 5 on the subject of the problem of target selection and identification, including “action to minimize casualties and damage of friendly assets by air operations”. General Anthis briefed on this subject very thoroughly. He acknowledged that all target information came from the Vietnamese and that the United States could not determine as a fact the validity of target information. However, the USAF did not accept any missions which the VNAF could perform and took every precaution to screen the Vietnamese requests which came to it. General Anthis had imposed the restriction on Jungle Jim operations not to operate less than five miles from the Lao and Cambodian borders during the daytime and ten miles at night.

Following General Anthisʼ briefing Mr. Harriman asked how a decision was made in individual cases as to whether military advantage outweighs political disadvantage. Ambassador Nolting replied that he was convinced that the greatest care has been exercised to insure that wrong targets are not hit although we have to rely completely on Vietnamese intelligence at present. Our post-strike information, however, is virtually nil. He felt we should try to squeeze out more post-strike information and, as our own intelligence capabilities increase, to double check GVN intelligence.

Secretary McNamara said as he saw it there should be three primary restrictions on USAF operations: 1. Minimize risk of loss of US personnel; 2. Avoid trespassing beyond South Viet-Namʼs borders; and, 3. Conduct operations only when there is a net advantage. Ambassador Nolting pointed out (without contradiction) that the surest operations were those of close ground support while interdiction strikes were less safe. Mr. Harriman then said that as he understood it General Harkins and Ambassador Nolting would have to decide in each case the question of the net advantage of an air strike since the necessary information was not available in Washington.

On the basis of the foregoing discussion, I had the feeling (although I was unable to confirm it) that Mr. Harriman was satisfied that the responsible people in Viet-Nam, both on the Embassy and military side, are now doing their best to insure that United States air operations are conducted in such a way as to minimize political disadvantages and that day-to-day controls on such operations must be maintained as a practical matter in Viet-Nam rather than in Washington or Honolulu. If this is incorrect, or if you have further thoughts on this subject, please let me know.

The other subject which Mr. Harriman discussed with me was the defoliant operation. We had just had a briefing on defoliants and it was apparent that the technical information available on the results was inadequate and that management of the whole project had been somewhat confused by the autonomous workings of the R and D people. It also came out that the Communists were making propaganda out of the use of defoliants, as was to be expected.

Based on the communications I have seen from the Department on the subject of defoliants, there has been no conflict in view between this headquarters and the Department on this subject. CINCPAC has never been enthusiastic about the project and was firmly opposed to the spraying of crops, fully realizing the political and propaganda hazards. The push behind the project has come from the Vietnamese themselves and the R and D people. As you know the subject has been discussed at both the previous SecDef conferences and approval given for only limited spraying in order to determine the operational usefulness of defoliants under various conditions. To the best of my knowledge what has been done so far on defoliants has been concurred in by the Department. If there is going to be a change in the Departmentʼs thinking on this subject, I hope you will let me know.

Since I expect to leave with Admiral Felt on February 28 for a brief trip to Southeast Asia, you may not be able to reply to this letter in time to reach me in Honolulu. However, if there is some guidance which would be useful for me to have on these subjects prior to our visit to Saigon March 6-8, perhaps you could send your reply to me there in care of the Embassy, sending a copy to Tom here. I am, of course, at all times glad to receive guidance on such subjects as this from you and others in FE at any time that you feel there is need for it.

Thank you for sending personal regards via Mr. Harriman. I reciprocate them heartily.

Sincerely yours,

Ed

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/2-2162. Top Secret; Official-Informal.

2 Harriman was in Honolulu on February 19 for the Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference.

3 Not further identified.

78. Editorial Note 78. Editorial Note

On February 21, 1962, the intelligence community issued Special National Intelligence Estimate 10-62, “Communist Objectives, Capabilities and Intentions in Southeast Asia.” (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Southeast Asia.) It concluded (1) that the Communist bloc had maintained basic unity in tactics toward Southeast Asia, but a Sino-Soviet split might result in a more militant Chinese attitude in the area; (2) that large-scale military actions by Chinese or North Vietnam was unlikely; (3) that there was no timetable or priority listing that the Communist forces were following in the area; and (4) that Thailand was a prime candidate for subversion.

One paragraph dealt with South Vietnam; it reads: “In South Vietnam, we believe that there will be no significant change over the short run in the current pattern of Viet Cong activity, although the scope and tempo of the Communist military and political campaigns will probably be increased. The Viet Cong will probably again resort to large-scale attacks, seeking to dramatize the weakness of the Diem forces and to reduce both civilian and military morale, in an effort to bring about Diemʼs downfall under circumstances which could be exploited to Communist advantage.”

79. Letter From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) to the Vice President (Johnson) 79. Letter From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (McGarr) to the Vice President (Johnson)1

Saigon, February 22, 1962.

Dear Mr. Vice President: One of the nicest things said to me since my arrival here as Chief, MAAG, was your remark, “Iʼm glad we have you fighting for us out here.” Because of this, I feel as a fellow westerner, you will understand the following remarks and my feelings, both personal and professional, about fast moving events here. First of all, I am most happy that the wonderful impact made by your trip, and its dynamic pro-American effect on the Vietnamese people, has not been allowed to lag-that we are delivering on the promises and maintaining the image. Second, I get the distinct impression that since your visit and the advent of Vietnam on the forefront of the world stage, we have tended to be too pessimistic about the situation here. It is still critical but certainly not hopeless. Third, that other of our top people now understand what you learned last May-that there is a hot war going on here for which neither MAAG nor our country was geared.

This latter which I reported 17 months ago, was the key to my past problems here until your understanding began to change the climate of opinion at the policy and decision making levels. As you will recall, an already complex situation was made even more difficult by the military and political ideas on Vietnam which prevailed at that time. MAAG was trying to pull them together into a coordinated effort. However, along the way, the admittedly attractive idea of quick and spectacular military victories instead of the historically sound sustained longer range approach got the upper hand. Although this was contrary to MAAGʼs considered judgment, we naturally attempted to carry it out—even to the point of it becoming counterproductive with Diem.

I was most happy that the Secretary of Defense after hearing my ideas on this, which coincided with Diemʼs opinions, put this idea on the back burner. Time, of course, is the controlling factor for the work of the “Civic Action-Rural Reconstruction” teams in laying the absolutely necessary infrastructure at village and hamlet level which will allow GVN to eventually separate the VC from the people. Such a control framework, plus adequate force which is now on the way, will permit the development of badly needed operational intelligence, plus an understanding on the part of the people through assuring their better protection. These basic elements, with adequate training of sufficient military forces is the crux of the Pacification Problem toward which MAAGʼs advisory effort has been oriented since my arrival.

The announcement of the new Command, USCOMACV, has had a good psychological effect on GVN and RVNAF. However, in providing GVN the tools to do the job, we must not offer so much that they forget that the job of saving their country is theirs—only they can do it. In addition, the political, economic and psychological fields must march abreast of the military effort as a coordinated whole. Ambassador Nolting is working hard on this.

On the military side, while Diem still runs a highly centralized operation, significant progress has been made in the military—although his tendency to run the military show still persists. This will take strong coordinating political assistance in complementing areas. Training has been expedited and improved but, in my professional opinion, it has been cut to buy time until it is now barely marginal and cannot be further reduced. In addition, it is still difficult to get commanders and politicians here to think and act unconventionally. As our enemy is tough, dedicated and trained—we also must be if we are to win.

I feel the new command will find that a firm base has been built here for continued progress as an Area Command—the operational type work the MAAG staff has been hard pressed to do here since 1959. This new headquarters should now allow the slowly increasing staff and command increment which remains with MAAG as a subordinate headquarters, a chance to do a better Training-MAP-job. With the hot war situation, this training job must be especially done well and it must, of necessity, get into the field of daily small unit operational planning. The breakdown of functions and responsibilities between the two headquarters is progressing smoothly and will, no doubt, take this into consideration.

Naturally, due to the rapid build up of recently authorized MAAG Advisors, we are experiencing some “growing pains” in arranging for their logistical support and insuring their prompt assignment to the most productive advisory slots. Of course, we will continue to experience certain frustrations inherent in this wartime situation wherein we have no command authority vis-à-vis our counterparts. However, I feel we are continuing to make progress.

With the formation of a senior headquarters, I particularly wanted you to know the terrific job the people working under me have done—under complex and difficult conditions. I can truly report that we have not let you down with respect to your praise of last May. With the growing understanding of the complex situation here and the psychological effect of our countryʼs strong stand announced to the world—followed through with actions—I am more sure than ever that we will win! Of course,MAAG will continue to work as a part of the new team towards this end. Harryette, my boss from “Six Shooter Junction,” Hemsted, sends her very best to you and your good Lady, as does her sister-in-law, Amanda Amsler of Houston. You can be sure we will keep pushing!

Warmest personal regards,

Lionel C. McGarr
Lieutenant General, USA

1 Source: Declassified Documents, 1976, 33H. Secret.

80. Editorial Note 80. Editorial Note

On February 22, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk presented an address at Davidson College in Davidson, North Carolina, in which he spoke of United States interests in South Vietnam. He stated that “the United States has no national requirements in that area.” Rather, he said, United States interests lay in preventing external aggression from the north from succeeding. For text of the address, see Department of State Bulletin, March 19, 1962, pages 448-454.

81. Telegram From their Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt), to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 81. Telegram From their Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt), to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Honolulu, February 22, 1962—10:15 p.m.

230815Z. Appraisal of SVN situation.

A. Your 220001Z cite JCS 3384.

B. Your 220210Z cite JCS 3388.

C. Your 220727Z cite JCS 3389.

D. Your 132228Z cite JCS 3272.2

1. In appraising the situation in SVN we must proceed from three basic facts: first, the communists are presently forcing us to fight on their terms. Second, by its non-conventional nature this form of warfare is designed to be prolonged so as to militarily/politically sap GVN strength. Third, enemy is extremely elusive and operates by methods designed to place conventional military elements at disadvantage where the power of GVNʼs more modern armaments/force are often negated to significant extent.

2. Proceeding then from these facts, I equate situation as follows. As regards GVN relative strength vis-à-vis Viet Cong, the current situation, although showing a temporary diminution in VC activity, does not portend any significant lessening of VC capabilities. Following is submitted in support of this statement. a. Main VC military body has not been defeated; conversely, it is numerically stronger than ever before, and militarily/politically the VC is very active.

b. Viet Cong still possess their various base areas and exert control over generally same territorial extent as 1961.

c. Routes of infiltrations from DRV are still open to VC through Laos and support is still coming over these routes.

d. Militarily, VC can attack at will, move swiftly, and has an offensive posture, whereas many GVN ground force elements are, by circumstances, forced into sedentary-fixed defenses, and, where GVN forces undertake offensive they handicapped by VC elusiveness. Further,GVN forces handicapped by inadequate timely intelligence on

e. Will, determination, and fighting ability of VC is at least equal to GVN. Until only recently, the VC were far in the lead in offensive/aggressive posture, thus engendering more hope/confidence in rank and file.

f. Politically VC has support of a significant segment of rural population; politically, time appears on the side of Viet Cong.

g. Lastly, length and nature of the conflict combine to breed circumstances wherein an anti-government coup could be launched, but conversely, no anti-communist coup is likely to topple Viet Cong.

3. In respect to our strength position throughout country, GVN military strength is comparatively uniform but GVNʼs political strength is not. Generally the GVNʼs political conbro1 is greatest in the major urban areas and along coastal plain where good routes of communication exist. On other hand, GVN control is virtually nonexistent in Phuoc Thanh province which is largely encompassed by Viet Congʼs stronghold of war Zone D. Viet Cong are also dominant in much of the Ca Mau Peninsula swamp area and in much of high plateau area along the Laos border—both regions where terrain/lack of roads tend to restrict movement of conventional forces. A program of province surveys is underway. Reports on first two provinces surveyed (Tay Ninh and Binh Long) illustrate variance of GVN strength in different areas. In Tay Ninh of 56 villages, GVN has some control of 33, and full control in only 12 of these. In Binh Long province, however, GVN has full political conbro1 of 14 of 15 ethnic Vietnamese villages and partial control of the 16 Montagnard villages.

4. In regard to enemy and friendly activities, VC have expanded political activity while maintaining their previous pattern of military activity. VC have established a new party: South Vietnam Peopleʼs Revolutionary Party. Also, Southern Liberation Front has established number of subsidiary fronts designed to establish a firm hold on SVN by organizing each segment of society in VC support. New propaganda station has begun broadcasting to SVN in five languages. VC are concentrating on getting firm grass roots support. a. That VC will attempt to establish a liberated area in SVN is indicated by above political developments. Advantages of establishment of liberation govt are manifold as witnessed by Laos example in which KL/PL gained diplomatic recognition and considerable bloc material support after establishing stronghold in PDJ. With US-backed GVN actions becoming more effective against VC, communists probably feel forced to respond.

b. On the military side, VC pattern is largely a continuation of the small unit actions: ambushes of GVN forces, mining of roads, destruction of ground lines of communications, and attacks of small GVN units, particularly CG/SDC installations. VC dedicated to destruction of CG/SDC which are a basic threat to VC as military means of GVN to separate VC from people. VC have capability of concentrating forces to achieve local numerical superiority over GVN forces in any local area. The VC avoids standup battles with RVNAF. While VC have successfully evaded most of RVNAF larger scale operations, existence of RVNAF forces in vicinity of VC infested areas has probably prevented large scale VC operations. With new training and weapons being provided SDC/CG forces, they stand to possibly cause increasing damage to VC hold on certain areas. VC casualties suffered from CG, SDC, and RVNAF about evenly divided, one third from each.

c. Considerable civil activity will be required to take bulk of basically neutral villages firmly into GVN camp. More Civic Action Teams are needed. These, together with implementation of strategic hamlet plan should be a proper complement to improved GVN military posture.

d. GVN military operations have increased numerically—28 January there were 232 operations involving forces BN size or larger. Real war of attrition, however, being fought by CG/SDC platoons/companies. These operations are responsible for killing most of VC. When these forces encounter any strong VC concentrations they have responsive backing by RVNAF which increasingly aggressive and exploiting their new air mobility.

5. In regard to future VC military activity. a. In coming months is expected generally to follow past pattern/tactics. We may anticipate continuation of large numbers of low-level incidents with occasional attack in BN strength. Expect more VC emphasis to put on organization/training to further develop larger tactical units. Also,VC may obtain better weapons for use against helicopters/low flying aircraft. VC will endeavor to sabotage aircraft, and improve their intelligence and defensive means of obtaining warning re air/ground attacks. VC will try to retain present numerical strength thru local recruitment plus infiltration. Concerted attempts will be made to capture as well as infiltrate arms.

b. Politically VC will stress themes of: US military intervention, US interference in internal affairs, use of defoliants, and presence of US aircraft. National Liberation Front will continue to expand its activities by setting up Red organizations to reach/supervise people. There will be greater emphasis on political efforts in cities as well as countryside, with continuous effort to gain populaceʼs support, and to recruit, VC may even make a dramatic appeal for world support for any so called liberation government.

6. In regard to specific questions posed by your para 2, ref d, following submitted: a. VC strength is estimated at 20,000 to 25,000. This is a net increase of at least 2,000 from our Dec 61 estimate of nearly 18,000. Believe that at least half this increase due to active recruiting, with remainder infiltrated largely overland.

b. Review of casualties/incident statistics over past year indicates that the 3rd Corps area has been most active in both categories. The 2nd and 1st Corps zones, however, have shown a broadening of VC initiated incidents since last summer. Noteworthy in analysis of GVN casualties during the last six months of 1961 is that while losses in the regular armed forces remained generally constant, there was a significant rise in SDC losses. In fact they have sustained greatest number of losses each month since Oct.

c. Incidents run the gamut of armed attacks, acts of terrorism, sabotage, and propaganda. Criteria has been constant for past two years.

d. The increase in number of VC initiated incidents and in SVN casualties must be attributed to the buildup of both GVN and VC forces, and to a lesser extent to the expanding of RVNAF operations. To some extent, increased number and scope of GVN military operations apparently induces temporary increased retaliatory VC incidents probably as a psychological tactic. Viet Congʼs high incident rate in 3rd Corps remained generally constant while total of incidents went up as VC strength increase permitted a spread of operations into other two corps zones. VC losses have increased substantially each month and almost doubled from June 1961 to January 1962. Acting to destroy SDC forces VC have caused a deadly conflict increasing losses on both sides. As RVNAF have increased operational tempo they have increased their troops' exposure to steady minor losses from snipers/ambushes.

e. Better reporting methods have been developed over past few months, but this has not necessarily caused increase in events reported upon.

7. In overall summary, VC are feeling results of improvement of GVN military posture, but they have not suffered major setbacks or loss of territory.VC plan a prolonged form of athritiona1 warfare. VC cannot be defeated by purely military means. They will not yet stand and fight in open. Until they change from subterranean tactics, they cannot be routed/defeated solely by bayonet. While military superiority is a prerequisite to solution final success will come only when people can be alienated away from Viet Cong and given adequate protection/security.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. Repeated to CONCPACFLT, CINCUSARPAC, PACAF, MAC/V, and MAAG Vietnam.

2 None printed.

82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 23, 1962—4:11 p.m.

1015. Personal for Ambassador Nolting from the Secretary. Following up your conversations with Harriman in Honolulu, the Secretary of Defense has informed us that, in addition to telling and confirming to Harkins substantive paragraph of my January 20 letter2 to you, he told Harkins that he should disregard the “terms of reference” contained in the CINCPAC message to Harkins.3 Secretary of Defense considers his statements to Harkins as superseding terms of reference contained in CINCPAC message and, in your discretion, you are authorized to show this message to Harkins as well as pertinent sentences of my letter of January 20 to you.

It is my judgment that you will be in a stronger personal position in carrying out your overall responsibility if discussions of terms of reference are allowed to rest on present understanding rather than enter again into attempt to find new “constitutional language” which can only leave some scars detrimental to the good will and confidence that now exists between State and Defense as well as between you personally and General Harkins.

I again want to make it clear that, if and when practical problems arise, if you will inform me I am prepared promptly deal with them; if actual problems arise which require more formal general statement of relationships than those you now have, I will of course go into it. Believe sweeping instructions and authority given you in Deptel 10064 on handling public relations well demonstrates attitudes of all here on such problems.

I appreciate that it is a tough job and demanding on you personally. We want to help all we can.

You can be sure that you have the continued confidence and appreciation of the President and me and that we shall give you and our effort in Viet-Nam our full support.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2362. Confidential, No Distribution; Eyes Only. Drafted by Johnson and cleared by Harriman, Battle, and Rusk. Signed by Johnson for the Secretary.

2 See Document 40.

3 See Document 53.

4 Document 75.

83. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 83. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, February 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Concept of Operations, SEATO Plan 7 (Counter-insurgency in South Viet-Nam)2

1. The SEATO Military Advisors are reviewing the concept of operations contained in the draft SEATO Plan 7. The plan includes the directive, intelligence annex, and concept at this time; on national approval of the concept, the question of force allocations will be undertaken so that the Plan can be discussed in detail at the 21 April meeting (now scheduled for Paris, but under review to relocate in SEA).

2. The main points of the draft concept are extracted below:

MISSION: To assist the GVN to counter Communist insurgency and gain full control of its territory, so as to establish conditions in which it can resolve its problems and maintain the security and independence of South Viet-Nam.

EXECUTION: Immediate assistance to GVN will be given by externally based air and naval forces. This will be followed as rapidly as possible by the deployment of a substantial SEATO Force to key strategic areas of SVN.

Aims of SEATO Force: (a) Initially: (1) Assist in securing the Seat of Government.

(2) Release the maximum GVN forces for offensive operations.

(b) Subsequently: (1) Assist the GVN to destroy the Viet Cong.

(2) In areas cleared of insurgents, assist the GVN to ensure a proper environment for the re-establishment of the normal civil authority and the protection of the local population on an effective and continuing basis.

SEATO Field Force Tasks: (a) Deploy forces to such key strategic areas as the situation may require to achieve the aims of the SEATO Force.

(b) Participate in operations to isolate the Viet Cong from North Viet-Nam: initially an effective naval and air patrol of the Vietnamese coast and the waters of the Mekong delta to be established to prevent the flow of Communist personnel and equipment by sea or inland waterway from north of the 1 7th Parallel and Cambodia, subsequently, SEATO ground and air forces to assist the South Vietnamese forces to effectively control their land border.

(c) Provide air and naval support to GVN and SEATO forces; to include reconnaissance, interdiction and support to ground forces by SEATO units operating from bases in South Viet-Nam. SEATO air and naval units also may be deployed to bases in Thailand to provide additional support to operations in South Viet-Nam and to provide improved capability to respond to overt aggression. The type and amount of support to forces in South Viet-Nam that can be provided by air units based in Thailand will depend greatly on whether overflight of Laos is authorized.

Deployment: Initially, SEATO forces should deploy to the Saigon and Tourane areas with the bulk of the ground forces deployed in the Tourane area. However, plans must be sufficiently flexible to allow for a changing situation and variations in the planned deployments. Thus it may be necessary to include, additionally or alternatively, Nha Trang or other suitable areas in the initial deployment locations.

Deployment and subsequent operations will be supported by forces, including Special Forces, remaining under national command. Some of these may be deployed to Thailand, South Viet-Nam, and the South China Sea as appropriate.

Contingencies: The Commander SEATO Field Forces will be prepared for the following contingencies; the implementation of plans for these contingencies will be subject to prior specific direction by appropriate higher SEATO authority: (a) Partial implementation. It is not possible to foresee the exact conditions which might exist at the time the SEATO Council approves a request for assistance from the GVN. The plans for the employment of SEATO forces, therefore, must provide for maximum flexibility and lend themselves to partial implementation.

(b) Counter-insurgency in Laos. It is possible that the Royal Laotian Government will conduct counter-insurgent operations in southern Laos either alone or with SEATO assistance (MPO Plan 5 operation). In either event SEATO forces in South Viet-Nam will be prepared to coordinate their operations with any such operations in Laos.

(c) Extension of operations into Laos. The successful execution of the SEATO mission in South Viet-Nam may require extension of air and/or ground operations into southern Laos for the purpose of denying the Viet Cong safe havens and lines of communication in that area.

(d) Attack on SEATO forces by external forces. In the event of such attack, SEATO forces will take action for their security appropriate to the circumstances.

(e) Overt aggression. In the event of overt aggression, transition to operations under the appropriate SEATO plan will be required.

3. The plan recognizes the current situation and in that respect is more suitable to the problem than Plan 5 is in Laos. It ignores Cambodia except inferentially by reference to lines of communication in Laos (which could be used to reach Cambodia, then into SVN). The question of action against NVN, in any form, if external support of insurgency in SVN continues, is not faced, though the possibility of escalation is. It is psychologically sound to include the deployment of Plan 7 forces to Thailand in addition to the increased readiness gained thereby to meet broader intervention.

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Top Secret.

2 SEATO Plan 7/61, “A Plan to Assist the Government of South Vietnam to Counter Communist Insurgency in South Vietnam,” December 20, 1961. (National Archives, RG 349, SEATO Registry Microfilm, Reel S-3-61)

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

84. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 84. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, February 26, 1962—5 p.m.

2284. Our views on numbered points Depcirctel 14762 are as follows: (1) As in Laos, can assume Moscow wishes avoid enlargement of hostilities into international conflict which would heighten risk of major war. In this sense Vietnam not vital Soviet interest. However, if balance should tip in South Vietnamʼs favor, Soviets might feel obliged to re-dress balance through greater support of DRV: 1) to meet threat to DRV itself, and 2) to prevent Chinese from coming in large way.

(2) Although Moscow likely prefer peaceful resolution of Vietnam problem, it cannot afford to appear soft regarding expansion of communism in colonial areas, if for no other reason than this would seem to confirm Chinese arguments in ideological dispute. Likely Moscow approach would be to use growing tension over Vietnam as pressure to convene international conference in 1954 Geneva framework.

(3) In past Soviets may have been confident that South Vietnam would fall to Communists sooner or later, but vigorous and effective US support for South Vietnam would change situation, especially if latter became strong enough to expand military operations into DRV.

(4) a. Establishment of “liberated” area and “government” in South Vietnam would not necessarily pose dilemma for Soviets, although likely that they would oppose these moves until possibility of reactivating international machinery explored further. Moscow for example has not recognized FLN de jure, although it supports latter materially and with propaganda.

b. Do not believe Soviets so much concerned over revelation of split with Chinese as they are with preserving their influence in DRV. Possible that Soviets will promise logistic support to DRV to preempt Chinese intervention as they did in Laos.

Vukolicʼs point regarding “influential groups” in USSR strikes us as typically Yugoslav. Do not believe there is serious division of opinion here regarding Vietnam and all major elements of regime, including military, likely be opposed to escalation there.

Soviet press has not indicated what purpose is of Ponomaryev mission currently in DRV. Presumably this related to Soviet-Chinese ideological dispute, but it could also be engaged in seeking DRV agreement to cautious policy in South Vietnam.

Soviet policy toward Vietnam will be very much influenced by outcome in Laos as well as by developments in other major East-West problems such as disarmament and Berlin. In many respects Soviet policy appears to be approaching a crossroads and developments in any one of these problems could well affect general course of Soviet policy toward West as well as toward Commie China. Whatever Soviet longer-range policy on Vietnam question may be I am convinced that for present they would prefer avoid any decisive actions there.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2662.

2 Dated February 24, it circulated the views of the Yugoslav Charge in London Vukolic, concerning Soviet interests in the war in Vietnam. (Ibid., 751K.00/2-2462)

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 26, 1962—6 p.m.

1088. Eyes only Secretary from Nolting. Ref Deptel 1015.2 Thank you for your message. I shall proceed on basis you outline, and am confident Gen. Harkins and I can work together successfully assuming our respective day-to-day instructions are consistent. In this connection, the more we can think and speak of Viet-Nam struggle in its present phase in terms of “pacification of the country and winning the allegiance of the people” as contrasted with “winning the war”, the more we will find success, in my judgment.

I appreciate very much the Presidentʼs and your own expressions of confidence, and warmly reciprocate them.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/1-2662. Secret; Priority. A note on the source text in U. Alexis Johnsonʼs handwriting reads: “No action required. Shown to Gov. Harriman.”

2 Document 82.

86. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 86. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, February 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Life Magazine and Vietnam

After your approval, I accepted the invitation by Charlie Murphy to meet with the editors of Life magazine for an off-the-record discussion on Vietnam. We had a two hour talk at lunch in New York last Friday, 23 February. I spent several more hours with the writers and photographers who are working on Lifeʼs coverage of Vietnam. Charlie Murphy, who arranged this and accompanied me, was most constructive in his comments and questions.

Essentially, the editors (George Hunt, Hugh Moffatt, Joe Kessner, etc.) seemed to be sincerely trying to make up their minds on whether or not the U.S. is wise in supporting Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam. “Can we win with him?” “Should a coup replace him?”

The questions apparently were raised by a series of letters from Time-Life correspondents, sparked to some extent by Stan Karnow of the Hong Kong office who is violently opposed to Diem. Karnow is the man who was opposed to our aid in Laos and, earlier, our aid to Chiang against Mao; he has a low opinion of Nolting, McGarr, and Felt. Anyhow, as a result, Life editor Roy Alexander has gone to Vietnam for a first-hand look, to help advise on Lifeʼs editorial policy re Diem.

I gave them several different angles for consideration. Since there seems to be a stepped-up campaign Newsweek, New York Times, and certain parts of Washington) to denigrate the Presidentʼs decision to support Vietnam and Diemʼs government, some of my remarks may be of help to you. I note the highlights below, along with some of the questions asked.

At the start, I remarked that they—and other Americans—were trying to play God, by trying to pick a leader for Vietnam. If they were serious, as they seemed to be, then they needed a yardstick to measure up Diem and other Vietnamese, to compare them for the job. I had some suggested measurements which Americans might use: 1. Dedication to defeat the enemy. Since Vietnam is essentially in a life-or-death struggle, the leader on our side must be every bit as dedicated to victory as Ho Chi Minh is on the Communist side.

2. Executive ability. The leader must have the ability to keep his government running, in many complex fields, despite the lack of competent or experienced Vietnamese administrators.

3. Moral courage. In a war, such as Vietnamʼs, there are many tough decisions that have to be made. None ever seem to be “black and white” problems, but mostly fuzzy gray ones which take real moral courage to decide.

4. Constitutionality. Since Vietnam has gone through real birth pangs in becoming a nation, we must consider the value of the legality of the Presidency. The Vietnamese had elected an Assembly to write a Constitution in 1956, had voted for this Constitution which established a government for the people, including a President, Vice President, and an Assembly, and had voted in the Presidential election of 1961 for President Diem and Vice President Tho. Do we want to make that Constitution a scrap of paper or a viable legal document?

5. Integrity. We should want a Vietnamese leader who has deep honesty, a selfless dedication to the cause, a man who won't use U.S. aid for his own selfish ends. Even those who hate Diem admit he is puritanically honest.

6. Team leader. Diem is weak in delegating authority and in getting the whole Vietnamese team to follow him whole-heartedly. But, have we really thought about why? U.S. officials have insisted that Diem give authority to civil and military officials who are weak, if not disloyal; a number of our own Presidents have had similar problems and we might well show a little more constructive understanding by helping him solve this problem rather than force him to compound it.

7. Popularity. The leader of the free Vietnamese must vie in popularity with the leader of the slave Vietnamese, Ho Chi Minh. Diem is the best known free Vietnamese. Making him the best liked is simply a professional chore, with some help from Diem; the chore is neither one for Madison Avenue techniques nor Communist techniques. It was done in 1954-56, and could be done again, if necessary. As a corollary, it is noted that intellectuals who are most critical of Diem do not speak of love or affection for and by the people. Intellectuals instinctively mistrust the people, with their belief of superiority of intellect needing to be kept unsullied by trust of others. This snobbery or arrogance is amusing but empty when it turns to being critical of a person for not being popular.

8. Liberal? Conservative? Some of the criticism of the Vietnamese government and of Diem is based on unusually fuzzy thinking for this day and age. Much of the political reform measures we insist that Diem adopt need to be looked at in the harsh light of the violent combat in Vietnam. An honest, hard look will reveal that they are “gimmicks” with much the same flavor as “deforestation”; the political gimmicks are pushed forward with much the same do-good enthusiasm as military and economic gimmicks. We should be desiring a Churchill, not a Chamberlain, for these critical moments in Vietnam. Some reforms are needed, but we must help Diem and the Vietnamese towards practical ways of solving their problems, not just sit on the sidelines and give orders for actions which are not solutions.

9. Know the needs of people and country. There are a number of politicians in Vietnam who aspire to be the top leader. In talking with a number of them, including some who are friends of mine, I know of none who has the depth of understanding his people and country which is needed for leadership now. Some are sincere patriots whom I would like to see growing politically today by holding positions of public trust. Others only seek to satisfy narrow aims or their vanity.

A rather lively discussion took place after this description of a suggested “yardstick.” It continued after the editors left and when Scott Levitt (writer), Howard Sochurek (photographer), and I discussed the articles the two of them will prepare. Some of the questions asked in both sessions stick in my mind, and I am noting them below, as of interest to you:

Q.: What makes you think Americans should “play God,” as you put it?

A.: I was merely putting the correct label to what you, and other Americans, seem to be up to today. You wonder if we can win with Diem or be better off with a coup and a possible military leader in Vietnam. President Kennedy has pledged U.S. support to Diem, and we are matching that pledge with a series of actions. Now you express doubt that this is what we should do. You hint that there are alternatives. When I suggest that these alternatives be taken out in the daylight and measured, it should cause no surprise. It is obvious that you, as responsible editors, are doing much the same as we are doing in Washington—acting as Americans for the best good of our country and trying to think very hard before we take each decision.

Q.: Does President Kennedy really want to win in Vietnam? Isn't there some hedging on this desire when Secretary McNamara says it will take 5 to 6 years?

A.: I feel that the Administration has made it very plain that the U.S. is determined to help the Vietnamese win their struggle for freedom. The President has said so in plain terms, not only to the U.S., but to the Vietnamese and the world. Secretary McNamara and Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, along with General Lemnitzer, are taking many actions to make our military aid and advisors really help the Vietnamese. To those who hope for a quick, cheap, and easy victory, the top folks in the Pentagon are saying honestly that this looks like a tough job that is going to take some doing.

Q.: Why was General Harkins appointed? Did Secretary McNamara think he needed more rank in the U.S. military? Can a conventional soldier win this kind of a war?

A.: General Harkins was picked as the military man who could best use U.S. military resources to help the Vietnamese win. He has just arrived. Why not wait and see how he does?

Q.: Why donʼt we get rid of people like Gardiner in USOM and McGarr in MAAG? They aren't getting anywhere with the Vietnamese and aren't helping anybody win.

A.: This question is in the category of “why donʼt you stop beating your wife.” Any answer I give damns me. However, it should be obvious that someone in authority has placed them in Vietnam and believes they are serving usefully.

Q.: Why do we have the big “paper-mill” MAAG in Saigon? Why so many U.S. military at desks and not out in the field?

A.: This is much the same category of question as the previous one. Taking these questions, and your earlier ones on Diem, it seems that you and too many other Americans, including both military and civil officials in Washington and Saigon, simply fail to realize the facts of todayʼs war. Our side is under deadly attack. It is life-or-death today in Vietnam, tomorrow elsewhere. The American people should be awake to this condition of war—and grimly determine that anything short of victory is too little. Since part of the deadly attack today includes the art of tranquilizing Americans at the same time, all of us—including Life reporters—who have seen the face of this enemy in the attack should bring it home to other Americans. In combat, we remove the commander when his unit fails to take the objective. If we saw todayʼs struggle as combat, we would do the same—whether the commander was an ambassador, an economist, an information man, or a military man. You know how our press would scream about the relief of “good guys” from devoted service to their country in some hardship post abroad. Well, we still have some toughening up to do, to relegate the “nice people” to our social life and start asking only if the man we put in is winning or not, the way we want him to.

Q.: Yes, but donʼt you think the American people deserve to know all that is going on in Vietnam? After all, some Americans are being killed there, and it is likely that more will be, with the big build-up of our forces there.

A.: Certainly I agree that Americans must have the truth, every bit of it that won't help the enemy defeat us. But, isn't it time that you started doing this constructively—rather than treating Vietnam as some quaint and strange place, full of peculiar little people, out at the end of nowhere where our good “American boys” donʼt belong anyhow, and where some Americans are all thumbs in what they're doing? You who have been there say that the Vietnamese are wonderful people, with a deep love of individual liberty. Well, why donʼt you picture them to the American people that way—as real people not too unlike us, people fighting against tyranny today? Then, as Americans go out to help them in this good fight—as advisors where the shooting is—standing up to be counted right alongside them—the American people can understand why Americans took the risks along with the Vietnamese. Hellsfire, we both love the same concept of freedom, and you know it, and I know it, but you haven't told that to the American people yet. They deserve that truth. And, to encourage the very Americans we need as dedicated volunteers in Vietnam, why donʼt you give some recognition to our really good guys out there? You've seen them in action, committed right up to the hilt in this struggle. I know that the Vietnamese love this type of American and bust their britches trying to be as good as he thinks they are. Well, we ought to love this type of American, too, and let him know it—to give him the encouragement he richly deserves. We have them in Vietnam today. I think your readers deserve to know about them. If a guy like that becomes a casualty, every American will feel it and not have to wonder what he was doing halfway around the world.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam 7. Confidential; Sensitive. Also sent to Gilpatric. Lansdale signed the memorandum “Ed.”

III. Attack on the Presidential Palace February 27-March 2, 1962III. Attack on the Presidential Palace February 27-March 2, 1962

87. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Department of State

Saigon, February 27, 1962—7:35 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2662. Secret; Flash; Critic. Also sent to the Director of NSA. Received at 8 p.m., February 26.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 27, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated priority to Paris, London, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, CINCPAC for Polad, Manila, Geneva for FECON, Hue, Ottawa, Kuala Lumpur, New Delhi, Moscow, Singapore, Djakarta, Tokyo, Seoul, Hong Kong, Taipei and Rangoon. Received at 4:10 p.m.

89. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, February 27, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, New Command Arrangements, 1962. Top Secret; Official-Informal. The source text was part of a package that included the original transmittal letter from McConaughy, October 20, 1961, and a copy of the contingency plan. In the margin is a handwritten note from Nolting to the DCM which reads: “(See Cont. Plan, if you have not done so already)”.

90. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1962, 3:04 p.m.

Washington, February 27, 1962—3:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2762. Confidential. Drafted by Grant and Horgan. Approved in S on March 6. A note at the top of the first page indicates that this is the first of two parts. Part II is not attached to the source text, but another account of the meeting transmitted to McGeorge Bundy in the White House under a memorandum of February 28 for the Presidentʼs perusal prior to his 11:30 meeting with Nehru contains a second section on Kashmir. (Ibid.) The text of the section on Vietnam is identical with that printed here except for the final sentence, which is missing in the version transmitted to the White House. The attachment is also missing from the White House version. No record of the Presidentʼs meeting with Nehru has been found.

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 1, 1962—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-162. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, New Delhi, London, Vientiane, Bangkok, Singapore, Phnom Penh, Ottawa, Paris, and Geneva.

92. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 1, 1962—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and passed to the Department of Defense.

93. Memorandum for the Record

Saigon, March 1, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 361.1, Chief Executive-Vietnam. Secret. Typed on MAAG stationery, suggesting that Eggleston was the drafter.

94. Editorial Note

95. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 1, 1962—8:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-162. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad. Drafted by Cottrell; cleared with L,FE/P, P, Heinz (ISA), and Sylvester (DOD); and approved by Harriman.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 2, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-262. Confidential, Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Geneva for FECON, Paris, London, Manila, New Delhi, Moscow, Hong Kong, Taipei, Hue, Kuala Lumpur., Singapore, Djakarta, Tokyo, Seoul, Rangoon, and Ottawa.

97. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1962

Washington, March 2, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-262. Secret. Drafted by Hubbard on March 6.

87. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Department of State 87. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 27, 1962—7:35 a.m.

262335Z. Between 2 or 3 aircraft attacked Presidential Palace at 0715 local. Guards responded with anti-aircraft fire by 0730 local. Extent of damage unknown.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2662. Secret; Flash; Critic. Also sent to the Director of NSA. Received at 8 p.m., February 26.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 88. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 27, 1962—8 p.m.

1109. Embtel 1099.2

1. As of late afternoon Feb. 27 calm continued prevail in Saigon, and morningʼs attack on Presidential palace appears have been unsuccessful attempt assassinate Diem and Nhus rather than element in coup dʼetat.

2. Except for two aircraft involved in attack, GVN military establishment remained loyal to President and government. All services including air force, responded with alacrity and efficiency to attack. Before 35-minute assault had ended, armor and supporting units had arrived at palace, air force had pursuing AD-6ʼs in air, and navy putting up heavy anti-aircraft barrage.

3. One attacking aircraft apparently forced down by ground fire and pilot captured. Second plane crash landed Phnom Penh.

4. President told Ambassador only palace casualty was injured maid. Small number troops on or around palace grounds were wounded. Madame Nhu also suffered slight wound on arm.

No American casualties, though one American died as result fall through roof of building while watching attack.

5. Ambassador and members diplomatic corps saw President at end of morning. He said not discouraged and determined continue his fight for country.

6. Service of Thanksgiving in Saigon cathedral in afternoon was crowded.

7. No incidents reported in provinces, and government appears have situation firmly in control.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated priority to Paris, London, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, CINCPAC for Polad, Manila, Geneva for FECON, Hue, Ottawa, Kuala Lumpur, New Delhi, Moscow, Singapore, Djakarta, Tokyo, Seoul, Hong Kong, Taipei and Rangoon. Received at 4:10 p.m.

2 Received in the Department of State at 6:51 a.m., February 27, it provided essentially the same information, in sketchier form, as telegram 1109. (Ibid.)

89. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 89. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, February 27, 1962.

Dear Fritz: In the light of todayʼs attack on the palace I have reviewed Walter McConaughyʼs letter to you of October 20, 1961 and the “Suggested Contingency Plan”2 of the same date which was enclosed with that letter.

It seems to me that the “Suggested Contingency Plan” is still valid. I regret that we did not have time to discuss it during your hurried visit to Washington.

If you have any comments to make on it in view of the present situation I would be glad to read them. Knowing that you are very busy I will assume that if I do not hear from you this plan remains satisfactory to you. We are very pleased with your handling of and reporting on todayʼs attack on the palace.

With best personal regards,

Yours very sincerely,

Averell

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, New Command Arrangements, 1962. Top Secret; Official-Informal. The source text was part of a package that included the original transmittal letter from McConaughy, October 20, 1961, and a copy of the contingency plan. In the margin is a handwritten note from Nolting to the DCM which reads: “(See Cont. Plan, if you have not done so already)”.

2 Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 181.

90. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1962, 3:04 p.m. 90. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1962, 3:04 p.m.1

Washington, February 27, 1962—3:04 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

PARTICIPANTS

His Excellency B.K. Nehru, Ambassador of India

The Secretary

Mr. James R Grant, Deputy Assistant Secretary, NEA

Mr. Rogers B. Horgan, Office of South Asian Affairs

Ambassador Nehru made what was essentially a courtesy call on the Secretary immediately prior to his return to India for a fortnightʼs consultation. After the usual pleasantries, the Secretary raised the subject of Vietnam.

The Secretary reviewed briefly the United States position regarding Vietnam, emphasizing that the US did not wish the trouble in Vietnam to become a serious war. He said that if the ICC can find a way of stopping penetrations from the North, the US would work diligently to bring the situation back in line with the Geneva Accords. We recognize the problem posed to the ICC by our overt assistance to South Vietnam, but we cannot fail to take account of the reality of the covert violations of the Geneva Accords by the other side.

The Ambassador indicated that both in New Delhi and in Vietnam itself the Indians had some difficulties because of the extreme visibility of our assistance. The Ambassador, however, repudiated the Secretaryʼs suggestion that perhaps the Indian Chairman of the ICC would prefer to dose his eyes to violations on both sides. The Secretary then explored the Indian position with regard to the ICCʼs responsibilities toward investigating subversion. The Ambassador indicated his belief that India held the view that subversion as such was not the concern of the ICC; it became a matter for the ICC only when it could be shown that it came from the outside.

The Ambassador asked whether there was anything specific the United States wished India to do in Vietnam. He would be glad to convey these desires to New Delhi. The Secretary said what we wished was for the ICC to get at the violations coming from the North if it can do so. Mr. Grant added it was our hope the ICC would not make charges against the GVN right now, at least until it answered complaints that have been made against the North.

The Secretary wondered whether our side had been getting to the ICC all the information we can on these complaints.

It was left for Mr. Grant to inform himself on this matter and to have specific information for the Ambassador regarding the type of ICC action the US felt should be taken now. (Mr. Grant talked further to the Ambassador on this subject the following day and left with him the attached paper.)

[Attachment]

For an extended period of time the Government of the Republic of Vietnam has been providing the ICC with evidence that the North Vietnamese regime has been violating the Geneva Accord. Thus on October 24, 1961 the Government of the Republic of Vietnam made an elaborate presentation to the ICC of the data available at that time of North Vietnamese-directed subversion in South Vietnam. The presentation was accompanied by the request that the ICC investigate. Additional evidence was submitted on November 16, 1961, December 29, 1961 and, most recently, on January 27, 1962. Much of this information was used in the preparation of the “White Paper” prepared by the United States Government entitled “A Threat to the Peace”.2

By its letter of December 9, 1961, to the ICC,3 the Government of the Republic of Vietnam notified the ICC that it has requested extraordinary aid from the United States for as long as the North Vietnamese regime pursued its aggression. The United States considers the position of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam stated in that letter to be consonant with international law: non-observance of a treaty obligation by one party to that treaty justifies comparable non-observance by the other party until the first party is prepared to observe its obligations.

The ICC has not yet taken definitive action on these complaints of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. This is despite the fact that on June 24, 1961 the ICC decided that it has the competence and the duty to investigate complaints under Articles 10,19, 24 and 27 of activities fomented by one party against the other in violation of the Geneva Accord.

We recognize Indiaʼs very difficult role as Chairman of an organization whose members have widely differing views and which has the responsibility of attempting to enforce a cease fire under most difficult circumstances. The actions of the North Vietnam regime are convert actions taken by a closed society. Counter-actions of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam and the support by the United States provided on request are those of open societies acting overtly.

The United States hopes that before any citing of the Government of Vietnam the ICC would act on the complaints made by the Government of the Republic of Vietnam over the last two years of subversion by North Vietnam. If the ICC does cite the Government of the Republic of Vietnam for violating the Geneva Accord, we would expect the ICC at the very least to cite at the same time the North Vietnam regime, since it is the actions of North Vietnam which give rise to the counter-actions of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/2-2762. Confidential. Drafted by Grant and Horgan. Approved in S on March 6. A note at the top of the first page indicates that this is the first of two parts. Part II is not attached to the source text, but another account of the meeting transmitted to McGeorge Bundy in the White House under a memorandum of February 28 for the Presidentʼs perusal prior to his 11:30 meeting with Nehru contains a second section on Kashmir. (Ibid.) The text of the section on Vietnam is identical with that printed here except for the final sentence, which is missing in the version transmitted to the White House. The attachment is also missing from the White House version. No record of the Presidentʼs meeting with Nehru has been found.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 315.

3 Printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 1056.

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 91. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 1, 1962—10 a.m.

1117. Departmentʼs 974.2 In view reaction Canadians and Indians in Ottawa and Delhi and Canadians in Saigon to reftel argumentation we believe it inadvisable send note to ICC along lines proposed reftel. First, it is clear that ICC will not accept legal argumentation breach one party of Geneva Accords is justification breach by other party. Second, note proposed reftel would convict US officially out of our own mouths of violation Geneva Accords and put US at mercy Indian chairman. Third, Hooten has pointed out proposed reply would bring to head question of whether GVN Dec 9 letter3 was denunciation Articles 16 and 17, whereas Canadians and apparently Indians have been trying precisely to avoid that because it puts in question future existence ICC itself. For that reason ICC in reply GVN Dec 9 letter sent innocuous response (our A-2084 ) which Canadians and Indians hoped would not lead to any further reference by US and GVN to Dec 9 letter.

GVN has in meantime sent holding letter essentially along lines of draft prepared by Canadians in response ICCʼS letter Jan 6 and follow-up of Feb 3.5 We do not know how long holding letter can keep ICC satisfied but at least appears allow some breathing space for further consideration of US-GVN approach to Geneva Accords problem.6

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-162. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, New Delhi, London, Vientiane, Bangkok, Singapore, Phnom Penh, Ottawa, Paris, and Geneva.

2 Document 55.

3 See footnote 3, Document 90.

4 Not printed.

5 Neither found.

6 In telegram 2340 from New Delhi, March 9, Ambassador Galbraith agreed with the argument presented in this telegram that a proposed note to the ICC would be unwise. (Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-962)

92. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 92. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 1, 1962—10 a.m.

1118. Have just been informed of following GVN request, on which urgent reply requested:

1. In view grounding GVN Air Force fighter bombers AD-6 pending investigation incident Feb 27 (bombing of palace) GVN has officially requested through Deputy Chief of Staff Khanh that Farmgate aircraft, with combined US-GVN crew, be used on combat training operations in close support of ARVN operations planned to begin March 1 and continuing several days.

General Harkins, Mr. Bundy2 and I believe it highly important that momentum of ARVN operations be continued despite setback of bombing incident and that Farmgate air support is justified and necessary under present circumstances. Since this operation does not fall closely within existing instructions, request immediate consideration and advice. Upon receipt Washington clearance, we would make clear to GVN that this is temporary measure pending completion investigation GVN Air Force and resumption usual procedures.3

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and passed to the Department of Defense.

2 William Bundy was in Vietnam for consultations.

3 Telegram 1118 was received at 4:54 a.m. in Washington. At 7:31 p.m. the Department of State approved the South Vietnamese request. (Telegram 1046 to Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-162)

93. Memorandum for the Record 93. Memorandum for the Record1

Saigon, March 1, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting at Gia Long Palace, Saigon, Vietnam, from 1530-1815, 1 March 1962

ATTENDANCE

His Excellency, Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam

The Honorable Frederick E. Nolting, Jr., U.S. Ambassador

Mr. William R Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense/ISA

Major General Richard Weede, Chief of Staff, USMACV

Brigadier General Howard K. Eggleston, Deputy Chief for Plans & Programs, MAAG

After a warm exchange of greetings, the President told his guests of some of the incidents surrounding the bombing of Independence Palace on 27 February 1962. He said that throughout the attack, he had the impression that the explosions were taking place some 20 kilometers away. He described this as a curious phenomenon since, normally, his hearing is very acute—the presence of another person in his room—the striking of a match, usually being enough to awaken him. He cited several examples wherein he had called General Ty or Colonel Mao (who is charged with the security of Saigon) to ask the reason for distant artillery fire or the explosion of a grenade within the city. In many instances, neither of them had heard the noise. In response to a comment by Ambassador Nolting concerning the excellent maps which the President had had in his Independence Palace office, the President replied that they were now present in his room. A bomb had struck the verandah near his office, but had not exploded. If it had, the stairs leading to the bomb shelter would have been demolished and the President would not have been able to find refuge. The Nhu family had also been particularly fortunate in that a bomb which carried away a large section of the palace next to their apartment, had hit the side away from the staircase—thus permitting them to escape to the shelter. The children had already come down to play in the garden and were amongst the first to reach the shelter. The last to arrive was Madame Nhu, who took the time to dress. She was slightly injured on the face by flying glass, and, in womanly fashion, was worried about being scarred. The Presidentʼs brother, the Archbishop of Hue, who was visiting the President after attending a meeting at the Vatican, went through the entire attack in a small chapel in the new wing of the palace and emerged uninjured. The President expressed the thought that his brother might have been killed if he had attempted to move, since the surrounding area was riddled, and the blast had been violent enough to hurl a heavy brass incense burner the length of the corridor. He added that the Archbishop was the one who had caused the least trouble.

The President next told of his visit to the Bien Hoa Airfield (on 28 February) during which he personally questioned the Base Commander, the Fighter-Group Commander and other responsible officers. The Base Commander, whom the President referred to as a “bureaucrat” claimed that his job was to provide security and to feed and perform other housekeeping duties for the men assigned there, and that he had no function of command, including the control of bombs and other armament. The President agreed that he was correct—in accordance with his terms of reference—but that his attitude was somewhat exaggerated and that he should have been aware of events taking place around him. The President then had a frank discussion with the commander of the Fighter-Group and a few of his officers. All expressed their grief over the incident which had dishonored them but disclaimed any knowledge of disaffection, subversive propaganda or other suspicious activities. They admitted that there had been some griping about the lack of conveniences, particularly by those who had spent some time in foreign countries, such as France and the United States and had seen the favored position held by the Air Forces of those countries. There had been complaints about the dangers involved in their operations, the hardship of being assigned away from their families in such areas as Pleiku and Danang, and the overwork produced by the fact that there were too few pilots and planes to meet all operational requirements. Ground crew personnel were particularly unhappy over the fact that, as in most other countries, they could not advance beyond the rank of Master Sergeant. Some pilots who had undergone intensive training were only too happy to receive desk jobs and to fly only the minimum number of hours required to maintain their flying status.

One officer told the President that he (the President) was considered to be a “regular fellow” by the real pilots, because he put in almost as many hours in the air as they did. Only the best pilots were assigned to fly him because, unlike the scheduled airline pilots with their regular routes and replacement personnel, his pilots were asked to follow irregular, hazardous routes for long hours without relief.

Ambassador Nolting then asked if the President considered the attack upon the palace as the act of two disgruntled, isolated cases, or whether others in the Air Force were implicated. The President replied that, although most of the airmen were young, worked hard and liked to dance and play hard, they were not generally men of ill-will. One of his aides, himself a pilot, had been surrounded by airmen while the President was questioning their leaders. The aide was bombarded with questions concerning the Presidentʼs feelings concerning the Air Force in general and themselves as individuals.

In a subsequent conversation with a senior Air Force officer, the President agreed that the pilots were young, excitable and immature. He further agreed that there should have been a more careful selection made prior to training and that family, education and background should be more meticulously examined. (The father of Lieutenant Cuu, one of the pilots in the attack, had a recorded history of antigovernment activity.)

The President next said that General Khanh and other officers had held a meeting the preceding evening to examine the problem of whether the VNAF should be permitted to continue its mission of bombing and close air-support. He said that he personally considered the restrictions which had been imposed a hindrance and was prone to allow them to operate as before. General Khanh had insisted that he proceed slowly—and that he consider the possibility that there might be another fool like the two who had acted. General Khanh told him that the members of the Bien Hoa group were very unhappy and that they wished to make some sort of manifestation to ask the Presidentʼs pardon. The incident lies heavily upon them.

General Khanh had also proposed that the Americans be asked to fly bombing and support missions, accompanied in each case by a Vietnamese. He further proposed that the VNAF first resume its activities by carrying out strafing missions only.

As a preliminary to a somewhat lengthy expose of the elements which might have precipitated the incident, the President said that the time selected for the bombing was determined largely by chance. Three days before the attack, the police at Thu Duc arrested a group of men caught in the act of robbing a man who had recently acquired a large sum of money. They claimed that they were not ordinary bandits but were collecting “political funds” and that they had been instructed to do this by a man named Luc (the father of Lieutenant Cuu, who had dropped the bombs). It is possible, said the President, that Cuu might have considered the entire plan compromised and that, believing himself on the verge of arrest, he decided to flee—attacking the palace on the way. A second incident, not so dear, but which might have had some influence on the act took place some eight days before in the High Plateau close to the Laotian border. In this region, the construction of a tie-road (which the President reminded Ambassador Nolting they had seen together) was badly behind schedule. Finally, the President had become impatient and had ordered the Public Works authorities to look into the real reasons for the delay. It was revealed that the Engineer in charge of road construction in the area had continuously protested that the weather was bad and that coolies were afraid to work because of the lack of security. Further, he had hired two members of his family and placed them in charge of depots where equipment and materials, including explosives were stored. These men had repeatedly told the workers that the Viet Cong was very strong in the area and that there were heavy concentrations of Communist troops immediately across the border. The Public Works investigators became suspicious and seized the records of the depots to check on the receipt and issue of explosives. Since the bombing of the palace, it has been discovered that there is a family connection between them and Lieutenant Quoc—through the wife of the Engineer—a woman named Phu. (Interpreters' Note: Lieutenant Quocʼs full name is Phan Phu Quoc.) The President expressed the thought that, although there appears to be no direct connection between the investigation in the High Plateau and the bombing of the palace, the fact that this inquiry was being conducted might have frightened Quoc and helped to precipitate his action.

Ambassador Nolting again asked the President if he felt that the information which had been obtained would seem to indicate that the action against him was an isolated, local incident not connected with the Armed Forces or specifically, with the Vietnamese Air Force. The President agreed that this was generally true, but that certain non-flying personnel of the Air Force also seemed to be implicated.

The President next spoke of the existence of minor political parties headed by ambitious, unemployed men with little following who worked on the ignorance and the superstitious nature of the people. He talked at length about a man named Thieu (?) who first became active in 1941-1942 as head of the National Socialist Party at the time when it appeared that Hitler and his fascism were most successful. Through the years, Thieu had offered his support to the President, changing the name of his party to fit the situation, but always maintaining his basic theme that the head of state should be a firm fascist and that the superstition of the people should be played upon. At one time, working through an intermediary, he had claimed that he could control the Cao Dai Sect by providing them with more predictions and superstitions than they could invent themselves. President Diem had consistently refused to accept his support and had, on one occasion, attempted to remove him from the political scene by providing funds for him to establish an arts and crafts center in Thu Duc. The venture failed because Thieu was unsuited for it.

To further illustrate the fact that there were people in Vietnam who felt that the Presidentʼs actions against the Communists and other dissident factions were not severe enough, the President told the story of an officer on the staff of Colonel Cao (7th Division Commander) who, after making a thorough study on coups d'etat, had suggested to Cao that, if he seized the power and exercised it with a firm hand, the people would follow him and obey him.

The President next told of an incident in Nha Trang in which a noncommissioned officer had been approached by a man who said that his name was Le Than (the name of a corrupt official of Bao Dai) and who told the soldier that he and people like him would be counted on in the forthcoming revolution. The description of the man fitted Luc, the father of Cuu. He was not taken into custody because of the approaching Tet holidays.

Returning to the subject of the attack on the palace, the President said that Quoc appeared to be hesitant and influenced by Cuu. Both pilots had been assigned to a close support mission on the morning of the 27th of February. They were preceded by two L-19ʼs which were to lead them into the target. Shortly after take-off, Cuu told them over their protest, that he was returning to Bien Hoa because of lack of visibility and then led Quoc in the attack on the palace. According to the President, it was fortunate that they were not able to discharge their entire load of bombs and rockets—or the palace might have been completely leveled. Quoc, who is now in custody, told an interrogating officer that he was stupid to have listened to Cuu. He had been told that the dropping of their bombs would be the signal for a general revolt and that “everyone” was in on it—including the Americans. As evidence of the complicity of the Vietnamese officers, Cuu had drawn his attention to the fact that the paratroop battalion guarding Bien Hoa had been replaced by another which he claimed to be in sympathy with the revolt. (The President explained that the battalions had been switched in connection with an operation to resettle the people in Binh Duong Province as part of a clearance program.) To substantiate his claim that the Americans were supporting the revolution, Cuu called Quocʼs attention to derogatory articles in the press, particularly Newsweek Magazine. The President expressed the thought that Quoc might have become mentally unbalanced and excited by the mass of intrigue and subversive talk to which he had been subjected. Ambassador Nolting agreed, adding that his observations seemed to indicate that the act was that of two young men who had been led astray and that it did not go down into the roots of the Vietnamese Army or the Air Force. Then, (referring to the request for U.S. participation in air support) he asked the President how long he thought the investigation would continue. The President replied that, as an individual, he was ready to permit the Air Force to resume its role but that he was obliged to permit the military to carry out its responsibility of getting to the bottom of the story. Ambassador Nolting agreed that the military should be granted authority corresponding to its responsibility and added that morale and psychological factors should be considered. He concluded by saying that the United States was prepared to advance with the President “all the way.”

The President next spoke of his visit to the area of Zone D in Binh Duong Province on the day following the bombing, saying that he had become impatient with the slowness of the program for regrouping the people of that area into fortified hamlets. It had become obvious that the program had to be carried out simultaneously throughout the province because the Viet Cong were reacting violently to it—forcing women and children to go to “unregrouped” isolated villages, thus putting pressure on the men to go along with them. Without regrouping, pacification could not be realized and military and paramilitary forces were constantly subject to ambush—platoons and even companies had been lost in the area. General Eggleston asked if this program was related to General Caoʼs program of “Civic Action” teams. The President replied that it was and that, realizing that the job was difficult and unpleasant, he had issued firm orders to permit General Cao to go ahead and to use severe methods, where necessary. As an example he said that, after several warnings, villages had been burned in order to force people to remain in the regroupment areas. General Eggleston then asked the President if he thought fortifications such as fences, ditches and barbed wire to be very important elements of the plan. The President replied that they were basic and added that the Communists had done the same thing against the French and that it had taken an entire battalion a half of a day to penetrate them. He then commented that the Viet Cong were doing the same thing again—aerial photographs had been taken of VC strongholds ringed by concrete lined trenches.

Ambassador Nolting next asked the President if he had signed the Overall Plan. The President answered that he had not, that he had discussed it with Secretary Thuan and that it had been decided that it should be coordinated with the Minister of the Interior since it had civilian as well as military aspects. Meanwhile, implementation was going on in the provinces.

Reverting once more to the bombing of the palace, the President stated that the Air Force appeared to be “clean” but he was concerned that their exaggerated interest in comfort and conveniences. He compared their situation with that of the ground troops and civilian officials who lived in constant danger to their lives. He suggested that the Americans might attempt to point out to his airmen that their role was not only one of glamour and grandeur, but also of service.

The President next spoke to the Ambassador about General McGarrʼs illness. He said that it was regrettable and paid tribute to the many things that the General had accomplished since his arrival in Vietnam.

Ambassador Nolting then told the President that he had noticed the pleasure of the people on hearing his voice. It could be seen on their faces. He suggested that when the President felt that the Air Force was ready to resume its role, he might address the people by radio to express his confidence. The President said that it was planned to have a demonstration which would be eloquent enough. The Ambassador repeated his suggestion that an address by radio would be worthwhile, pointing out that this would reach the entire nation. He added that the people wanted to hear the Presidentʼs voice and that there might be an advantage in making a film which would be seen by the 3,000 people who see the newsreels each week.

Turning to Mr. Bundy, the President expressed his pleasure over his visit and asked if there was anything that he would like to discuss. Mr. Bundy replied that he had no special points to raise. He reminded the President that he had some responsibility for the United States Military Assistance Program. He had spoken with the Ambassador and U.S. military authorities as well as Mr. Thuan and General Khanh and felt that his visit had been profitable. He added that the United States public were becoming more and more understanding of the problems of Vietnam.

The President commented that some journalists saw the bombing of the palace as a warning to him. He felt, rather, that it should be a warning to them—an indication of the danger of their irresponsibility. He hoped that the incident would soon be cleared—but expressed his concern over some of the political factions which played on superstition.2

The meeting closed with Ambassador Noltingʼs remark that there might be an answer to his cable.3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 361.1, Chief Executive-Vietnam. Secret. Typed on MAAG stationery, suggesting that Eggleston was the drafter.

2 In the margin next to this paragraph Mendenhall wrote: “Never learns. JAM”

3 See footnote 3, Document 92.

94. Editorial Note 94. Editorial Note

On March 1, 1962, Secretary Rusk gave a press conference that included a prefatory statement on Vietnam. He made the case that North Vietnam violated the Geneva Accords of 1954 by perpetrating aggression against the South, that the United States was assisting the people of the South to maintain independence by supplying military and economic assistance and technical advice, that the United States had no intention of sending combat troops to South Vietnam, and that the United States would end assistance to South Vietnam as soon as the threat from the north was removed. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, page 1101.

95. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 95. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 1, 1962—8:36 p.m.

1050. International and local U.S. press reporting of events in Viet-Nam as well as news commentators and even some public and private statements by U.S. government officials and military personnel are stressing or implying incorrectly the following themes: 1. That U.S. effort is in support of the Diem regime rather than the people of Viet-Nam.

2. That we are in partnership in a common effort rather than in support of a GVN effort.

3. That the situation is rapidly turning into a U.S. war rather than a war controlled and directed by the GVN.

4. That U.S. military personnel are in combat status on offensive operations rather than in training, logistics, transportation, support and advisory capacity, defending themselves when attacked.

5. That the U.S. is violating the Geneva Accords rather than our assistance is in response to North Vietnamese aggression. This aggression is what constitutes a violation of the Accords, and our assistance will no longer be necessary if the Communist authorities in North Viet-Nam will stop their campaign to destroy the Republic of Viet-Nam.

The Secretaryʼs press statement of March 12 transmitted separately to you was designed to set the record straight. It and this message constitute guidance which you should transmit to appropriate U.S. personnel.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-162. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad. Drafted by Cottrell; cleared with L,FE/P, P, Heinz (ISA), and Sylvester (DOD); and approved by Harriman.

2 See Document 94.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 96. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 2, 1962—8 p.m.

1126. Embtels 1099. 1109.2

GVN announced evening Feb 27 casualties in morning aerial assassination attempt on President were four dead and approximately 30 wounded. Embassy info puts wounded at between 30 and 40, many of whom injured in Cholon by falling anti-aircraft fire.

2. Security measures have gradually been relaxed in past 48 hours and job of repairing palace already begun. Particularly strategic buildings such as Treasury and Gia Long Palace, where President now living, remain under heavy guard. Tanks and armored cars have disappeared from streets, however, and municipal police and gendarmerie have taken over security controls originally performed by army.

3. Information gleaned from interrogation captured pilot, Quoc, continues indicate very small number of people involved. Father of pilot Cuu who escaped to Cambodia and several others with VNQDD (VN Anti-Communist Nationalist Party) implicated, and Suox [?], Captain Quocʼs brother, also VNAF pilot, party to plot.

However, still no indications other units were prepared to support this, shocked reaction other pilots in AD-6 squadron, GVNʼS rapid and effective response to attack all point to limited scope effort.

4. Pilots' motivations not clear. Quoc one of VNAFʼS most outstanding and experienced pilots, though only 1st Lieutenant. Married, he had been at Bien Hoa for six years and under almost continuous combat conditions for past two years. He recently selected for jet training in U.S. and had been told had excellent chance for promotion and more responsible job on return. Like Cuu, his family had VNQDD history. Cuuʼs father arrested some two years but, according Dr. Tuyen, head Presidential security service, released at instance Col. Vinh, AF commander. Cuu, also married, in squadron only since December, prior to which had flown l-19ʼs. Considered be good pilot and known to have invited Quoc to his house several times. What little have in motivation info thus points to political rather than personal grievance compulsion.

5. Numerous mass meetings, religious ceremonies, petitions of support, etc., which being publicized indicate GVN may be trying use attack as vehicle for renewed popular support of President and government. Official treatment continues depict incident as isolated act two deranged pilots. No doubt, however, that suspicions of President and family toward Saigon political dissidents and intellectuals will be even stronger in future than in past. Also likely his reluctance trust GVN officials and his unwillingness delegate authority will be strengthened, too.

… In talk with U.S. journalist Tuyen hinted all non-GVN political circles under suspicion. Thus appears be some possibility GVN may use attack as basis for further restrictions on opposition. Possible augury of such line is motion adopted by Bureau of National Assembly Feb 27 calling for “end of tolerance” and severe repression of “irresponsible elements”.

According … info some 60 people taken into custody for questioning; number actually detained not known. Tuyen told several journalists no one had been arrested. Among those questioned was reported to be Nguyen Thi Truyen, unsuccessful vice presidential candidate in last Aprilʼs elections. Cuuʼs father reportedly still being sought.

6. Despite mass meetings, etc., there appears be no pattern of public reaction, which probably due Vietnamese temperament as well as caution. There has been little display of emotion, and most of Saigon appears studiously to have gone about business.

We thus unable evaluate at this moment what effect Tuesdayʼs3 event will have on Diemʼs popular position. We understand most correspondents here describing attack as manifestation GVNʼs basic unpopularity.

7. Grounding of VNAF lifted evening March 1. However, AD-6 armament to be limited for moment to 20mm cannon. President has twice assured AD-6 squadron that he did not hold it responsible for acts of two of its pilots and that he continued have confidence in air force.

8. So far as we now know, VC did not attempt exploit confusion surrounding attack on palace, either in Saigon or outside. Seems reasonable believe, however, Commie conviction “enemy divided at home” will be strengthened, and bolder ventures may ensue.

9. Effect on GVN-RKG relations will probably be bad. FonMin Mau told EmbOff March 1 GVN had requested extradition of Cuu, but Sihanouk in speech Feb 27 implied he would be granted political asylum. Also noteworthy but not surprising that while messages of sympathy and support being addressed to Diem from many nearby countries, Cambodia not one of senders.

10. As all of foregoing indicates, it still too early provide final answers as to scope of plot, attackers' motivations, effect on GVN and Diem and on their status in country and abroad. No reason at this time change earlier appraisal of limited-scope, anti-Communist assassination attempt. We are inclined believe that with some luck GVN may succeed in minimizing adverse effects, though we somewhat disquieted by possibility it may react against political opposition in general.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-262. Confidential, Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Geneva for FECON, Paris, London, Manila, New Delhi, Moscow, Hong Kong, Taipei, Hue, Kuala Lumpur., Singapore, Djakarta, Tokyo, Seoul, Rangoon, and Ottawa.

2 See Document 88 and footnote 2 thereto.

3 February 27.

97. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1962 97. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 2, 19621

Washington, March 2, 1962.

SUBJECT

ICC and Vietnam

PARTICIPANTS

A.D.P. Heeney, Ambassador of Canada

E.R. Rettie, Political Counselor, Canadian Embassy

Mr. Edward E. Rice, Deputy Assistant Secretary, FE

Mr. Wharton D. Hubbard, BNA

While waiting for his appointment with the Under Secretary on March 2, 1962 regarding another subject, Ambassador Heeney took the occasion to make some observations to Mr. Rice about the question of the ICC in Vietnam.

The Canadian Ambassador said he thought it had been fruitless to instruct the U.S. Embassy in Ottawa to attempt to persuade the Department of External Affairs of the validity of the legal principle that a breach of an accord by one party automatically allowed the other party to break the agreement also.2 The Department of External Affairs had reported rather fully to Ambassador Heeney on this approach by the Embassy at Ottawa and had noted that the Embassy had been instructed to make the point that such a legal thesis was based on well recognized principles of international law. The Ambassador added that the legal staff of the Department of External Affairs could not accept such a thesis and could find no legal justification for such an assertion. In any event, he continued, it was not really worthwhile to push this point. He believed that the legal aspects of the ICC had already become so Byzantine that to add to the complexity of legal assertions would not be productive.

Ambassador Heeney went on to say it was not for him to say what the United States should or should not do. He understood only too well U.S. anxieties about Vietnam and he shared them. He believed that, if the United States thought the only way to save Vietnam was to bring personnel and materiel above the limits set by the Geneva Accord, then he would be willing to accept this judgement. He would bless any attempt to save Vietnam, but nevertheless saw no point in stressing legalisms. Ambassador Heeney thought a double citation was probably the best solution available at this time, and, in this connection, noted that he had received word from the Canadian Commission in Saigon (Hooton) that it believed it would be possible to bring the subversion issue out of the Legal Committee by mid-March.

On another aspect of the same subject, Ambassador Heeney discussed the manner in which U.S. materiel had been brought into Saigon. He understood that the reason for delivery being made in the principal downtown area of Saigon had been to buttress Vietnamese morale and faith in its government being properly equipped to defend itself. Nevertheless, this quite open way of doing things did make matters rather more difficult for the ICC and he imagined that the effectiveness of this materiel in coping with insurgency would probably do as much for moral as anything.

Mr. Rice said he was insufficiently informed about the legal problems involved but said he would speak to Mr. Chayes about it—which he did shortly thereafter.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-262. Secret. Drafted by Hubbard on March 6.

2 See Document 55.

IV. Further U.S. Efforts To Strengthen the Government of South Vietnam, March-April 1962IV. Further U.S. Efforts To Strengthen the Government of South Vietnam, March-April 1962

98. Paper Prepared for the Special Group (Counterinsurgency)

Washington, March 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State,INR Files: Lot 75 D 378, SV 23613, Civic Action. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The date is penciled in at the top. In the margin is written: “This was tabled and revised.” At the March 1 meeting of the Special Group, General Taylor under agenda item 3 asked about the status of economic programs. The minutes of that meeting reported that: “Mr. Coffin was asked to prepare a special report on this for next weekʼs meeting, which would outline specific programs and show the emphasis being placed on support of counterinsurgency.” (Ibid., Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62) Presumably the paper printed here is that report. No specific reference was made to this paper in the minutes of the March 8 meeting, although they indicate that General Taylor “made the general observation that it was very difficult to get hold of civic action programs which were contemplated for South Vietnam.” U. Alexis Johnson promised to have the Vietnam Task Force examine civic action programs and report its findings. (Ibid.)

99. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 9, 1962—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-962. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and Manila. A note by Bundy on a copy in the Kennedy Library instructed the Communications Center to forward the telegram to Salinger in Miami.

100. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 9, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-962. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 9, 1962—6:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-962. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Magathan and Cottrell, cleared with Heinz, and approved by Cottrell. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to Baguio for Harriman. Harriman, Nolting, and the other U.S. Ambassadors in the Far East were in Baguio, March 10-11, for the Far East Chiefs of Mission Conference. A complete record of that conference is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2056.

102. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 10, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-1062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, CINCPACFLT, CINCPACAF, CINCUSARPAC, Baguio for Ambassador Nolting, Clark Air Force Base, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, Singapore, New Delhi, Taipei, London, Hue, Hong Kong, and Fuchu. It also requested that the Department of State pass the cable to the Department of Defense for various military units. to CIA. and to AID.

103. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, March 10, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret.

104. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 11, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-1162. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Baguio for Harriman and Nolting, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Vientiane.

105. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, March 12, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret.

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 13, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-1362. Confidential, Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Baguio for Harriman and Nolting, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Vientiane.

107. Editorial Note

108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)

Washington, March 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.51K/2-2162. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but a copy of a similar letter that was not sent is attached, listing Wood as the drafter with clearances by Aldrich and Vance (DOD) as well as Oakley, Chayes, Rice, Cottrell, and Sarris in the Department of State. The source text lists as attachments: (1) Questions and Answers on Vietnam; (2) Letter to [from] Senator Morse, (3) Letter from President Kennedy to President Diem; and (4) “The Economics of North and South Vietnam.” Only the first two are attached and only the first is printed. The letter from Senator Morse, February 21, submitted additional questions to Harriman, which are included in the attached Questions and Answers.

109. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, March 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-1562. Top Secret.

110. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 15, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-1562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and Manila for Ambassador Nolting. A memorandum recording the conversation with President Diem is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 361.1, Chief Executive—Vietnam.

111. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 16, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-1662. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

112. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President (Johnson)

Washington, March 16, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security Files, Memos from Colonel Burris. Secret.

113. Decree by the President of the Republic of Vietnam

Saigon, March 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-1662. Secret. Transmitted as enclosure 1 to despatch 431 from Saigon, April 16, which described some of the changes made in the Delta Plan from the time Thompson originally submitted it until its final approval by Diem. For original plan, see Document 51. Also enclosed with the despatch was a decree of March 23 that appointed Hoang Van Lac as Special Commissioner responsible for carrying out the Delta Plan.

114. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, March 31, 1962.

Source: Department of State, INR Files: Lot 75 D 378, SV-236, 12 Delta Plan. Secret.

115. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)

Saigon?, March 19, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries: Vietnam, 3/1/62-7/28/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Allan Evans, Thomas L. Hughes, and Joseph W. Scott, all of INR.

116. Letter From the Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs (Heavner) to the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood)

Saigon, March 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.S/3-1962. Secret; Official-Informal. Heavner was in Vietnam to assist with provincial surveys. Two handwritten notations were on the source text, one requesting that a copy be sent to Stoneman, the other indicating that it had been done. Stoneman was the AID officer responsible for Vietnam.

117. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 20, 1962—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

118. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 20, 1962—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-2062. Secret; Limit Distribution.

119. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 20, 1962—2:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-162. Secret. Drafted on March 16 by Wood; cleared by Hubbard, Morgan, Salans (State), and Heinz (DOD); and approved by Cottrell. Also sent for action to Ottawa and New Delhi and for information to London, Moscow, and CINCPAC for Polad.

120. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 21, 1962—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 6:07 a.m. on March 21. Repeated to Bangkok for Harriman; CINCPAC for Polad, Nolting, and Harkins; and Clark Air Force Base. Nolting and Harkins were in Honolulu for the March Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference. The message also requested that the Department of State pass it to the Department of Defense.

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 21, 1962—1:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2162. Secret. Drafted and approved by Johnson.

122. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, March 22, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam 7. Secret.

123. Briefing Paper for a Presentation by the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) Before the Special Group (Counterinsurgency)

Washington, March 22, 1962.

Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172, March 23, 1962. Secret. Drafted by Cottrell on March 22. The briefing memorandum was part of a package delivered to Under Secretary of State Johnson in preparation for a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on March 23 (see Document 126). A typewritten notation indicates that Cottrell presented the information orally to the Counterinsurgency Group meeting on March 22. The minutes of that meeting read in part: “Mr. Cottrell stated that, although he is encouraged by progress in the civic action programs, it is necessary to remember that we are engaged in an eight to ten year struggle. The MAAG is giving emphasis to the Strategic Hamlet concept in its civic action programs, as is USOM and the Government of South Vietnam. CIAʼs program is more in the field of security than civic action, with emphasis on paramilitary training for youths and villagers.” (Department of State, Special Group (C.I.): Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62)

124. Editorial Note

125. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, March 27, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Top Secret.

126. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, March 23, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Pentagon, Washington, March 23, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Minutes. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the Pentagon. A note on the source text reads: “Department of State draft, not cleared with DOD.” U. Alexis Johnson led the Department of State delegation; Mr. Amory represented the CIA; Messrs. Nitze and Bundy, DOD; and Bromley Smith the NSC.

127. Airgram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 23, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-2362. Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall and cleared with Gardiner, Fippin, and Bogardus. Repeated to all Asian posts, and CINCPAC, London, Paris, and Ottawa.

128. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Geneva, March 24, 1962—1 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam, Country Series 3/1/62-3/12/62. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution.

129. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Geneva

Washington, March 24, 1962—5:33 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series 3/23/62-3/26/62. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Johnson, cleared with Pezzullo, and approved by Ball.

130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 24, 1962—7:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-2462. Secret. Drafted by Wood; cleared with Czyzak, Rice, Pezzullo, and Heinz (DOD) and approved by Johnson. Also sent to Ottawa and New Delhi and repeated to London, Moscow, and CINCPAC for Polad.

131. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Geneva

Washington, March 26—1962—8:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2059. Secret. Drafted by Johnson, cleared with Rice and Pezzullo, and approved by Ball.

132. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staffʼs Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, March 26, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 77-131, Republic of Vietnam, 1961-1963. Secret. At the top of the first page is written: “Check idea of ops. deps. with Lansdale.”

133. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 27, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/3-2762. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to Tokyo for Harriman.

134. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, March 29, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret.

135. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Aide (Clifton) to the National Security Adviser (Bundy)

Washington, March 29, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda-Chester Clifton, 3/61-6/62. Secret. Also sent to Bromley Smith.

136. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to Vice President Johnson

Washington, March 30, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security Files, Memos from Colonel Burris, Jan. 1961-June 1962. Secret. A notation on the source text reads: “VP has seen.”

137. Letter From President Diem to President Kennedy

Saigon, March 31, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-3162. Official use Only. This letter was also sent to the Pope and 92 heads of state in non-communist countries. The Australian Mission to the United Nations had agreed to circulate the letter to all member delegations, but on April 26 Madame Chuang, the Vietnamese Ambassador to the United Nations, undertook the distribution herself.

138. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, April 3, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-362. Secret. No drafting information is given on the source text, but it is signed “Cot.”

139. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, April 3, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries, Vietnam. Secret; Noforn.

140. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, April 3, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 2-B.4 GVN. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Cot—Please consider. I agree with the principle. WAH”

141. Memorandum From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to the President

Washington, April 4, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 77-131, Republic of Vietnam, 1961-1962. Secret. Also printed in Galbraith, Ambassadorʼs Journal, pp. 297-299. Transmitted to President Kennedy under cover of a letter of April 5 from Galbraith (ibid., pp. 296-297) that dealt, for the most part, with subjects other than Vietnam. Galbraith was in the United States, March 27-April 8, to testify before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on India. Forrestal sent this memorandum 131 to McNamara for DODʼs comments on April 7.

142. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the President

Washington, April 4, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, Bowles. Secret. The memorandum totals 54 pages and includes a table of contents at the beginning. Bowles transmitted the paper to the President under cover of a memorandum of April 4 in which he indicated that it was the second of two papers growing out of his recent trip, that he was limiting the number of copies due to the controversy sure to be generated by the conclusions, and that he would like to discuss the proposals with the President after he had read it. (Ibid., National Security File, Meetings & Memos, Staff Memos, Chester Bowles) He also sent copies to Bundy and Forrestal in the White House and Walt Rostow in the Department of State. The President had sent Bowles on a mission to the Middle East, Africa, South Asia, and the Far East, February 8-March 19; while in the Far East, Bowles chaired the Baguio Chiefs of Mission Conference, March 10-11.

143. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 4, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69.

144. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 4, 1962—2:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-462. Confidential, Priority Drafted by Wayne James (DOD/ISA) and cleared with Heinz, Cottrell, and Stoneman Also sent to CINCPAC for Polad and repeated to COMUSMACV and USOM in Saigon.

145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 4, 1962—6:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-462. Secret; Priority. Also sent to CINCPAC for Polad. Drafted by Harriman and Cottrell, and cleared with Johnson.

146. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Director of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow)

Washington, April 5, 1962.

Source: Harriman Papers, Vietnam, 1962. Secret. A typed note at the bottom indicates that Harriman dictated but did not read the memorandum.

147. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 5, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

148. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman), White House, Washington, April 6, 1962, 4:55 p.m.

White House, Washington, April 6, 1962, 4:55 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 1/62-5/62. Top Secret. Prepared by Forrestal. The meeting was held at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs log. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Appointment Books)

149. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, April 6, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Poll 7. Secret. No drafting information is given on the source text but it is signed “Cot.”

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 7, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/4-1762. Secret Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

151. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 9, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-030-69. Top Secret. At the top of the document, Taylor wrote: “See me.”

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 10, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.S/4-1062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

153. Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Vietnam Affairs, Agency for International Development (Stoneman)

Washington, April 10, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8. GVN, 1962, Information & Civic Action. Confidential. Stoneman prepared the memorandum on April 18.

154. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 11, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-1162. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

155. Circular Telegram From the Department of State

Washington, April 11, 1962—4:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-1162. Official Use Only. Sent to Embassies in 15 Asian countries and to Canberra, Wellington, Paris, London, and Ottawa. Drafted by Chapman; cleared with Cottrell, Manell, Usher, and Link; and approved by Rice.

156. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Williams) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, April 14, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files. FRC 65 A 3501, Vietnam 1962,-2. Secret. At the bottom of the page is the following handwritten note: “For record-SecDef has talked to Amb Galbraith and feels no reply needed. Mr. Forrestal informed this date none would be sent. April 17.” The memorandum, but not the attachment, is also printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, p. 466. A less detailed memorandum from Lemnitzer to McNamara, April 13, which makes some of the same points as the attachment, is ibid., pp. 464-465.

157. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Honolulu, April 15, 1962—7:23 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Top Secret. Repeated to COMUSMACV and four other military commands.

158. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 16, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-1662. Secret; Priority. Repeated Phnom Penh, CINCPAC for Polad, London, Paris, Bangkok, Vientiane, Geneva for FECON, Taipei, Hong Kong, Manila, New Delhi, Ottawa, and Moscow. In a memorandum of April 17, Bagley informed Taylor that President Kennedy was interested in the view of the Department of State on this telegram and that Harrimanʼs initial reaction was not to make the public repudiation suggested by Nolting, but rather to inform Sihanouk privately that the United States opposed a conference. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69)

159. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President

Washington, April 16, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, Memos from Colonel Burris, Jan. 61-June 62. Secret.

160. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 17, 1962—5 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security File; Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad. Attached to the source text was a memorandum from Bagley to Smith, April 25, noting that Cottrell was preparing a reply to be recommended to the White House.

161. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)

Honolulu, April 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 20.1 GVN 1962. Secret.

162. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 18, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-030-69. Secret.

163. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 18, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

164. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, April 19, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-1962. Secret; Limit Distribution.

165. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of the Army (Stahr)

April 20, 1962

Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Departments and Agencies, Army, 1961-1962. Secret. The source text provides no indication of the date of preparation.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 20, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-2062. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi, Ottawa, London, CINCPAC for Polad, and Moscow.

167. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 20, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

168. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 20, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-2062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Phnom Penh, London, Paris, CINCPAC for Polad, Moscow, Vientiane Bangkok, Geneva for FECON, New Delhi, Taipei, Manila, and Ottawa.

169. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 26, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

170. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 26, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

98. Paper Prepared for the Special Group (Counterinsurgency) 98. Paper Prepared for the Special Group (Counterinsurgency)1

Washington, March 7, 1962.

SUBJECT

Special Group Agenda Item 3d2

3d. Planning for immediate civilian and military civic action and subsequent detailed civic action programs which will be required to support the province pacification strategy.

I. Status

Enclosure number one is a review of the status of civic action programs in Vietnam. The salient facts to be considered are the following: 1. Neither US nor GVN planning for civic action in Vietnam can proceed on a sound basis until the overall strategy for the campaign in Vietnam is developed and agreed. The civic action effort must be planned to support the time-phased geographic plan for clearing and holding the country-side. The general concept of a campaign plan is emerging, but the plan has not.

2. The Vietnamese are currently conducting several unsystematic civic action activities, varying by area and means and not guided by a strategic plan. Their primary source of advice and guidance in the civic action field does not appear to be our Country Team.

3. Country Team recognition of the need for civic action is recent. Civic action has not been persistently pressed on the GVN. What has been accomplished appears to be mainly on GVN initiative.

4. A clear concept on the U.S. side of the manner in which to unite the divided responsibilities of U.S. agencies in a successful field program in Vietnam has not been demonstrated. A joint State-AID-Defense message of 12 Feb 623 provides very broad guidance calling for MAP funding of requirements to provide indigenous military forces for which MAP is responsible, with increased capability to take on civic action and calling for AID funding of project costs additional to those funded by local governments and of requirements to enhance the civic action capability of the paramilitary forces for which AID is responsible. This broad guidance, generally confirming previous understanding, does not solve the problem of how to develop and administer one integrated program, agreed to by the GVN, in Vietnam.

II. Required Actions by the Country Team

Each of the required actions listed below presumes that our Country Team will have completely determined what the GVN is doing in the civic action field and will, through early consideration of GVN views and local circumstances and united persuasion that the U.S. has a sound program to offer in this field, achieve agreement with the GVN as to requirements, methods, and programs to be implemented.

1. Attention to the necessity for a time-phased, geographically based strategy and campaign plan for all of Vietnam that envisions clearing and consolidating areas contiguous to the starting area.

2. Development of one integrated comprehensive civic action program phased to support the strategy of the campaign plan. This must be a program of specifics; the generally accepted broad principles thus far announced in various programs do not provide an adequate basis for action in the current stage.

3. Division of tasks between the U.S. agencies only on the basis of their capability and willingness to perform the function in the current circumstances in Vietnam.

4. Assignment of resources to U.S. agencies on the basis of the division of tasks rather than such a basis as MAP support or precedent.

Enclosure 14

REVIEW OF THE STATUS OF CIVIC ACTION IN VIETNAM

I. Status

a. U.S. Military Civic Action Efforts

On 12 July 1961, a Department of Army Civil Action Mobile Training Team (CAMTT) arrived in SVN. Its dispatch was one of the approved “Gilpatric Task Force” recommendations.5 From 12 July to 12 December, the CAMTT conducted surveys of civic action needs, held seminars in Saigon and in each military region for top military and civilian officials, organized a group of ARVN officers to conduct a civic action program, provided the P.O.I. for individual training, and submitted to CHMAAG a complete Civil Affairs/Civic Action Program for approval.6

On 30 January 1962, this program was submitted to CINCPAC. CINCPAC approved the program 7 February 62. It now awaits adoption by the GVN. Only after query from the JCS7 did the Country Team during February present to the GVN the proposals for civic action drawn up by the DA CAMTT during 1961.

b. U.S. Civilian Civic Action Efforts

As reported under Agenda Item 3a, a proposed civilian rural medical plan was proposed to Ambassador Nolting by State/AID message dated 26 Feb 62.8 The basic feature of the plan would be mobile civilian medical teams performing a “sick call” operation in villages and available for emergency call. Foreign doctors would replace in the cities the VN doctors moved out to rural areas under this plan. Field comments have not been received.

On 16 Feb 62 State suggested to Ambassador Nolting that he consider means to strengthen the GVN Civic Action Ministry, including employment of U.S. advisors within the Ministry, and requested a report from T.F. Saigon on the status of civilian civic action and specific suggestions for expansion of the program, including especially activities by which civilian civic action can support military plans for cleaning out and securing provinces.9 These are each very recent indications of interest in civilian civic action; results—or even clear specific plans—have not been realized.

c. NV Civic Action

(1) Background

The Government of Viet Nam (GVN) has established a number of organizations and carries out a variety of programs which are designed either to materially aid the people of Viet Nam or to convince them of the desirability of supporting the present regime. The Information Service, the National Revolutionary Movement (NRM), the Republican Youth Organization (RYO), the Ministry of Health, and the Vietnamese Solidarity Movements are examples of such organizations. Frequently it has occurred that the programs of these organizations combine both material and moral help for the people with a propaganda program, and the lines between the GVN purpose of “help” and the regimeʼs purpose of “sell” are difficult to differentiate.

(2) Organization and Cadres

In at least part of the provinces a provincial-level CA organization exists. Below the provincial headquarters there is often, but not always, a chief cadre for each district who may have a number of cadres under him, depending upon the size of the population. These cadres, through the chief cadre, usually coordinate their activities closely with the district chief although the latter in most cases exercises no direct authority over the CA program. Generally the number of cadres is not fixed in a district and may vary from time to time according to the schedule of the CA program. One cadre, however, may be assigned to cover two to four villages on a more or less permanent basis.

CA cadres often participate in “teams” composed of Information Service cadres, Surete representatives, RYO cadres, and Self Defense Corps members. The teams move about in a district, spending perhaps two or three weeks in a village organizing defenses, explaining GVN policy lines, and exhorting the population to carry out self-help projects.

The CA cadres (25-35) are young, aggressive, and dedicated. They are paid 2,800 piastres a month (the provincial CA chief receives 5,500 piastres), a fair wage were it not for their added expenses accruing from their responsibilities of having to live away from home virtually all of the time.

One district chief stated the CA cadres are generally educated through the third or fourth year of high school. In addition, they received two months of training with the Ministry.

(3) Civic Action Activities

Civic Action activities can be grouped into two categories1) propaganda and 2) organization of projects generally relating to either defense or community welfare. CA cadres frequently organize “study courses” which are used to “educate” the people about GVN programs and policies and to convince them of the advantages of supporting the present regime. CA objectives in poorer areas are, of necessity, changed from encouragement and organization of community projects to simple propaganda, as the people of such areas are too poor to devote much if any time or money to projects not immediately essential to the providing of the daily necessities of life.

The principal job of CA, however, is to aid villagers in the organization and execution of projects designed to benefit the community as a whole. Varying according to the needs and capabilities of the village, such projects include road repair, dam building, canal excavation, construction of tactical defenses, crop protection, and establishment of health programs. They may investigate any “suspicious elements” in a village for VC activities or connections, and investigate the background of candidates for the village council or any charges of abuse of power leveled against a member of a council. In an emergency involving the safety of the village or the crops, CA cadres may concentrate their efforts on a given area. However, CA itself has no funds to invest in projects and it is always necessary for the villagers to foot the bill themselves on any costs of a project. CA cadres can only explain the utility of the project to the villagers and help them organize the effort. Another activity sometimes engaged in is to coordinate with SDC and other defense groups in conducting security patrols. CA cadres also frequently urge the people to pay their taxes.

These activities and programs have a basic limitation in that they do not have funds to assist with the developments that they urge. They are essentially “do-it-yourself” advisors. Their programs call for diversion of local effort and resources to programs not developed at local initiative. This would be more acceptable if some funds were available to the teams to help with local projects. There is recent information that a special responsibility for civic action has been assigned to … . The portion of the total program which he supervises and the resources available to him are not yet clearly reported. He is at least responsible for the Binh Duong and Bien Hoa areas. However, fragmentary reports indicate some activity in these areas and elsewhere. For example, in January 62 President Diem ordered a crash civic action program for the newly formed province of Chuong Thieu. By the end of January an initial complement of 100 civic action personnel, of whom 70 had been newly trained and armed with carbines and LSMGʼs, were organized into ten teams of ten men each. To meet the estimated 250 additional team members required for this province, 150 were to be assigned from the class of 200 graduating from their training program at Danang in late February.

(4) Relation to the Overall Strategy

Future GVN civic action programs will certainly be geared to the strategic hamlet concept and the overall strategy for clearing and holding areas. This, too, is not yet completely developed. No time-phased priority of clearing the provinces has been announced. However, the scheme for clearing and holding individual provinces appears to be generally understood as depending on a three-phase operation (I—preparatory, II—military, and III—civic action and rehabilitation) to establish strategic hamlets. Civic action plans and requirements will consequently be tied to the strategic plan finally agreed.

The costs of this scheme may run high. For example, the relocation costs for only 6,500 people being moved in Binh Duong to five new sites is estimated at $75,000.

President Diem only recently (3 Feb) signed the decree establishing an Inter-Ministry Committee for Strategic Hamlets.10 The mission of this body is to develop a national plan for securing the villages. However, in the meantime, the work is proceeding. There are 16,000 hamlets and 2,500 villages in Vietnam. 784 strategic hamlets have already been constructed and 453 are under construction. It is reported that 6,066 are to be completed in 1962.

The intent of the GVN as to an overall strategy is also somewhat clouded by recent actions with regard to the recommendations of British Advisor, Mr. R.G.K. Thompson. Mr. Thompson has submitted to the GVN a draft directive for the pacification of the Delta area, which outlines in the form of a National Security Council Directive the concepts to which he proposes.11 [sic] He has also prepared three draft policy instructions for implementation of the directive. One concerns the general concept, another the coordination and command of the operation, and another specific control measures to break the links between the VC and the population.12 It is reported that President Diem approved at least the basic directive at a meeting from which he excluded Minister of Civic Action Hieu.

This plan now considers only the Delta area. How the program there will tie into a national plan is not clear because the GVN has also been recently discussing clearing provinces in the Binh Duong area with MAAG. However, it is reported that Thompson coordinated his plan and draft directions with MAAG.

1 Source: Department of State,INR Files: Lot 75 D 378, SV 23613, Civic Action. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The date is penciled in at the top. In the margin is written: “This was tabled and revised.” At the March 1 meeting of the Special Group, General Taylor under agenda item 3 asked about the status of economic programs. The minutes of that meeting reported that: “Mr. Coffin was asked to prepare a special report on this for next weekʼs meeting, which would outline specific programs and show the emphasis being placed on support of counterinsurgency.” (Ibid., Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62) Presumably the paper printed here is that report. No specific reference was made to this paper in the minutes of the March 8 meeting, although they indicate that General Taylor “made the general observation that it was very difficult to get hold of civic action programs which were contemplated for South Vietnam.” U. Alexis Johnson promised to have the Vietnam Task Force examine civic action programs and report its findings. (Ibid.)

2 There was no agenda item 3d in either the March 1 or 8 meeting, although there was an “agenda item 3” on Vietnam for the March I meeting and “agenda items 3a, 3b, and 3c” on Vietnam for the March 8 meeting. “Agenda item 3b” at the latter was entitled “Civic Action. South Vietnam.”

3 See footnote 6, Document 64.

4 Secret.

5 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 42.

6 Not further identified.

7 The JCS query has not been found.

8 Transmitted in CA-1198. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series)

9 See Document 66.

10 See Document 46.

11 Document 51.

12 The draft instructions were enclosed with a letter of February 10 to Trueheart. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814,350. GNV-Task Force (Thompson Mission))

99. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 99. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 9, 1962—noon.

1149. From Ambassador Nolting. Manila for Harriman.2 Following relates to US statements to press concerning US military activities in Viet Nam. We have previously disseminated and stressed to all units of mission press guidance given to date, including distribution of Secretary Ruskʼs statement March 6th.3

Late evening March 7 two reporters (Hudson of NBC and Rose of Time) came by my house to discuss what they termed very important information received by them which was in conflict with their understanding of official US statements. I thanked them for following suggestions made at earlier press briefing that US press corps check doubtful or important information with General Harkins or me, or designated representatives, prior to broadcast or filing. Reporters then said they had received from a US military source, and had verified through GVN military source, the following: (1) that Farmgate operation was in many cases spearhead of ground support and bombing missions against Viet Cong, including recent operation in Tay Ninh province, results of which had been seen by several reporters: (2) that there are now two air forces in Viet Nam operating against the Viet Cong—the GVN Air Force and secondly American units (Farmgate) controlled and operated by US Air Force, comprising T-28ʼs and RB-26ʼs: (3) that during recent grounding of GVN AD-6 squadrons, US had been requested to supply US pilots for the AD-6ʼs for combat missions and had done so; (4) that this report was inconsistent with what had been said in Washington and in Saigon officially as to US military role in Viet Nam. These two reporters added that above information was widely known to foreign reporters now in Viet Nam.

I told them following: (1) US role in Viet Nam is, as officially stated, a training and supporting role in air force as well as in all other branches of GVN Armed Forces. (2) It is incorrect to say US is “spearheading” ground support and bombing operations against Viet Cong. (3) In training GVN Air Force in operation T-28ʼs, a new plane to them, we are giving on-the-spot training which often involves training under combat conditions, but that in no case do US pilots operate alone, purpose and objective being training of GVN pilots for combat operations. (4) Information that we had been requested to fly AD-6ʼs in combat during short period of grounding of GVN Air Force was false, as was statement that there are two distinct air forces operating now in Viet Nam. These reporters said they accepted this explanation and would file their stories accordingly, remarking that this made stories considerably less sensational. I have no doubt, however, that they will continue to probe this matter on basis of leads they already have, and try define more precisely role of Farmgate. (This code name was used by them throughout.)

As illustrated by above, I feel most US reporters here are trying to play ball with us, but I also have strong feeling that, given number of participants, both US and GVN, in these air operations, it is inevitable that the degree of US control of mechanics of Farmgate operation, and the degree of US participation in air combat operations, will become increasingly known and stressed in press. (Lt. Cuu, one of renegade pilots now in Cambodia, is undoubtedly familiar with details of Farmgate operation.) Such questions as when will GVN pilots be trained and ready to take over complete control of T-28ʼs and RB-26ʼs now at Bien Hoa will inevitably arise.

Believe we should give further thought to adequacy our present line with press in light these insistent inquiries. While official statements correct in general terms, they may become object of criticism or attack when specifics of operation become further known, which is likely. Mission may have further suggestions.

General Harkins concurs.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-962. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC and Manila. A note by Bundy on a copy in the Kennedy Library instructed the Communications Center to forward the telegram to Salinger in Miami.

2 Harriman was in Manila en route to a Chiefs of Mission Conference for U.S. representatives in the Far East scheduled for Baguio, March 10-11.

3 Presumably a reference to Ruskʼs March 1 statement; see Document 94.

100. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 100. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 9, 1962—7 p.m.

1155. Deptel 1017.2 Embassy has carefully considered suggestions reftel and feels scope of provincial surveys can be broadened on informal basis to include fuller consideration of effectiveness village administration, local development plans, civil-military relationships, economic conditions, and provincial information programs. However, believe we would encounter strong resistance from Diem to explicit broadening of terms of reference of Joint Vietnamese-American Commission beyond military and intelligence matters. Believe American team members—particularly Embassy representative—can in most cases informally cover at least portion additional matters listed above. Believe decision on what additional points to cover in each province beyond military and intelligence matters should be left to American members of commission, who in best position to judge what is feasible under circumstances.

Our comments on other specific suggestions in reftel as follows: 1) Agreement already reached with GVN to form additional teams. Will attempt to increase length of observation time in each province to approximately one week. However, believe possibility of GVN opposition or VC harassment may make it necessary to limit survey to shorter period. Rate at which surveys made and written up has been limited by heavy commitments of Vietnamese Team members to other duties. Problem here has been to find qualified Vietnamese team members with knowledge at least French (and English if possible), who have enough authority to command cooperation from local officials but are not too occupied with other duties. This is tall order.

2) Future surveys will contain summary.

3) Surveys of individual provinces will probably not be suitable vehicle for specific recommendations to be used in making overall policy and for planning and assessing purposes, as perspective from one province only is too limited. However, information accrued through surveys will be used in formulating overall policy and planning for Vietnam and in assessing Vietnamʼs major needs.

Further details by airgram. Heavner has arrived and has helped draft revised concept survey program which following by airgram.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-962. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Dated February 23, it noted that the Department of State considered previous provincial surveys very useful and offered suggestions, as outlined in telegram 1155, for improving the surveys. (Ibid., 751K.5/2-2362)

101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 9, 1962—6:37 p.m.

1085. Embtel 1159.2 Initial reports provincial surveys received with interest here at all levels. Obvious program very worthwhile and general consensus opinion here is they should be pushed with all possible speed consistent with requirement for thorough coverage. Consensus also they should include economic and political data and surveys should be focussed on information of direct use to military and coordinated plans.

Following questions raised here: 1. Since Diem has now accepted Thompson approach should not surveys be realigned explicitly to supply requisite planning data on schedule coordinated with Thompson Plan? You may wish discuss this matter with Gen. Harkins and with Thompson and consider compiling data in some standard format for ready accessibility and comparability.

2. Questions Emb Despatch 1893 appear fairly comprehensive. In view strategic hamlet approach, however, more specific information may be needed on situation and applicable assets each village, nature communications thereto, and degree VC control or influence. Also in view crucial civic action phase, reliable information on political, economic, and social matters such as the effectiveness of the GVN administration and the attitude and livelihood of the populace on village by village basis and availability of local resources for establishment of defended areas. This appears vital to realistic planning for successful outcome.

3. Despite Diemʼs express limitation to military and intelligence matters reflected Embtel 756,4 hope you can rely heavily on opening afforded by Thuan mentioned last paragraph Embtel 754.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-962. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Magathan and Cottrell, cleared with Heinz, and approved by Cottrell. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to Baguio for Harriman. Harriman, Nolting, and the other U.S. Ambassadors in the Far East were in Baguio, March 10-11, for the Far East Chiefs of Mission Conference. A complete record of that conference is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2056.

2 Telegram 1159, March 9, reported that all agencies represented on the Country Team concurred in the Delta Plan presented to Diem by the British Advisory Mission. (Ibid., Central Files, 751K.5/-962)

3 Not printed.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 305, footnote 4.

5 Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 305.

102. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 102. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 10, 1962—6 p.m.

1163. Following is mission Interagency Intelligence Committee assessment of current Viet Cong position and tactics:

We expect continuation for next few months at least of pattern of generally small-scale VC attacks, accompanied by intensive politico-military organization of back country, which has characterized Communist struggle in South Vietnam. Until two weeks ago, this campaign concentrated primarily on isolated CG and SDC posts but since then there several attacks on ARVN forces using somewhat larger, more aggressive, and better armed units. This could represent beginnings of trend in some areas toward larger-scale warfare of type associated with Phase II General Giapʼs doctrine. We believe VC not yet capable, however, of full transition Phase II all areas. Furthermore, continued reliance on slower but less provocative process eating away at government administrative structure and presence at district and village level offers Communists several advantages at this stage their revolution. For one thing, it is kind of program which strikes Diem regime at weakest points while avoiding to large extent damaging contact between limited VC offensive force and much more numerous ARVN. It also tactic least likely attract major American intervention Vietnam or arouse more active concern of Western allies of US. Viet Cong are likely, however, to punctuate this campaign with occasional larger-scale attacks, employing up to 1,000 men or so, against selected targets which appear to them relatively vulnerable. In each case Communist decision undertake such attack would probably be made only after carefully balancing advantages, in terms heightening VC morale and perhaps inducing panic in GVN, against risks of inviting effective ARVN counteraction and inspiring escalation American commitments.

On organizational side, Communists will continue efforts elaborate controlling political superstructure for VC, giving first priority to development of newly established Vietnamese Peopleʼs Revolutionary Party as Communists inner core in National Liberation Front. At same time, Communists will continue attempt attract non-Communists various walks life to Frontʼs banner, and representatives of Front likely appear in increasing numbers at Communist-supported international conclaves. Although at national level, Frontʼs efforts enlist non-Communist support not notably successful, there considerable evidence that at local level numerous front committees established.

Parallel political efforts, Communists continuing emphasize progressive development military forces. After dramatic expansion their forces in 1959 and 1960, it reasonable assume substantial consolidation of VC forces has been necessary. There some evidence enemy engaged this process past few months, regrouping smaller guerrilla elements to form district companies and provincial battalions. This effort enhanced by utilization trained cadres infiltrated North Vietnam, for which DRV has substantial manpower reservoir in form more than 80,000 troops evacuated from south after Geneva Armistice. Some of these regrouped southerners demobilized and assigned “production” elements, but 50,000 were used form four PAVN infantry divisions.

DRV deployment in Laos intimately connected with support of VC in addition, of course, to backing up PL, by insuring safe transit supplies and cadre to South Vietnam. There is in fact evidence DRV units assisting in preparing logistical system (roads and supply points) for support VC effort. Possibly offsetting this advantage, at least for short term, is continued delay in reaching settlement in Laos leading coalition government under Souvanna Phouma. So long as this question unresolved, DRV probably feels it must be ready participate resumed hostilities which now seem only alternative to a Souvanna coalition. This may detract somewhat from attention it pays to South Vietnam.

Due to nature of war here, it difficult draw up balance sheet for past few months. RVNAF, with American assistance, undoubtedly improved, among other things, its ability cope with large enemy concentration and exploit sudden encounters with VC by calling for air strikes. On other hand, incident rate has remained extremely high, and Viet Cong, while sustaining substantial casualties themselves, able inflict rather heavy casualties government forces, particularly over extended and under-trained CG and SDC. Perhaps best estimate is that there more or less military standoff with both sides gradually improving respective capabilities.

Fact VC has in general concentrated on small-scale activity recent months, eschewing more sensational attacks mounted Sept, should provide no grounds complacency. Enemy is determined, resourceful and controls substantial areas in countryside. Government cannot hope begin long, slow road to victory until it better able contest with enemy for control vital countryside through buildup CG, SDC and various irregular village defense forces, and through adoption wide variety political, social and economic measures aimed at giving peasant stake in defense his village against VC.

In discussing contrast between large-scale Sept attacks and subsequent pattern smaller-scale activity, two main bodies opinion developed in committee. … These attacks and in fact general VC posture last summer indicated enemy actually in process moving into Phase II Giapʼs doctrine but later decided regress Phase I for number reasons. Other view, advocated by political section and evaluation center, was that these attacks represented specific use of tactic associated with Phase II to secure infiltration routes, redress morale balance and regain initiative following the GVNʼs temporary successes in Delta. Whatever the case, committee agreed they presently operating generally context Phase I but working intensively prepare themselves for transition Phase II.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-1062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, CINCPACFLT, CINCPACAF, CINCUSARPAC, Baguio for Ambassador Nolting, Clark Air Force Base, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, Singapore, New Delhi, Taipei, London, Hue, Hong Kong, and Fuchu. It also requested that the Department of State pass the cable to the Department of Defense for various military units. to CIA. and to AID.

103. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 103. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, March 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Operation Sunrise

The attached plan2 provides for the pacification of Binh Duong province (southern edge of which is 12 miles north of Saigon).

Essentials of plan are as follows:

Enemy: 1800 regular and provincial troops plus sympathizers; in strong control of northern half of province.

Friendly: In addition to unspecified number of SDC/CG in the province now, allocate five ARVN infantry battalions to clear northern part of province; two civil guard battalions for local security; four ranger companies; one river forces group; VNAF and US Army helo company. There are nine civic action teams (16 men per team) operating now in southern part of Binh Duong province; five additional teams (32 men per team) will be added for the operation.

Mission: The Government of the Republic of South Vietnam conducts combined civil-military operations in the province of Binh Duong to eliminate Viet Cong control over the people; provide for the selective relocation and physical security of the population; enforce law and order; assist in rehabilitating village administration, economy and security; and assist in consolidating national control within the area of operations by enhancing popular support for the counterinsurgency effort.

Concept: Three phases of operations are planned: I. Preparatory (prior to D-Day). Reconnaissance and planning; determine requirements for village relocation and civic action; determine requirements for additional para-military personnel; train paramilitary and civic action personnel; command and logistic planning in detail; psywar and civic action planning; military planning.

II. Military (D-Day to D+30). Regular forces gain control of northern areas in which population resettlement is to be undertaken; psywar campaign to explain to population the reasons for movement of their homes; Army engs and civic action teams move to new village sites (population of 15 villages will be moved to 5 new defended villages) for clearing ground and constructing defenses; CG provide village security; regular forces maintain secure LOCʼs; villagers moved to new sites (priority to 3 villages because of limited resources; complete other 2 villages when forces are released) and given funds/material/help in reconstructing their homes; concurrently, clear western part of province and resettle on more limited basis.

III. Consolidation (D+30 to D+120 approximately). Phase out of regular forces as SDC/CG are able to provide security; defensive village system and population controls continued and refined; village alarm system established; security patrols instituted; civic action pursued on urgent basis to regain normal living conditions; information program and facilities established; civic action teams (after 2-4 months) train local replacements and prepare to move to a new location.

Command: The Province Chief is responsible for Phases I and III; the Commander. ARVN 5th Inf Div for Phase II.

Specific parts of this plan which you may wish to scan are clipped as follows: VC organization

LOC overlay

Village overlay

Secure Village Concept

Emergency Assistance and Support

Material requirements—village security

Psywar Plan

Civil Affairs Plan

Some questions which the Plan raises: 1. Date Phase II will commence (will rainy season delay until Oct/Nov)?

2. Extent of population indoctrination prior to Phase II.

3. What the US is doing now to expedite Phase I (which is in progress to some unknown extent)?

4. What the US is doing to provide resources for Phase III.

5. What role US advisors will have at command levels during Phase II to assure effective direction as the operation unfolds.

6. Possibility of success in view of strong VC position in north part of province and zone D to the east (it is of interest that in past 10 days, VC have increased scope of operations in Tay Ninh Province to the west).

7. Nature of follow-on operations in other provinces and extent of concurrent planning.

8. Supporting operations planned to divert VC reinforcements from Binh Duong as the operation gets underway.

9. Extent of reserves to be earmarked for the operation.

CINCPAC and COMUSMACV are working with the GVN on details of this plan; detailed information on status is almost nonexistent. While not expressed, I think this operation will not be ready until the fall of this year. This is why it is vital there be more intensive attention to preparatory and supplemental actions (country-wide civic action; border patrols) to prevent further deterioration of the security situation while we prepare for offensive operations.3

W.H.B.4

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret.

2 Not found.

3 Phase I of Operation “Sunrise” got underway on March 22. According to the minutes of the meeting of the Committee on Province Rehabilitation for April 20, Phase 1I began on April 17. (Department of State, Vietnam Task Force Files: Lot 66 D 193, 6.1-C, GVN 1962, Agrovilles & Land Devmt)

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

104. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 104. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 11, 1962—7 p.m.

1165. Re Embtel 1164 info Baguio unn.2 Mme. Nhuʼs address at Trung sisters ceremony made in her capacity as President-Founder of Vietnamese Womenʼs Solidarity Movement. Diplomatic Corps and GVN ministers present. Her remarks, which subsequently broadcast, are not surprising as reflection views of her and her husband vis-à-vis West, including US, since both Nhus have privately expressed opinions generally along these lines in past. Even President Diem has in private conversation attributed lack of security in countryside to alleged failure US to support Civil Guard at earlier stage.

What is new, however, is public expression these sentiments by leading personality of regime. Their vehemence indicates depth of feeling probably intensified by narrow escape of Nhus in recent palace bombing episode. While we have not seen complete range Western press reaction (including Time and Newsweek) to bombing, we believe that if stress is on unpopularity Diem government and/or Nhus, Ngo family feelings will be even further stirred up, and recurrence last Novemberʼs anti-American press campaign could be cranked up.

Believe therefore that I should promptly make oral protest to GVN. I would put protest in context that public statements of this sort make task of Western, and particularly American friends of Vietnam inordinately difficult. I would point out that Madame Nhuʼs public speech presents gravely unbalanced view of what Western democracies, particularly US, are doing with their immense assistance to help Vietnam in its mortal struggle against Communists. American public which is wholeheartedly supporting this struggle can only be discouraged by statements of this sort. Raking over past is not key to future cooperation. Even past has two sides, however, and further public presentation by GVN of one side only may compel US press present other side, with resultant public dispute which can only please Communists. Finally, I would protest implication of foreign incitement to murder, and stress that public figure, whether American or Vietnamese, must expect receive criticism as well as praise. I would propose make protest to Secretary of State for Presidency, Thuan.

I recognize that démarche along these lines unlikely have any effect on attitude of Nhus and could well increase their anti-American sentiments. By privately indicating our concern, however, we may forestall anti-US press campaign which otherwise likely be stimulated by expected US press reaction to speech. Whether or not démarche has this result, my personal view is that United States on prestige grounds should not ignore public statement of this kind by figure as closely associated with GVN as Madame Nhu.

Ambassador Nolting may wish to comment.

Please instruct urgently.3

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-1162. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Baguio for Harriman and Nolting, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Vientiane.

2 Telegram 1164, March 11, transmitted a translation of Madame Nhuʼs speech. The speech dealt mainly with the provision of security in the countryside, complaining that training and equipping a paramilitary force to provide such security has been difficult for Vietnam, “especially when its allies refused to recognize the need for such forces.” (Ibid.)

3 In telegrams 19 and 20, March 12, Harriman and Nolting responded in favor of a démarche by Trueheart. Upon receipt of these responses, the Department of State authorized Trueheart to make the proposed démarche in telegram 1091 to Saigon, March 12. (Ibid., 751K.00/3-1262)

105. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 105. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, March 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Force Structure in South Viet-Nam

The following future MAP-supported force levels have been approved by the JCS for South Viet-Nam: Present
FY 62 Proposed
FY 62 Proposed
FY 63 Proposed
FY 64

RVNAF (Army-Navy-AF) 205,000 206,662 215,000 225,000

CG 68,000 72,000 81,000 90,000

SDC 49,200 65,000 80,000 80,000

TOTAL 322,200 343,622 376,000 395,000

These figures have been recommended by CINCPAC with the concurrence of the Country Team. Approval at this time was suggested in order that GVN planning could go forward; the force levels indicated do not reflect a number of factors which will take form in the next few months. There is unofficial agreement on the US side that changes in levels will be made if later information and events dictate the need.

The review which follows is intended to set forth the essentials of the force structure determination.

Current Force Levels

The US approved a force level of 200,000 for the RVNAF in the fall of 1961; it was agreed then that the need for further increases would be reviewed after 1 January 1962. As an interim measure, CHMAAG was authorized by State and Defense to consider the calendar 1962 goal as 205,000 to permit flexibility in billet determinations. It is estimated at present rates of build-up that the 200,000 level will be reached in late 1962. Approximate present strengths are:

RVNAF: Army 163,000

Navy 5,000

Airforce 5,000

TOTAL 173,000

On the para-military side the situation is as follows:

Security Forces: GVN Authorized Strength MAP-support Level Present Strength

Civil Guard 68,000 67,000

Self-Defense Corps 67,751 49,200 57,000

The USOM-approved strength for the National Police is 7,020.

Proposed Increases

Based on these strengths and the approved levels for the period FY 62-64, the net increases through June 1963 will be: Present Strength Present Goal MAP June 1963 Global Difference between present strength and June 1963 Goal

RVNAF 173,000 205,000 215,000 42,000

CG 67,000 68,000 81,000 14,000

SDC 57,000 67,751 80,000 23,000

Mr. Hilsmanʼs recommended approach to a SVN strategy calls for an increase of 58,000 in the Civil Guard and, in a part-time Self-Defense Corps, an increase of 100,000.2 Mr. Thompson similarly lays stress on the role of the CG and SDC. The latter as the close-in defender of the strategic hamlet and defender village; the former as the wider-ranging provincial patrol force and mobile reserve. Thompson originally suggested use of the National Police for provincial security, but later agreed with the US view that existing para-military assets in the CG/SDC should be used.

Essential Considerations

There are certain essential considerations in reaching a decision as to the force levels the US reasonably could support in SVN. Some of these have been cited by Defense or State; none are sufficiently developed to permit governing conclusions. Each should be the subject of further analysis or discussion with the GVN.

a. Economic employment of existing armed resources. CINCPAC stresses the need to assure the GVN organizes and employs existing military and para-military resources properly before moving too rapidly toward increases in strength. There are insufficient indications now as to what the GVN is actually capable of doing and what military strength is required. The best data available suggests the RVNAF has not decreased static tasks despite US provision of transport aircraft and helicopters. Rangers still are not committed to jungle/border functions. At the same time, recent increases in the means for air and water mobility, the need to strengthen force capability in the Plateau area, and expanded training facilities have resulted in the need for RVNAF personnel increases (reflected in the FY 62 figure of 206,662).

b. Requirement for security forces for follow-on control in province pacification strategy. There is a need for CG/SDC forces (and, later, National Police) to hold province areas swept by the ARVN and in which population resettlement has been accomplished. Numbers of para-military forces required for this purpose are not yet known; there is some uncertainty, in US circles, as to numbers now in each province. Tentative estimates for CG/SDC needed for the Binh Duong operation are 1644/1000 respectively, over the normal manning level in that area. A prime factor in any build-up is the present saturated training organization for the CG and SDC; personnel now in those categories will not all complete the training course until the end of 1962. Further, the GVN is reluctant to move CG and SDC forces away from their village and province assignments to fight elsewhere. To the degree that this is done, the local intelligence capability, area familiarity, and morale of these troops would be compromised. But at the same time, this reduces the flexible use of security forces to concentrate at points of immediate need.

c. Influence of social and economic factors on the force structure. USOM, Saigon has emphasized the non-military determinants of an expanded force structure in the context of the concurrent need for progress and efficiency in governmental administration and services. The key factors, which USOM concludes indicate increases in Security Force levels rather than in the RVNAF, are: (1) Better use of available manpower; skilled personnel will be drawn off in lesser numbers.

(2) Puts “people” into the fight to a larger degree.

(3) Less cost in personnel and support.

(4) Will require less stringent economic measures though USOM feels a build-up of the RVNAF to 279,000 can be financed by the GVN if proper procedures are followed.

Conclusions

From the background developed above, I conclude that the best courses of action are: a. View the JCS-approved force levels as tentative pending further analysis of capabilities and requirements.

b. Continue to emphasize acceleration and expansion of CG/SDC training.

c. Determine areas in which the ARVN can be released from static functions and made strategically mobile; press the GVN for early action to so refine their force employment.

d. Assess the need for additional US air transport to force-feed ARVN mobility and reduce reliance on land lines of communication.

e. Complete development of an overall military strategy for SVN so that force structures may be viewed in some sort of accepted framework.

Currently, a and b above are in process; c, d, and e require improved U.S. direction.

W.H.B.4

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret.

2 See Document 42.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 106. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 13, 1962—7 p.m.

1173. Deptel 1091.2 I saw Thuan at 4:30 today and spoke to him regarding Madame Nhuʼs speech, following more or less exactly third paragraph Embtel 1165.3 Thuan could not have taken protest better, and I had distinct impression that he was personally pleased that it had been made. He said that he himself had been “shocked” by speech and appreciated difficulties it caused for US. He recognized tremendous effort US making in Viet Nam and, referring to my remarks re problems posed for friends of Viet Nam, said that he thought US-Vietnamese relations had never been better. He attributed this in large part to attitude displayed by Ambassador Nolting, General Harkins, General McGarr, and myself.

Requesting that I treat his remarks with utmost confidence, he asked that we understand extreme delicacy of his position, insofar as doing anything about Madame Nhu is concerned. It was a family matter in which it was awkward to intrude.

Thuan concluded by saying that he would convey my remarks promptly to President Diem pointing out that they had been made on instructions. I thanked him and said that the fundamental purpose of the approach had been to facilitate American-Vietnamese cooperation.

Comment: I believe that it is of the utmost importance that fact that this protest has been made, and especially Thuanʼs reaction to it, be kept confidential.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-1362. Confidential, Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Baguio for Harriman and Nolting, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Vientiane.

2 See footnote 3, Document 104.

3 Document 104.

107. Editorial Note 107. Editorial Note

On March 13, 1962, McGeorge Bundy transmitted National Security Action Memorandum 131 to various Executive Agency Directors. It detailed a series of training objectives for counterinsurgency. For text of this memorandum, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 11, pages 467-469.

108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) 108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)1

Washington, March 14, 1962.

Dear Mr. Chairman: In Governor Harrimanʼs absence, I am forwarding the Departmentʼs replies to the questions which were presented to him as a result of the executive session of the Foreign Relations Committee concerning Viet-Nam.2 The questions were those put by Senator Morse at the meeting and then by letter subsequently.

The enclosed material is provided with the understanding that those portions which are classified are for the sole information of the Committee.

If I may be of further assistance, I will appreciate you letting me know.

Respectfully,

Frederick G. Dutton3

[Enclosure]

ANSWERS TO SENATOR WAYNE MORSEʼS QUESTIONS OF FEBRUARY 21, 1962 ON VIET-NAM

Q. No. 1. (Unclassified) From what provisions of the Constitution or treaty or statute does President Kennedy derive the right to order United States military personnel to transport South Vietnamese troops into combat, to return the fire of North Vietnamese, to patrol the sea approaches to South Viet-Nam and to drop propaganda leaflets over areas held by the guerrillas opposing the Government of South Viet-Nam?

Answer: (Unclassified) Article II of the Constitution makes the President Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and vests in him the executive power. Article II has also been interpreted as making the President the “sole organ of the nation” in the field of foreign affairs (United States v. Curtiss-Wright, 299 U.S. 304, 318 ff. (1936)). These constitutional powers give the President authority to deploy United States military personnel abroad.

In addition to the Presidentʼs constitutional powers, the Congress has enacted Section 503 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 which authorizes the President to furnish military assistance abroad, inter alia, by” … assigning or detailing members of the armed forces of the United States … to perform duties of a noncombatant nature, including those related to training or advice.”4

Furthermore, the United States and Viet-Nam are parties to the agreement for Mutual Defense Assistance in Indochina of December 23, 1950 (TIAS 2447; 3 U.S.T. 2756) which was concluded pursuant to P.L. 329, 81st Congress (63 Stat. 714, 22 U.S.C. 1571-1604). This agreement provides for the furnishing by the United States to Viet-Nam, among others, of military assistance in the form of equipment, material and services. Article IV, paragraph 2, of the agreement states that “To facilitate operations under this agreement, each Government agrees … to receive within its territory such personnel of the United States of America as may be required for the purposes of this agreement … .”

Under these provisions the United States has since 1950 provided military assistance to Viet-Nam in the form of training, equipment and logistic support. The activities mentioned in the question are an expansion of this training and logistic support role. The transportation or troops is logistic support. The sea patrols referred to are carefully limited to training operations and the exchange of intelligence with Vietnamese naval units. Our assistance to the Vietnamese in dropping leaflets over isolated parts of Viet-Nam has similarly been confined to training and logistic aspects of the operation.

Given the activities in which they are engaged, and the character of guerrilla warfare, in which hostilities occur sporadically at scattered points throughout the country, we had to face the possibility that United States personnel would come under hostile fire. In these circumstances, it was obvious that they would have to be able to defend themselves, and the President has accordingly authorized them to fire, if fired upon, if necessary for self-defense.

Q. No. 2. (Unclassified) Would you discuss the differences and similarities between the present use of United States forces in Viet-Nam and their use in Korea in 1950 and in Lebanon in 1958?

Answer: (Unclassified) United States military personnel are presently in Viet-Nam pursuant to a request of the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam of December 14, 1961 (attached)5 and to an Agreement for Mutual Defense Assistance in Indochina of December 23, 1950. These personnel are engaged in activities of a noncombatant nature, primarily in training, logistic and advisory capacities, designed to assist the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam to counter the indirect aggression directed against it from the North.

United States forces were sent into direct combat operations in South Korea to repel the aggressive armed attack launched on June 25, 1950 by North Korea against the Republic of Korea. On the same day the United Nations Security Council adopted a resolution calling upon all members to render every assistance to the United Nations in the situation. The Korean National Assembly, on June 26, appealed both to the United States and the United Nations for assistance. On June 27, 1950 the Security Council adopted a resolution recommending that members of the United Nations furnish such assistance to the Republic of Korea as might be necessary to repel the attack. The Security Council, on July 7, established a United Nations Command under the United States. In these circumstances, the President on the basis of his constitutional authority sent United States forces to Korea.

United States forces were deployed in Lebanon in 1958 pursuant to an urgent request from the Government of Lebanon which felt itself threatened by externally inspired civil strife. These troops were sent to Lebanon under the Presidentʼs constitutional authority as Commander-in-Chief. President Eisenhower stated that United States forces had been sent to Lebanon “to protect American lives and by their presence there to encourage the Lebanese Government in defense of Lebanese sovereignty and integrity.”

It will be recalled that pursuant to President Eisenhowerʼs request the Congress had on March 9, 1957, passed a joint resolution to promote peace and stability in the Middle East which provided in part, “if the President determines the necessity thereof, the United States is prepared to use armed forces to assist any such nation or group of such nations requesting assistance against armed aggression from any country controlled by international communism:” (P.L. 85-7, 85th Congress). In sending United States troops to Lebanon, the President did not make use of this joint resolution since the Lebanon situation did not involve Communist armed aggression as contemplated by the resolution.

In the Lebanon situation, United States forces neither engaged in combat operations as in the Korean conflict nor in training or advisory functions as is the case today in Viet-Nam. Their mere presence in Lebanon had the desired effect of helping to restore order and tranquility there.

Q. No. 3. (Unclassified) Would it be appropriate under the Constitution for the President to submit to the Congress a resolution covering the situation in Viet-Nam which would be comparable to the Formosa Resolution of 19556 and the Middle East Resolution of 1957?

Answer: (Unclassified) As indicated in question 1 above the President has power under the Constitution to take the actions presently being carried on in Viet-Nam.

It is obviously desirable that the Congress understand the basis for Presidential actions of this character and fully support them. Traditionally these objectives have been achieved by consultation between officers of the Executive Branch and members and Committees of Congress having responsibility in the premises, particularly the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. In the present case the President has asked that the fullest and freest consultation with the Committee and the Congressional leadership be maintained. He has himself met with appropriate members of the Congress on several occasions to discuss the problems in Viet-Nam. The Secretary has frequently testified before this Committee on the same subject, and has discussed it informally on many occasions with the members of the Committee. The Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs with appropriate members of his staff are and have been available for the purpose of consultation.

On two occasions in the past, where it seemed possible that the President would wish to commit United States forces to combat operations, President Eisenhower decided to invite Congress to associate itself with his exercise of his constitutional functions as Commander-in-Chief, primarily in order to provide a convincing demonstration of United States unity on the issues there involved. We have not thought that such action has been called for to this point. However, should circumstances develop in which a formal expression of Congressional support seems desirable, the President undoubtedly would not hesitate to seek an appropriate resolution.

Q. No. 4. (Unclassified) To what extent are the actions by United States military personnel in South Viet-Nam considered to be combat actions?

Answer: (Unclassified) As the President said in his Press Conference on February 14, “We have not sent combat troops in the generally understood sense of the word.”7 The United States is assisting Vietnamese combat units with training, logistic, transportation and advisory personnel.

The nature of the activities in which United States military personnel are engaged in Viet-Nam is dictated by the very character of guerrilla war. Hostilities are not concentrated in any well-defined area; rather, fighting is likely to break out sporadically and without warning in any part of the country. The “front” is not fixed as in the classical situation; the front literally is everywhere. In these circumstances, as indicated in Question 1 above, the President has ordered our military personnel in Viet-Nam to fire back in self-defense if fired upon.

As noted above, United States military personnel in Viet-Nam are noncombatants. In the seven years since 1955 violence in Viet-Nam has claimed about 26,000 casualties. Of these, fifteen have been American personnel (four killed, ten wounded, one missing). Despite our increased activities in Viet-Nam, we would hope that these casualties can continue to be kept at a minimum.

Q. No. 5. (Unclassified) Is the action of the United States in Viet-Nam inconsistent with the agreement of July 1954 on the cessation of hostilities in Viet-Nam, having particular reference to Chapter III entitled “Ban on Introduction of Fresh Troops, Military Personnel, Arms and Munitions, Military Bases”? (End Unclassified)

Answer: (Confidential) The United States did not sign the 1954 Geneva Accords and is not a party thereto. At the time of conclusion of the Accords, Under Secretary of State Walter Bedell Smith stated that the United States “would view any renewal of the aggression in violation of the … agreements with grave concern and as seriously threatening international peace and security.” We have maintained the view expressed in General Smithʼs statement, and our present actions in Viet-Nam are fully in accord with that policy.

However, North Viet-Nam which is a party to the Accords has consistently violated the agreements by directing, assisting, supplying, and reinforcing guerrilla forces in South Viet-Nam and by illegal introduction into North Viet-Nam of military personnel and war materials.

International law recognizes the principle that a material breach of a treaty by one party entitles the other at least to withhold compliance with an equivalent, corresponding or related provision until the other party is prepared to observe its obligations. Both the United States and Viet-Nam have made it clear that if North Viet-Nam would comply with the provisions of the Geneva Accords, increased United States assistance would no longer be necessary. Legally, the actions of the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam in requesting and receiving additional assistance from the United States are fully consistent with the above principle.

Justification for the application of the principle of law outlined above gains force in the present context from the fact that actions being taken by the Government of Viet-Nam can be related to the requirements of legitimate self-defense necessitated by the breaches of the other party. (End Confidential)

Q. No. 6. (Unclassified) Section 503 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 authorizes the President to assist a friendly country by providing defense articles and by assigning military personnel “to perform duties of a noncombatant nature”. To what extent are the operations of United States Forces in Viet-Nam being paid for out of appropriations made pursuant to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961? (End Unclassified)

Answer: (Begin Confidential) As of March 1, 1962, fiscal year 1962 operations in Viet-Nam have been funded to the extent of $151.3 million from appropriations made pursuant to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and $49.6 million from Department of Defense appropriations. These figures are subject to adjustment by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) in accordance with the following guideline issued by the Secretary of Defense: “Under MAP financing procedures, reimbursement is made to the Military Service for materiel and/or services delivered or furnished to a recipient country against an approved and funded Military Assistance Program. On the other hand, where a Military Service has been assigned a U.S. military mission in a foreign country by the Secretary of Defense through the Joint Chiefs of Staff, all costs involved will be charged to the Military Service Appropriation.”

Salaries of all military personnel are, of course, funded from their Service appropriations and are not included in the above estimates. (End Confidential)

Q. No. 7. (Unclassified) What are the plans of this Administration, if any, to bring the South Viet-Nam issues before the United Nations?

Answer: (Confidential) The Administration has no present plans to bring the Viet-Nam situation before the United Nations Security Council or General Assembly for debate or action. However, Viet-Namʼs case has been officially brought to the attention of the United Nations and its members. The State Department paper on Viet-Nam entitled “A Threat to the Peace” was transmitted to the Secretary General and all members on December 8, 1961. The Government of the Republic of Viet-Namʼs own presentation of the facts has been made known to the members. The Secretary General, at the request of the Australian Delegation, circulated to all United Nations members copies of Vietnamese Notes to the International Control Commission on January 10, 1962. (End Confidential)

Q. No. 8. (Unclassified) What do we consider to be our obligation to SEATO in regard to supplying military aid and economic aid to South Viet-Nam?

Answer: (Confidential) Under Article IV (1) of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and the Protocol to the Treaty, the United States is committed, in the event of Communist aggression by means of armed attack against the Republic of Viet-Nam, to act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes. In the case of a threat to Viet-Nam other than armed attack, the parties to the Treaty have agreed under Article IV (2) to consult in order to agree on measures which should be taken for the common defense. Under Article IV (3) of the Treaty, no action can be taken on the territory of Viet-Nam except at the invitation or with the consent of the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam. There has been no request by Viet-Nam for SEATO action.

There is, of course, nothing in the Treaty which prevents the United States from taking action bilaterally with the Republic of Viet-Nam outside the framework of the Treaty.

Several years before the creation of SEATO, the United States began to supply military assistance (1950-TIAS 2447) and Economic Aid (1951-TIAS 2346). A good working relationship for dealing with the fast-moving complexities of a guerrilla war has been established.

We have consulted regularly in the SEATO Council Representatives with our Treaty partners on the situation in Viet-Nam. We have informed them of our efforts there and have urged them to join in helping Viet-Nam. A majority of the members are doing so. (End Confidential)

Q. No. 9. (Unclassified) What is the Administrationʼs answer to the cumulating evidence that the Government of Viet-Nam is not an effective government, that it is a corrupt government, and that it is a government that will probably fall at some time in the absence of U.S. support? (End Unclassified)

Answer: (Begin Secret) The effectiveness of the Vietnamese Government can only be judged against its circumstances. It is a new country emerging from fifteen years of war and eighty years of colonial control. During half its six years of existence it has fought off the threat of Communist conquest. Its political policy has been to lay the infrastructure of democracy” through education, transportation and communication. Despite the war the number of children in Vietnamese elementary schools has grown in five years to 1,100,000, an increase of 272%, and a far better record than that of Communist North Viet-Nam. The Government of Viet-Nam has also made a proud record in expanding transportation, communication and health services. Its per capita food production and per capita gross national product are growing and are both higher than in North Viet-Nam. This is a good indication that the Government of free Viet-Nam with U.S. help has made more effective progress than has North Viet-Nam under Communist control. Statistical evidence carefully compiled from the best sources available is enclosed.8

On the other hand Government effectiveness in South Viet-Nam has been hampered by over-centralization, overlapping agencies and insufficient understanding between the governing and the governed. While this is partly due to the lack of competent administrators, it is also true that a greater number of competent administrators could have been developed if they had been given more responsibility and authority.

Another fact which has hampered the effectiveness of the Government of Viet-Nam is that President Diem does not possess the magnetic qualities needed to rally his people enthusiastically to his Governmentʼs programs.

There is evidence of corruption in the Government of Viet-Nam. There is no evidence of corruption on the part of President Diem and he has carried on an extensive and well-publicized campaign to punish corrupt officials. Several have been publicly tried and punished.

Some official corruption is endemic in Southeast Asian countries. The amount of corruption in Viet-Nam does not appear to be greater than in neighboring countries. However, it has damaged the prestige of the Government of Viet-Nam because exaggerated stories of official corruption are widely believed. We have checked these stories carefully and find no evidence for many of them. However, the Government of Viet-Nam has not done an effective job setting the record straight with its own people.

Two attempts have been made against President Diem. Both were military in origin and seem to have been motivated by the feeling that the government was not giving them the authority to press on vigorously with the anti-Communist struggle. The attempts failed. President Diem is clearly in control as the legitimate and elected head of the government. No other group has any appreciable degree of popular support. In the circumstances of war and tension existing in Viet-Nam, some discontent must be expected. Also the trouble lies partly with Diemʼs inability to project adequately his own many good qualities of leadership to his people. (End Secret)

Q. No. 10. (Unclassified) What actions has President Diem taken in regard to the 9 points for reform which he and Ambassador Nolting agreed to in December?9

Answer: (Unclassified) Varying progress has been made on all the points on which President Diem and Ambassador Nolting reached agreement in early December. Since their understanding intimately affects the interests of both governments and the prosecution of Viet-Namʼs defense effort, it cannot be spelled out in detail.

However, the following has clearly emerged in the intervening three months: 1. There is a much closer and more effective working relationship between the United States Government and the Government of Viet-Nam.

2. American military advisers have been accepted and listened to in a variety of roles.

3. The Vietnamese National Internal Security Council (War Cabinet) has met more frequently and is playing a somewhat greater role.

4. There has been increased freedom of debate in the National Assembly.

5. The military command structure has been strengthened, but considerable improvement is still needed.

6. U.S. and Vietnamese officials have embarked on joint studies of local conditions.

7. Civic action and plans for village and hamlet defense are being made. Further coordination and better implementation are needed.

8. Provincial Councils are being created. It is too soon to judge their usefulness.

9. There have been increases in military salaries and benefits.

10. A wide range of sound measures have put the economy on a sounder basis.

11. A National Economic Council has been formed and has commenced examination of government development plans. Its activities will be slow and cautious.

12. The effectiveness of military intelligence has been greatly increased.

13. Flood relief and rehabilitation have been carried out with good effect.

14. The President has increased his travels to the provinces.

15. Public information has definitely improved.

Q. No. 11. (Unclassified) Do the Attorney Generalʼs remarks10 at the Saigon Airport represent the policy of the Administration? Were they cleared by the President or the Department of State in advance?

Answer: (Unclassified) The Attorney General received intensive briefings on the situation in Viet-Nam before his departure for the Far East. He made a stop in Viet-Nam at the Saigon Airport only for purposes of refueling his aircraft. His remarks there were informal and consisted largely of answers to questions from the press. In these circumstances there was no formal clearance of his statements. However, his remarks reflect the policy of the Administration toward Viet-Nam.

Q. No. 12. (Unclassified) To what extent are our allies and other non-Communist states contributing to and supporting the combined U.S.-Vietnamese effort to preserve the independence of the Republic of Viet-Nam?

Answer: (Unclassified) Since it became independent Japan, France, Germany and Australia have made available to Viet-Nam various forms of aid whose total value is about $100 million. In addition there have been other programs involving students, teachers, technicians, commodities and equipment from these countries as well as from Canada, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, China, Malaya, India, FAO, WHO, ILO, ICAO, UNESCO and UNTAO.

The United States is, moreover, presently trying to stimulate expanded Free World aid to Viet-Nam as evidence of financial and political solidarity with Viet-Nam in its struggle.

Q. No. 13. (Unclassified) What precisely is the present attitude of the Indian Government toward the conflict in Viet-Nam? Heretofore, India has appeared to observe a strict and uncritically neutral role in its function as Chairman of the International Control Commission for Viet-Nam. I would like to know whether this continues to be the case.

Answer: (Unclassified) India, as Chairman of the International Control Commission for Viet-Nam, has, according to its lights, sought to play an impartial role dealing with the problems of Viet-Nam as they relate to the Geneva Accords of 1954. (End Unclassified)

Q. No. 14. (Unclassified) What is our intelligence estimate of the possibility that the Communist bloc will escalate the conflict in Viet-Nam above the level of subversion and guerrilla warfare? (End Unclassified)

Answer: (Secret) The Communist objective remains that of eliminating United States influence and presence from Viet-Nam and of replacing it by Communism. They have so far maintained coordination within the Communist bloc in their attempts to attain this objective. While the tempo of Viet Cong activity is likely to increase in Viet-Nam, there seems little prospect at present that the pattern of this activity will change quickly and drastically.

In looking further it must be remembered that Hanoi and Peking are more militantly revolutionary than Russia and consider their interests to be more directly involved in Viet-Nam than Russiaʼs.

If Viet-Namʼs efforts to defend itself are more successful, Hanoi, with military forces of 300,000 available, will be strongly tempted to increase the strength of its attacks. To Hanoi the struggle is at least as much a struggle for national reunification as an ideological struggle. It has largely committed its prestige to this struggle.

However, the following factors are likely to deter an overt escalation by North Viet-Nam in a situation where South Viet-Nam is defending itself with increasing success: 1. Hanoi would not welcome the presence of a large number of Chinese Communist troops in North Viet-Nam. China is the traditional enemy. North Viet-Nam does not want to become another Chinese sphere of influence.

2. North Viet-Nam fears Free World retaliation.

3. Hanoi desires to retain some latitude of action by playing off Moscow and Peking.

4. Moscow might increase its military aid to Hanoi, but would probably prefer to see a conference on Viet-Nam rather than a full scale war m Viet-Nam, an area which Russia probably does not consider vital to its interests.

5. There appears to be some Communist belief, particularly in Moscow, that even if South Viet-Nam is able to resist temporarily, it will, in the long run, fall to Communism.

If Viet Cong success increases, the present guerrilla struggle will be likely to move up the scale, in the pattern of Communist wars of “national liberation”, towards open war involving increasingly large troop formations. A “liberated” area and “liberation government” would probably be established. However, the formation of a “liberation government” would not be an automatic signal for Communist military escalation.

It appears more likely that the present pattern, a long, wearing struggle, will continue. The South Vietnamese effort, with U.S. support is designed to meet this challenge. Time is not necessarily on the side of the guerrilla, as shown in Greece, the Philippines and Malaya. The Viet Cong probably must escalate their guerrilla war to open war in order to conquer the country. If they should decide to escalate to larger, open formations, it will be a particularly dangerous time for them. On the other hand continuation of present guerrilla destruction risks angering the peasant without winning the war. Since Communist propaganda carries limited conviction in Viet-Nam, where so many have already lived under their domination, the Viet Cong guerrillas must operate through fear and coercion as well as through propaganda and persuasion to obtain men and food. The South Vietnamese counter-guerrilla strategy seeks to save the peasant, conserve his property and deprive the Viet Cong of their needs so that they will have to take increasingly cruel measures to obtain food, arms and men. (End Secret)

Q. No. 15. (Unclassified) I find myself unclear as to the Soviet Unionʼs attitude toward and role in the Viet-Nam conflict. I would like an assessment of that question. More specifically, I would like to know whether Russian and Czech arms are being made available to the Viet Cong-if so, whether the levels of such assistance are appreciable or token.

Answer: (Begin Secret) As indicated above the Soviet Union for the present probably desires to avoid an enlargement of the struggle in Viet-Nam to the point which would increase the likelihood of a major war. If, however, South Viet-Namʼs defensive efforts become more successful, the USSR might feel constrained to redress the balance by increased aid to North Viet-Nam in order to reduce the likelihood of a large scale Chinese Communist intervention. Moscow cannot appear to oppose Communist expansion in underdeveloped areas.

While the Soviet attitude towards Viet-Nam will be largely influenced by developments in Laos, as well as by its own relations with Communist China and by developments on disarmament and in Berlin, it seems probable that at present Moscow does not want any major escalation in Viet-Nam. This attitude will not prevent the continuation of Russian and Communist bloc military aid to North Viet-Nam.

Communist bloc military aid to North Viet-Nam has been large and effective. However, the Viet Cong have sought to avoid the use of Communist manufactured arms in South Viet-Nam. (End Secret)

Q. No. 16. (Unclassified) If President Diem should depart the political scene—either as a result of a military coup such as was attempted in November 1960, or otherwise—are there elements, military or civilian, which could cope effectively with the situation, in our judgment?

Answer: (Unclassified) We believe there are. We are following this most sensitive subject very closely. (End Unclassified)

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.51K/2-2162. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but a copy of a similar letter that was not sent is attached, listing Wood as the drafter with clearances by Aldrich and Vance (DOD) as well as Oakley, Chayes, Rice, Cottrell, and Sarris in the Department of State. The source text lists as attachments: (1) Questions and Answers on Vietnam; (2) Letter to [from] Senator Morse, (3) Letter from President Kennedy to President Diem; and (4) “The Economics of North and South Vietnam.” Only the first two are attached and only the first is printed. The letter from Senator Morse, February 21, submitted additional questions to Harriman, which are included in the attached Questions and Answers.

2 The transcript of the Executive Session at which Harriman testified on February 20, is in National Archives, RG 46, SFRC Files.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 P.L. 87-195, September 4, 1961; 75 Stat. 424. These and subsequent ellipses are in the source text.

5 Not attached to the source text, but presumably a reference to Kennedyʼs letter of December 14; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 322.

6 See American Foreign Policy, 1950-1955: Basic Documents, vol. II, p. 2486.

7 See footnote 3, Document 68.

8 Not attached to the source text.

9 The Joint Memorandum of Understanding, December 4, 1961, was transmitted to the Department in telegram 756 from Saigon, December 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/12-461)

10 During his tour of Asia, Attorney General Robert Kennedy stopped in Saigon for about an hour while his plane was refueled. In response to a question from a newsman, he made a statement to the effect that the United States was in South Vietnam to win.

109. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 109. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, March 15, 1962.

Dear Alexis: The Department of Defense has completed a review of the required force structure and strengths for the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF), Civil Guard (CG) and Self Defense Corps (SDC) through 1964. Our analysis included consideration of the following factors: 1. The build-up of Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam.

2. The expansion of Communist control in Laos.

3. The progress of the GVN in planning for and conducting security operations.

4. The capability of the GVN to train, maintain and effectively utilize their forces.

5. The need for the GVN to husband its manpower resources carefully.

6. The force structure best reconciling the requirements of coordinated and phased counter-insurgency operations with available leadership; and

7. The requirement for long range planning for South Vietnam.

From our analysis we conclude that MAP support should be authorized for the FY 62 and FY 63 GVN force levels shown below; and that the FY 64 GVN force levels shown below should be approved for MAP planning purposes: Currently Authorized FY 62 FY 63 FY 64

RVNAF 205,000 206,600 215,000 225,000

CG 68,000 72,000 81,000 90,000

SDC 49,200 65,000 80,000 80,000

Totals 322,200 343,600 376,000 395,000

The estimated additional MAP costs of the above increases, from presently approved force levels to the levels proposed for end FY 63, are prorated as $11.6 million for FY 1962 and $21.7 million for FY 1963.

It is anticipated that some MAP support may also be required later for selected paramilitary local defense groups. Modest support may be required to prepare selected paramilitary forces for use in support of the plans developed for the campaign in South Vietnam. Our estimates of the extent and duration of required MAP support for forces of this nature are not yet firm. It will depend on the role that these groups accept in support of refined counter-insurgency plans. We now envision that as clearing actions are initiated in the areas where these groups operate, they might be integrated into the CG or SDC for support of holding operations.

The Department of Defense recommends prompt approval of support of the above force levels, to insure most timely availability of trained and effective operational forces considered essential for attainment of U. S. objectives in South Vietnam. As you know, Ambassador Nolting and the Country Team concur in support of these force levels.

Sincerely yours,

Bill

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-1562. Top Secret.

110. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 110. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 15, 1962, 7 p.m.

1180. General Harkins and I called on President Diem afternoon March 12 at his request. In course of two hour meeting, primarily devoted to Diemʼs views re military situation in central highlands and central coastal plain, General Harkins asked when limitations on armament of VNAF planes would be lifted (as of that time our information was that they were still limited to 20-mm cannon, except in I corps area). Diem indicated that he was not prepared to permit planes to carry bombs until system of “control” had been devised which would ensure that pilots hit targets they were supposed to. He did not specify what sort of control might accomplish this. Although not willing to permit planes to carry bombs which could “destroy buildings”, Diem indicated that he might be prepared to permit them to carry rockets and napalm. In pointing out dangers of permitting planes to carry bombs, Diem remarked that even if an irresponsible pilot were shot down, plane with bombs aboard might crash anywhere in Saigon “even on foreign Embassy”.

General Harkins and I expressed concern over continuation of restrictions, emphasizing not only military handicaps but awkward position in which United States Government was placed. US role in Viet Nam was to assist GVN to win its war; it was not a US war, undeclared as some press releases indicate or otherwise. Restrictions on VNAF tended to undercut this position. Diem did not reply directly.

Following day, March 13, I raised matter with Thuan and Harkins with Generals Ty and Khanh of joint general staff, along same lines we had taken with Diem. Thuan said that restrictions were being lifted immediately except on 250 pound and 500 pound bombs. Planes would, however, be allowed to carry rockets, napalm and anti-personnel bombs, which Thuan said was only type of bomb needed in “war of this kind”. (He telephoned March 14 to say that he had just signed order to this effect.) General Harkins was informed by Ty and Khanh that background investigation of pilots was continuing but was expected to be completed by about April 1. They also said that “controls” envisaged were radar and definitive flight plans.

Harkins informed by Khanh today that Thuanʼs order had been received and put into effect, i.e., VNAF planes now authorized carry 20-mm., rockets, napalm and anti-personnel bombs.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-1562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and Manila for Ambassador Nolting. A memorandum recording the conversation with President Diem is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 361.1, Chief Executive—Vietnam.

111. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 111. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 16, 1962—7 p.m.

1185. Deptel 1085; Embtel 1155.2 I discussed provincial surveys with Thuan March 13 stressing importance getting further surveys under way. As it was my understanding that GVN desires proceed next with remaining seven provinces covered by Delta (Thompson) plan,3 suggested desirability survey teams using that plan as framework for their investigations, seeking develop information which would be useful in its implementation. I thought that in order to accomplish this, it might be necessary to extend period devoted to surveys to about one week per province. Thuan agreed with these suggestions but was not at that time prepared to set date for start-up of next surveys or to name GVN representatives. It was clear from his remarks that he expects to have trouble finding qualified people who can be spared full time for this work. He did say that he had already discussed recommendations of first surveys with President Diem and planned to have further discussion next day with him with view to getting recommendations implemented.

We will continue to press GVN to get further surveys under way. It is our hope that Thuanʼs informal agreement to key surveys to Delta Plan will permit expansion into political, economic and social areas, without risks of rejection or at least delay which would be involved in proposing explicitly that terms of reference of surveys be changed with reference points raised Deptel 1085: (1) Every effort will be made to gear surveys to needs Delta Plan. MACV has developed new checklist and we will seek to have surveys concentrate on those provinces slated for early clearing and holding operations. Results of surveys will also be combined with large slides specific information being developed through MAAG and CAS channels.

(2) Effort will be made to reach village level in surveys. Do not believe practicable, however, have surveys proceed on village-by-village basis. This would not only involve proposing change in terms of reference (with risks indicated above) but would, we estimate, require extension of time spent in each province to two or three weeks, with resulting heavy drain scarce GVN manpower, maximum disruption normal provincial administration, and increased security risks. Moreover, much detailed information for planning purposes can be and is being developed in other ways, for example, through CAS/CIO surveys of provincial NPSS units already in progress

(3) Believe important value first set surveys was catalogue intelligence and military shortcomings that could be immediately corrected, plus on-the-spot remedial action by officials concerned. Wish continue stress this approach, while at same time using surveys to generate information for implementation outline plan for counterinsurgency. Believe surveys should fill out and provide check on information obtained from GVN for planning purposes, but do not believe we should make them sole instrument for developing such information.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-1662. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Documents 101 and 100, respectively.

3 See Document 51.

112. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President (Johnson) 112. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President (Johnson)1

Washington, March 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Situation in South Viet Nam

The Communist rebels continue their attacks with company and battalion-sized units, in contrast to much smaller groups of men formerly employed. Attacks are made against lines of communication and isolated guard posts. The brunt of the attack therefore is directed against the civil defense forces rather than against the principal units of the regular armed forces.

The propaganda barrage against United States assistance to South Viet Nam continues to increase and the rebels are receiving increased logistic support from North Viet Nam. Propaganda broadcasts to South Viet Nam have reached an all time high and emanate from many sources both within and without South Viet Nam.

. . . . . . .

The U.S. program in South Viet Nam still has not reversed the level nor intensity of Viet Cong operations. While I have not talked with Mr. McNamara personally on the subject, I am familiar with the substance of his meetings with the commanders in the Pacific. Further, discussions with General Taylorʼs office and with representatives from the Joint Chiefs' staff have all so far failed to produce an estimate as to when the trend might be reversed.

One discussion on March 14 produced a rather interesting thesis that a decisive victory could never be achieved in South Viet Nam and that a Korea-style truce within that country would be the most that could be expected.2 One basis for this thesis is the policy of dealing, in effect, with each nation in Southeast Asia separately and in differing contexts. The Communists therefore take advantage of our truce efforts in Laos to supply Viet Cong forces in South Viet Nam, even utilizing the sanctuary of Cambodia. Soviet aircraft continue to operate with impunity in this effort. Suggestions have been made that actions be taken against these operations, but State rejects them as “aggressive” and “provocative”. The situation is analogous to that in Korea where Communist forces were supplied from bases just across the Yalu. Under these circumstances and restrictions our efforts in South east Asia will at most be no more conclusive than those in Korea. The costs will probably be comparable, and the Presidentʼs estimate of a ten-year effort is realistic.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security Files, Memos from Colonel Burris. Secret.

2 No record of any meeting on March 14 has been found.

113. Decree by the President of the Republic of Vietnam 113. Decree by the President of the Republic of Vietnam1

Saigon, March 16, 1962.

No. 1/QP

SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS ON THE PLAN TO RESTORE SECURITY IN THE THIRD TACTICAL ZONE

Article 1.

Within the framework of national pacification, a priority plan is herewith established to restore security in the Third Tactical Zone. The purpose of this Special Instruction is to determine the basic principles and necessary procedures to carry out the plan. This Instruction is divided into two parts: 1. General Section

2. Execution of the Plan

PART 1

General

Article 2. Over-all Concepts.

The Viet Cong have chosen rural areas for their important activities. They have oppressed the spirit of the people in order to destroy the lower echelons of government authority, exploited news, sources of supply, manpower, and resources in order to build up their strength in their destructive war. The reliance of the Viet Cong on rural people is obvious.

Cut each connecting link between the Viet Cong and the people, and the Viet Cong will naturally be isolated and easily crushed. As for the people, once they are able to escape the coercion of the Viet Cong, their protection will become more effective. Security and the National Law will be guaranteed, and the Governmentʼs authority will be strengthened in every village and hamlet. Order will be restored, the people will believe firmly in the government, and will honestly cooperate with the authorities to eradicate Communism.

The Plan to Restore Security in the Third Tactical Zone aims at the vital objective of eliminating Viet Cong influence among rural people.

Article 3. Objectives of the Plan.

In order to achieve this vital purpose, the Plan aims at the realization of the following objectives: (a) Control, protect, and fight for the people, most of all rural people;

(b) Gather all information essential to destroy the organs the Viet Cong have placed among the people;

(c) Isolate armed Viet Cong elements to force them away from the peopleʼs side;

(d) Establish and maintain “White” zones, i.e., zones where Viet Cong influence has been completely eliminated.

Article 4. Priority Areas.

The national resources at present are not sufficient to carry out the plan at once in all areas of the country, or to provide all the means.

For this reason, in the initial period the following areas have been chosen as first priority because they are densely populated, have centralized administrative organs, a prosperous economy, and are relatively secure: a) All of Vinh Long province;

b) Vinh Binh province (except the southeastern portion: Tra Cu, Cau Ngang, and Long Toan districts);

c) Kien Hoa province (except the southeastern portion: Thanh Phu, Ba Tri, Binh Dai districts);

d) Dinh Tuong province (except for the portion north of the road from the My Thuan ferry to Cai Lay, along the Thuong Mai canal to Thu Thua);

e) Long An province (except for the portion west of Thu Thua, along the Vam Co river north of Duc Hoa to the Part between the Vam Co river and the road from Duc Hoa to Tay Ninh);

f) Tay Ninh province (the part south of Go Dau Ha and east of the Vam Co river);

g) Binh Duong Province (except the part north of Ben Cat);

h) Phuoc Thanh province (that part west of Interprovincial Route 15 from Phu Giao to Tan Uyen);

i) Bien Hoa province (that part south from Ho Nai to Long Thanh along National Route 15, except for Quang Xuyen and Cao Gio districts);

j) Phuoc Tuy province (that part west of National Route 15 from Bien Hoa to Phuoc Le, then along Interprovincial Route 23 to Xuyen Moc).

Priorities for remaining areas in the provinces of the Southern Region of Viet-Nam will be determined later, according to the progress of the plan.

PART 2

Execution of the Plan

Article 5. Establishment of a Security System.

In the area granted priority, the Plan will establish a firm security system, composed of strategic hamlets and fighting hamlets. Strategic hamlets will be built in places where popular security is adequate. Fighting hamlets will be built in areas that still suffer Viet Cong pressure and control, or in areas permanently threatened by important Viet Cong troops.

The security system must be built on a stable foundation and in depth, in order that the strategic and fighting hamlets support one another. For this reason, isolated hamlets or groups of hamlets which the enemy could exploit or which would be unprotected close to the frontier will not be established.

On the provincial level, the Province Chief must put forth a plan for building a system of strategic and fighting hamlets. Only in this situation may isolated hamlets be built during the brief wading period unh1 intermediate hamlets are constructed to complete the connected system.

On the interprovincial level, the Province Chiefs must coordinate the plan for building a security system in their own provinces with that of neighboring provinces, in order that the interprovincial security system is not left uncovered in border areas

Article 6. Defense of the Security System.

During the period in which the security system is being built, the Army shall carry out operations to prevent Viet Cong units from being free to interfere in the execution of the Plan. Intelligence and information agencies shall make every effort to assure that the Plan obtains satisfactory results.

In the defense of the hamlets the large part of the work will be given to the Self Defense Corps, with the Republican Youth contributing strength within the framework of the SDC organization. The Civil Guard will have responsibility for providing close mobile support. However, during the period when fighting hamlets are being built in areas heavily infiltrated by the Viet Cong, the Civil Guard may be temporarily used to replace the SDC in the direct defense of hamlets, unti1 such time as reliable and capable SDC units can be raised.

The Army shall be ready to intervene when the hamlets are heavily attacked by the Viet Cong.

Article 7. Control of the Security System.

Control of the population in the security system must be complete, to cut off any source of contact with the Viet Cong. Therefore, a number of control measures must be taken, to wit: 1) Urgent distribution of plastic identity cards to the entire population in the area where the security system is being established. The inhabitants of each house will be recorded and photographed' a copy going to each house along with the identity card number. Copies will also go to the district and province headquarters.

2) Establishment of regular control points along inland waterways, and conduct of surprise patrols in neighboring areas.

3) Enforcement of curfew orders on a few waterways in the area of fighting hamlets and other areas, if necessary. Defense forces may fire at sight on anyone breaking the curfew.

4) Establish forbidden zones in dense, jungle, and marshy regions, etc. . . . .2 Permit defense forces to fire at sight on any element penetrating this area.

5) Control of the transportation of paddy, foodstuffs, and articles of a military nature. If it is deemed necessary, transportation by convoy will be enforced, and after the harvest rice will be bought by the Government and collected in a secure place, and will be rationed to consumers.

Article 8. The Fight for the People in the Security System.

In order to fight for the support of the people, the following concrete policy must be carried out: 1) Military and Government cadres must have correct behavior when communicating daily with the people and in every situation. Punitive measures against a village or hamlet will never be taken without the approval of the National Security Council, even if they are legitimate. Great care must be exercised when using bombers or artillery in populated areas, to avoid injuring or killing law-abiding citizens.

2) The people must be kept thoroughly informed about the details and purpose of the control measures which they must follow. Once order and security in the area have been re-established, control measures must immediately be eased. In the event that people must be moved to regrouped hamlets, they must also be given every assistance, and at the same time should be informed of the benefits they will receive as a result of the Plan.

3) According to the progress made, when a security system has been firmly consolidated and Viet Cong influence has been eliminated in a part of the area, activities on the social and economic side must be begun immediately to improve the life of the people.

Article 9. Distribution of Duties.

The tasks of the civil and military authorities in the execution of the Plan are distributed as follows: 1. Civilian a) Administrative —build strategic and fighting hamlets;

—organize administration in the villages and hamlets;

—provide control measures;

—effect social and economic reforms. Emphasize especially agricultural, health, and education, and public facilities.

b) Self Defense Corps —direct protection of strategic and fighting hamlets;

—patrol in neighboring areas;

—gather information leading to Viet Cong organs, communications, or supplies;

—eliminate armed Viet Cong cadres or arrest elements working for them;

—distribute leaflets, information, and propaganda documents.

c) Civil Guard —mobile patrolling outside the hamlet, particularly along the perimeter of populated areas and along rivers and canals;

—rescue SDC forts that are attacked

—take over the defense of fighting hamlets in places where SDC are lacking or not adequate;

—enforce the control regulations stated above.

2) Military a) Army —in the initial period, carry out sweeping and probing actions and attacks on bases and assembly areas of main Viet Cong forces;

—patrol outside populated areas, and prevent coordinated attacks and concentrations of the enemy;

—assist fighting hamlets in areas controlled by the Viet Cong, intervene it these hamlets are surrounded;

—apply control measures, particularly the curfew and forbidden zones.

As the security system is gradually stabilized, regular army units will be relieved of their static duties.

Ranger units will be withdrawn on a priority basis from populated areas when Civil Guard units arrive to replace them. Army units that must remain will be reorganized for long operations outside of populated areas, primarily in the enemy zone in the Thirty-First Tactical Zone.

b) Air Force —reinforce the mobile attack capability of regular Army and Civil Guard units, by airlift in areas where communications are difficult or nonexistent;

—perform reconnaissance and communications;

—seek targets to attack;

—evacuate wounded, military and civilian.

c) Navy —prevent the Viet Cong from infiltrating equipment, food, arms, and personnel by sea;

—coordinate closely with Civil Guard river patrol units to prevent Viet Cong movement by water along the sea coast and river estuaries;

—supply the means of rapid transportation of personnel and equipment in coastal areas;

—support operations in coastal areas and along the major channels of the Mekong.

Article 10. Responsibility for Executing the Plan.

The Secretary of State at the Presidency, Assistant for National Defense, Charged with Security, shall accept responsibility before the President for the general execution of the Plan.

As for the Strategic Hamlet Program, the Secretary of State for the Interior is the Secretary General of the Central Committee, still responsible for the over-all plan.

Article 11. Special Stipulations.

The Viet Cong will naturally react strongly to prevent the execution of the Plan, and will concentrate all their force to seek to destroy the Governmentʼs efforts, despite some failure at the beginning.

Thus, when establishing the security system, the provincial authorities must examine the situation carefully and select the proper time to execute the Plan, i.e., when there are sufficient troops to halt every destructive Communist plot, or encourage the population to oppose the enemy. The more the security system is strengthened, the more will the Viet Cong seek to attack in strength, and at that time the Army will be ready to exterminate the enemy when he concentrates or attacks fighting hamlets.

Finally, the determination of priority zones for establishing a security system does not mean that the Viet Cong are free to control other areas. such as the First or Second Tactical Zone. On the contrary, in these Zones civil and military authorities as well as popular anti-Communist organizations must be warned to face the enemy reaction in timely fashion.

Ngo Dinh Diem3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-1662. Secret. Transmitted as enclosure 1 to despatch 431 from Saigon, April 16, which described some of the changes made in the Delta Plan from the time Thompson originally submitted it until its final approval by Diem. For original plan, see Document 51. Also enclosed with the despatch was a decree of March 23 that appointed Hoang Van Lac as Special Commissioner responsible for carrying out the Delta Plan.

2 Ellipsis in the source text.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

114. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 114. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, March 31, 1962.

SUBJECT

(1) Report on Meeting with General Harkins, Directed by Higher Authority2

(2) Doubts on Operation Sunrise

As directed by higher authority, I met with General Harkins in Saigon on 17 March 1962. After about an hourʼs conversation, we were joined by Ambassador Nolting.

General Harkins gave me a rundown on the inspection tours that he has been conducting since arriving in Saigon. On the whole he feels encouraged. He finds the troops are well-trained, energetic, and vigorous fighters.

He reported particularly on some newly organized strategic villages in central South Viet-Nam.3 The Viet Cong had attacked one of these villages just the night before, and the Self-Defense Corps had successfully repelled them. The next morning reinforcements were brought up and the Viet Cong suffered heavy casualties.

In discussing our general approach in South Viet-Nam, I stressed to both General Harkins and Ambassador Nolting that the paper entitled A Strategic Concept for South Viet-Nam4 was written hastily after only a very short time on the ground; that no one felt that it was the last word on the subject; and that any comments, criticisms, or suggestions that they would have would be most welcome. General Harkins said that for his part he felt that the general approach was sound and that his impression was that the South Vietnamese Government and the people in the American Missions were in substantial agreement with this approach. On the specific recommendations for assigning U.S. personnel to civic action teams and other tasks at the village level, Ambassador Nolting with General Harkins' concurrence suggested that we should not approach President Diem with a formal proposal. Rather, we should recommend the assignment of individual Americans to civic action teams and other tasks at the village level only as specific needs arose. For my part I said that I thought that this was by far the best approach. Both Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins went on to say, though, the assignment of American personnel to civic action teams and village level tasks was necessary and desirable and that the numbers needed were very close to those estimated in the report.

At the time of our meeting, President Diem had not yet signed the strategic village plan prepared by Mr. Thompson.5 The delay was apparently occasioned not by any reluctance concerning the plan itself but by doubts as to who among the Vietnamese would be in charge of it.

The Deputy Chief of Mission was concerned that Brother Nhu, who is enthusiastic about the strategic village approach, might attempt to apply it simultaneously all over the country rather than systematically by phases. Ambassador Nolting, however, has talked with Brother Nhu about this specific question and has gotten some assurances that Nhu is aware of the danger of a blanket approach. Ambassador Nolting feels that it would be most unwise to raise with President Diem any question about Brother Nhu at this time.

Operation Sunrise

I asked about Operation Sunrise, which calls for building a belt of strategic villages in Binh Duong Province along the road through Ben Cat.6 This province is flanked by areas of very heavy concentrations of regular Viet Cong units, in Zone D on the one side and Tay Ninh on the other, and is a major route for Viet Cong supplies and troop movements. I said that the strategic village concept called for building zones of such villages beginning with the less dangerous areas and then fanning outwards, and that my fear was that the Viet Cong would try to make an example of these villages and so discredit the Strategic Village concept throughout South Viet-Nam.

General Harkins said that he, too, was very disturbed about Operation Sunrise. He feared that the troops guarding these very exposed villages would be called away to meet some other threat, giving the Viet Cong precisely the opportunity they seek. Both General Harkins and Ambassador Nolting were pressing Diem to cancel this operation, but they were handicapped by the fact that it was the MAAG that originally urged it and especially since the MAAG had previously urged the Zone D operation and then abandoned it. General Harkins said he could only hope that these villages could in fact be protected until the phased plan had begun to work.

Roger Hilsman7

1 Source: Department of State, INR Files: Lot 75 D 378, SV-236, 12 Delta Plan. Secret.

2 “Higher Authority” refers to President Kennedy.

3 The value of the strategic village approach is also illustrated by two recent cables. The first is an intelligence report indicating that the arming of a very few villages in the Montagnard District along the infiltration routes has forced the infiltrating Viet Cong to change their routes drastically. The second illustrates the particular importance of village radios. A team distributing radios bumped into a Viet Cong unit, which withdrew towards a village equipped with a radio just 24 hours earlier. Alerted by their newly acquired radio, the village Self Defense Corps intercepted the Viet Cong in a highly successful ambush. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 Document 42.

5 President Diem signed the plan (Document 113) on March 16, although U.S. representatives did not learn of the signing until March 19.

6 See Document 103.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

115. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) 115. Memorandum for the Record by the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman)1

Saigon?, March 19, 1962.

I find that I am a little uneasy about the way things are going in South Viet-Nam

. . . . . . .

Secondly, Iʼm uneasy about the tendency in Washington to attempt to keep the farm gate operations secret. I think it is an impossibility; there are just too many Americans and Vietnamese involved in this particular operation in South Viet-Nam and I think that the solution lies not in trying to keep it hidden but in to using farm gate correctly.

On this latter point, it is perfectly clear that farm gate is still being used on what they call “Interdiction” roles; that is, striking at targets revealed by South Vietnamese intelligence in places where the GVN does not have access. A General Jabloski (whom I used to know at West Point) related the following to Fritz Nolting:

On several occasions the Viet Cong, after an air strike, have removed their own dead and then laid out in the middle of the street the women and children killed by our air strikes, so that the villagers on resuming would find only women and children dead rather than Viet Cong.

Among the Americans in South Viet-Nam, according to Nolting, however, there are growing doubts about the utility of farm gate used in this “interdiction” role as opposed to close ground support of units actually in contact with the Viet Cong. However, Diem and the South Vietnamese think it is great stuff and are continually calling for strikes on the basis of the flimsiest kind of intelligence. Our joint air control center has been screening these very carefully but there is still a very large amount of what cannot help but be indiscriminate bombing. The whole business could blow up in any number of horrendous ways.

I would like all of you to give some thought to this and how we might intervene either at the White House with Bobby Kennedy or in some other way.

Roger Hilsman2

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries: Vietnam, 3/1/62-7/28/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Allan Evans, Thomas L. Hughes, and Joseph W. Scott, all of INR.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

116. Letter From the Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs (Heavner) to the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) 116. Letter From the Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs (Heavner) to the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood)1

Saigon, March 19, 1962.

Dear Ben: You will no doubt get a copy of the Hickey-Donnell report2 in due time. I think, however, that you may be interested now in some of the things they said Friday3 in a debriefing session at MAAG. Their work is not finished, so some of the ideas may be changed by future observations as well as by being filtered through Heavner.

The outstanding conclusion seemed to be that strategic hamlets do make for better security, that relocation of the people in strategic hamlets is feasible in general, but that the GVN is still making many of the errors which characterized the agroville program, i.e. implementing the plan with no regard for the hardships imposed on the local population. Another conclusion was that the people very much need and hope for more agricultural extension assistance from the GVN. Both Hickey and Donnell seemed to feel that increased agricultural assistance in the form of credit, fertilizer, improved seeds, stock and expert advice are essential to winning over the peasantry.

They reported that at Cu Chi in Binh Duong province they found the people openly resentful over the labor and material demands made on them to construct the strategic hamlets there. They learned that although the laborers were supposed to get nominal pay (10 piasters a day), none actually received any money or food, that some had worked as long as 49 consecutive days on the project, that many laborers will not live in the hamlet and so derive no personal benefit from the project, that building the hamlet cut deeply into the second crop (tobacco) because they did not have time to plant and water it, and that many were facing genuine economic distress as a result. Hickey and Donnell felt these gripes were quite legitimate.

A simple solution here of course is to pay the workers. But this requires piaster resources. Another solution to the Cu Chi problem is suggested by the fact that one area visited is hiring a bulldozer from a nearby plantation to construct the earthworks around the village. In part at least, this could be done with dollars.4

Still another idea is suggested by the fact that Hickey and Donnell saw several variants on the strategic hamlet, some of which are much easier and much less expensive than the Cu Chi model (which is apparently pretty much on the lines of the Hilsman prototype). In Vinh Long they found strategic hamlets with no encircling fortifications but a “defensive bloc” at or near the center of the hamlet. This bloc was fortified by spike boards and mines made from hand grenades. These could be taken up in the day time. In Kien Hoa, no fortifications are built by the famous Colonel Thao, who thinks they are generally unnecessary. He builds a hamlet office, information post, and guard post and calls it done. He concedes, however, that in some areas earthworks may be required. His approach is in general much slower than that used at Cu Chi; he is not paying the peasants either, but neither is he applying great pressure.

While the rather unhappy picture at Cu Chi is almost certainly quite accurate, I should say I think much of the discontent will wear off if security really improves. (Donnell tentatively agrees.) The Vietnamese are wonderful gripers, and let off steam in the same way our GIʼs do whenever they catch a sympathetic ear. Also Hickey and Donnell found that in Vinh Long the people generally seemed to like the idea of strategic hamlets, particularly because the better security made it possible for relatives to visit during Tet. And in the Hoa Hao area around Sadec, people seemed almost enthusiastic about the strategic hamlets. This was the only area visited where the people were quite vocal about the hamlets being useful in keeping the VC out. (This suggests to me that there may be more validity than I had supposed in the idea that the Hoa Hao are still an untapped source of GVN support.) And even in Cu Chi people liked the fact that the strategic hamlets keep the “agitators” out.

Among other interesting observations that emerged is the fact that the NRM and other mass organizations have virtually disappeared in the countryside. The only active GVN organization at the rice roots seems to be the Republican Youth and various auto-defense groups. This is perhaps not altogether bad. The five-family system is not working well because the heads of the family groups often refuse any responsibility (which is not surprising, given the security situation and the rewards of heading the group).

A point stressed by the team is the immediate importance of agricultural assistance at hamlet level. In this connection, it is worth repeating Hickeyʼs observation that the peasants do not think in terms of future benefits. Saving is rare in the villages; a good crop simply means larger feasts on the suitable occasions. This means, as Warren has been saying, that plans for long-range economic development, however well conceived, are far less important in this struggle than rural impact programs.5 (It is difficult to convince people of this. The fact that a mobile medical team in a hamlet will be talked about for months even though it helps fewer people less efficiently than building up provincial hospitals is difficult to sell. Medical teams in the villages would have impact. And they would reach people who will never venture near the provincial hospitals for political or financial reasons.)

Few peasants actually stated they want increased security and one peasant engaged in constructing a strategic hamlet told the team that she was carrying bamboo to build a fence around “Mr. Communist.”This seems to point up a failure on the information side. Hickey and Donnell said in response to a question that the population got a week of advance information in Cu Chi before construction started. Colonel Thao generally works them over for three or four weeks, by his own account at least, before setting up a strategic hamlet. This could make quite a difference.

Among the teamʼs tentative recommendations is better training and organization for hamlet and village level defense forces and increased salaries (paid on time) for the SDC and for village and hamlet chiefs. (Although they did not mention the need for more training of hamlet and village officials, the team did note that no training programs were in evidence except in Kien Hoa, where the wonderful Colonel Thao runs a continuous course for his people which lasts for three and a half months.) They stressed agricultural extension, as noted above, and also approved Colonel Thaoʼs idea of using the old Council of Notables to backstop the village administrative councils in terms of advice, some control, and by lending their prestige to council actions. (Thao is also using the Cult Committees in some way not entirely clear to me.) One idea, also Thaoʼs, that does not seem very convincing is the suggestion that we are overstressing the hamlet at the expense of the village, and that we must decide whether we are going to focus on strengthening the hamlets or the village administrative structure. Thao thinks we are now tending to overstress the hamlet.

The team also reported that they never encountered any anti-American feeling. The role of the U.S. is not well understood, however, and the Commie line that we have replaced the French is perhaps making some headway.

I am champing at the bit somewhat here in Saigon. While Hickey and Donnell sound very right to me now, I would like to check it out, and hope that Thuan will soon name the GVN team members so we can get on with the surveys.

My best to all there,

Sincerely,

Ted

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.S/3-1962. Secret; Official-Informal. Heavner was in Vietnam to assist with provincial surveys. Two handwritten notations were on the source text, one requesting that a copy be sent to Stoneman, the other indicating that it had been done. Stoneman was the AID officer responsible for Vietnam.

2 Not found.

3 March 16.

4 At this point in the source text, a note in an unidentified hand reads: “How about using some of the SDP bulldozers sitting in Saigon?”

5 At this point in the source text, a note reads: “Hear, hear.”

117. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 117. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 20, 1962—2 p.m.

1191. Thuan informed DCM and me yesterday that President Diem had signed decree on “Delta Planning”.2 I gather that this is overall directive for clearance and rehabilitation of ten provinces around Saigon and that Diem may not yet have signed detailed directives for implementation various aspects. At any rate, it was clear that he has not signed specific order assigning responsibility for execution of plan. Thuan nevertheless seemed confident that this would be done shortly and that officer designated would be Lieutenant Colonel Hoang Van Lac.3

Lac is at present Chief of Kienh Province and is highly regarded by Thuan. Thuan assured us that when Lac is designated he will build on plans already developed by Gen Cao for operations in Bien Duong (Operation Sunrise) rather than starting afresh, and that Lac will maintain close liaison with mission as Cao has done to enable us to advise and assist promptly and effectively.

This could be important breakthrough on commencement systematic counterinsurgency operation. Diem had been holding back on signing of Delta Plan directive for about a month, and there was reason to fear that major snag had arisen, possibly in form of some basic disagreement between ministries about fundamentals of plan or who was to carry it out. In particular, there was considerable ground for doubts that Operation Sunrise under General Cao had full support of GVN military. Thuanʼs more or less jubilant report on signing of Delta Plan indicates that this problem, if it existed, is resolved. Thuan is not only Minister of Defense and therefore in a position to give plan necessary military support. He also indicated that he was quite conscious that more forces than presently allotted two battalions are required for Bien Duong operation. He said that he was urging on President desirability of taking regiment from 1st division in north for this operation and substituting for it as military presence on DMZ newly-created 9th division which would carry out its training there. (I have not yet had opportunity to discuss military implications of this with General Harkins.)

At any rate, decision to move forward on Delta Plan is encouraging development. We should make and are making maximum effort to support it. It is plan with which Task Force Saigon is generally in accord and there will be ample opportunity to support modifications of detail, if required, as operations proceed.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 113.

3 Diem signed the decree bestowing responsibility for the plan on Colonel Lac on March 23.

118. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 118. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 20, 1962—2 p.m.

1192. Embtel 1173.2 In conversation with Thuan yesterday, I brought up question of Madame Nhuʼs speech, following same substantive line as protest made by Trueheart March 13 but indicating also my personal disappointment and concern over statements and stressing problems created for my government in its efforts to help Viet Nam.

Thuan indicated, as he had to Trueheart, that he personally deplored speech and understood our position. He said that he had discussed protest with Nhu who had suggested he reply to the general effect that Madame Nhu was not speaking for GVN but as head of Womenʼs Solidarity Movement. We should also be aware that in interrogation of Lieutenant Quoc (one of pilots who bombed Palace February 27) it had been brought out that Quoc had stated that he was persuaded to undertake bombing by reading specific paragraphs of Time and Newsweek articles which were represented to him as showing that U.S. favored overthrow of regime. (I remarked that this showed Quoc was naive, but asked for specific citations of paragraphs in question.) With regard to references in speech to U.S. failure to support Civil Guard, Nhu had said, according to Thuan, that there might be two sides to question but GVN was being blamed for insecurity in countryside, and this was blame which must be shared. I replied in effect that question should be discussed privately, not in public speeches.

Turning to what could be done to prevent a recurrence, Thuan seemed to think only solution was some procedure for prior clearance of Mme Nhuʼs speeches. As matters stood, President Diemʼs speeches were reviewed by Ministers, Mme Nhuʼs were not. He suggested that I might speak to Diem about this.

I followed up on this with President Diem today. He took it in good part, seemed somewhat embarrassed, said that when he had read the speech after Mme Nhu made it he felt that, “while emotionally and perhaps intellectually understandable, it was politically stupid”. I said that I hoped very much, for the sake of our common objectives, there would be no repetition.

Mme Nhu has already told AP reporter Brown that her speech was aimed at U.S. press and not at U.S. Government. (According to Brown, she seemed in this interview to be genuinely upset at reaction to speech.) Moreover, as she is about to embark on extensive foreign tour which will reportedly keep her out of country for three or four months, I believe we should now let matter rest.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-2062. Secret; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 106.

119. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 119. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 20, 1962—2:40 p.m.

1119. Saigonʼs 1117.2 On March 8 Department officer had long talk with Canadian Counselor Rettie, who has now studied ICC/Viet-Nam so long and carefully that he understands much of it and therefore may be considered one of small number experts this esoteric subject. His views carry weight with Ambassador Heeney and probably in Ottawa.

Following emerged from conversation: 1. ICC/Viet-Nam should continue.

2. As an awkward “early model Troika” ICC/Viet-Nam must not be expected deal successfully with large concepts, legal or otherwise. It responds best to limited stimuli. Thus we should not openly make sweeping statements to effect: a. We will give no more notification.

b. Breach by one side justify non-observance by the other. Difficulty here compounded by fact we had used DRV breach cease-fire (articles 19, 24, etc.) as justification bringing in men and material (articles 16 and 17). Rettie unable find clear precedents in international law to effect breach one part a treaty by a party justified non-observance other parts treaty by other party.

3. Rettie also made plea that our actions should not be too sweeping, e.g., avoid upsetting ICC equanimity by spectacle scores US helicopters on dock opposite Majestic Hotel (Department officer commented ICC eyesight seemed far more acute Saigon than in Hanoi where after 15 months airlift apparently still not visible).

4. Rettie again confirmed that Canadian strategy on ICC would continue to be one of attempting persuade Indians rather than taking obdurate position to counterbalance Poles.

Rettie then gave advance indication favorable ICC action re subversion (Saigonʼs 1157).3

Comment: We believe Rettieʼs theory international law incorrect, but we shall send subsequent instruction on whole ICC question which at present under study.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-162. Secret. Drafted on March 16 by Wood; cleared by Hubbard, Morgan, Salans (State), and Heinz (DOD); and approved by Cottrell. Also sent for action to Ottawa and New Delhi and for information to London, Moscow, and CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 91.

3 Dated March 9, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-962)

120. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 120. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 21, 1962—5 p.m.

1200. COM USMACV 210531Z.2 Reference message reports joint US-GVN radar sightings unidentified aircraft in numbers Pleiku area night of 19-20 March.

Similar reports for night 20-21 March being checked. If confirmed, and evidence strong for night 19-20 March, these sightings almost certainly involve aircraft dropping supplies and/or reinforce meets to VC. Defense Minister Thuan telephoned me this morning indicating grave concern and stressing need to take “precautionary measures”. Thuan subsequently relayed to General Weede request from Diem that US interceptors be introduced SVN.

I strongly recommend that aircraft with night-fighter capability be dispatched Saigon immediately with mission of confirming any future radar contacts and shooting down any unfriendly aircraft detected over SVN. This seems to me correct response from US standpoint to Communist effort reinforce VC by air. It is minimum response expected by GVN.

If aircraft are sent, I recommend they remain at least through present full moon period and that they be represented publicly as “in transit”.

General Weede is commenting separately to General Harkins.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received in the Department of State at 6:07 a.m. on March 21. Repeated to Bangkok for Harriman; CINCPAC for Polad, Nolting, and Harkins; and Clark Air Force Base. Nolting and Harkins were in Honolulu for the March Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference. The message also requested that the Department of State pass it to the Department of Defense.

2 Not found.

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 21, 1962—1:09 p.m.

1121. Embtel 1200.2 Agree that prompt action should be taken to investigate and if necessary destroy any NVN aircraft operating over SVN territory. Will of course be important avoid any possible incident over Cambodian territory. Also believe any such operation should be handled on very sensitive basis and if necessary introduce additional aircraft they be based outside Saigon area. CINCPAC and USMACV plan in foregoing sense will be given promptest consideration here.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2162. Secret. Drafted and approved by Johnson.

2 Document 120.

122. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 122. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)1

Washington, March 22, 1962.

SUBJECT

Civic Action in Vietnam

The current plans and programs for Civic Action in Vietnam, which Sterling Cottrell is bringing back from his visit to CINCPAC, will need evaluation by the Special Group (CI).2 The following is a suggested yardstick for measuring Civic Action in Vietnam, based upon my experience in developing the initial Civic Action programs in the Philippines and Vietnam, and helping initiate Civic Action in Laos and Burma.

The essentials needed in Vietnamʼs Civic Action program now, I believe, are: 1. To provide the means for the VN military to earn the friendship of the people. These can be simple actions which show that the troops really care for the people they are protecting. The U.S. military program should be mostly one of promoting me proper attitude in the VN soldier. Troop brotherliness towards the people speaks louder than planned propaganda or big projects with bulldozers and gimmicks. These actions are such things as willing care for wounded and injured civilians, sharing rice with the hungry, repairing destroyed public structures, and starting public services such as schools, pure water supply, sanitation, etc. These are quick, natural actions which the soldier does when he has a moment from his primary security mission. Its effectiveness is measured in the increase of combat intelligence voluntarily given by the villagers helped.

2. To make the village a dynamic, willing part of free Vietnam. We need the whole countryside with us, not just a few fortified areas and cities. The people need something demonstrably worth defending. When the VN government shows up in a village, it shouldn't just teach village defense and collect taxes. The villagers need a sense of participation in something greater than their own local spot, and a sharing in both the benefits and responsibilities of free citizenship, as well as their actionʼs future. The civilian Civic Action teams must set the example by being public servants in the best sense—including getting their hands calloused by helping people. I believe the Civic Action teams should develop national spirit at the village level, by fundamental democracy in the villages, including electing most village officials by secret ballot, establish primary education, and start linking up the village spiritually as well as mentally (information programs) and physically (roads, landing strips) with the provincial and national centers. The Civic Action teams will earn their influence with the villagers to accomplish the above by really helping initiate public services (which is where health, communications, etc., assistance comes in).

3. To establish a permanent governmental structure. Civic Action should be seen as a contingency means towards creating a going concern, where Civic Action teams are no longer needed. Thus, the Civic Action teams need to be fielded by all service-type national Ministries (Health, Agriculture, etc.) and work to build a modest permanent organization under each Province Chief so that the national government has roots throughout the country, responsive to the people. This requires a Civic Action chief at the national level able to levy requirements on a number of Ministries (as did Vietnamʼs first Civic Action chief), to increase the executive assets of Province Chiefs, and to inspire dedicated public service in his teams with a minimum of bureaucracy. The teams should be able to get a village on its feet as a good member of the national community, and then move on. Team members themselves used recognition, in terms of preferred civil service in Ministries or provincial governments at the end of their field duty.

4. To help the people help themselves. This must not be simple dogoodism. The real value of Civic Action is in helping the people to help themselves. Villagers will proudly maintain the road they helped to build themselves, where they are indifferent to maintaining a similar road built by the Army or other government organization. As the people create a better life, with government encouragement and help, they both find a closer bond with that government and build something worth risking life to defend. Further, as this progresses, people start providing true security in an area, and troops can be removed from static defense into mobile striking forces.

Recommendation.

The best way for the Special Group (CI) to get a meaningful Civic Action program under way fast in Vietnam would be to approve Defense and AID selecting one experienced officer each to be responsible for U.S. participation in Civic Action in Vietnam, team them up in Washington, and then send them soonest to Vietnam to get a practical organization and program started. There are several U.S. military officers who have proven themselves in Civic Action in Southeast Asia. AID was planning to use Bert Fraley in USOM counter-insurgency. Two “right” people, supported properly, could get more done with what is already available in Vietnam in one day on the spot than could days of further study by others. The two could quickly plan a really practical program, a realistic organization, and do more than that—get some willing cooperation from the Vietnamese government.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Vietnam 7. Secret.

2 See Document 123.

123. Briefing Paper for a Presentation by the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) Before the Special Group (Counterinsurgency) 123. Briefing Paper for a Presentation by the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) Before the Special Group (Counterinsurgency)1

Washington, March 22, 1962.

CIVIC ACTION IN VIET-NAM

Introduction:

Civic Action in Viet-Nam is undertaken by the military, CIA, USOM and the GVN.

Military:

The Department of Army Civil Affairs Team surveyed the situation in 1961 and presented their report with recommendations on December 12. After review by MAAG it was submitted to Secretary Thuan in February 1962.2 He accepted the report but no formal approval by the GVN has been made. The principal recommendations of this report are: 1. The RVNAF should be inculcated with the belief that the war cannot be won in Viet-Nam if the villagers are antagonized by RVNAF hostile attitudes and treatment.

2. Villagers should be assisted on Civic Action projects by ARVN teams.

3. Civic Action teams should be trained to conduct resettlement of villagers into strategic villages.

4. Teams should be trained to assume civil government functions in areas recovered from the VC until turned back to civilian control.

Action Taken: 1. Psywar indoctrination of all RVNAF trainees has been introduced by MAAG to achieve objectives in No. 1 above.

2. Vietnamese leaders such as “Big Minh” have publicly stated and have issued orders to ARVN troops that their conduct vis-à-vis the villagers must be changed.

3. General Timmes reported in Honolulu on March 21 that a marked improvement has been noted in troop behavior towards the villagers since the initiation of this Psywar effort in the ARVN.

4. Five 20-man Civic Action teams are now in the field working on resettlement in connection with the construction of strategic hamlets and villages.

5. Five more teams are ready for assignment.

6. Five teams are now in training.

7. CINCPAC is providing guidance on a continuing basis to MAAG on the program described above.

8. The above Civic Action program is being applied in the Sunrise operation.

. . . . . . .

USOM:

USOM Civic Action is geared primarily to rural rehabilitation and specifically pointed now at the strategic hamlet program in the Sunrise and Delta Plan concepts.3 The resources offered are to assist in Civic Action cadre training, making known USOM resources so that these may be drawn upon. These resources include the provision of village communication facilities, restoration of medical clinics, provision of medical stocks and staff, issuance of identification cards, vaccinations, conduct of malarial programs, basic sanitation, provision of elementary schools, teaching aids, teachers, pest control programs, agricultural credit, fertilizer supplies, seeds, advice on crop patterns, fish farming and irrigation assistance, farm extension programs, introduction of rammed earth brick equipment for housing, farm equipment, temporary housing, well digging, improvement of roads, electrical generation, village radio receivers, motion pictures, and printed materials.

GVN:

The Civic Action of the GVN is centered in the Ministry of Civic Action which was created in 1961. Since a number of other ministries of the government provide assets in Civic Action, a coordination of the effort was vested by Diem in an Interministerial Committee for Secure Hamlets on February 3. This Committee is charged with coordinating the Civic Action program throughout the country and has among its objectives the setting up of 8000 strategic hamlets in the next two years, strengthening them with socio-economic services and facilities.

President Diem has given the highest priority to the construction of these strategic hamlets which will constitute the hub of the GVN Civic Action effort. Minister Hieu now has over 600 cadre operating singly and in teams in every province of Viet-Nam.

Conclusion:

MAAG and USOM have organized standing committees to work directly with the GVN in providing required U.S. military and economic resources to assist the GVN effort. It is expected that the present multiplicity of effort and programs will gradually be consolidated and coordinated. The encouraging element is that the GVN is moving forward with energy, having recognized the necessity for reaching the villagers with tangible government benefits.

1 Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172, March 23, 1962. Secret. Drafted by Cottrell on March 22. The briefing memorandum was part of a package delivered to Under Secretary of State Johnson in preparation for a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on March 23 (see Document 126). A typewritten notation indicates that Cottrell presented the information orally to the Counterinsurgency Group meeting on March 22. The minutes of that meeting read in part:

“Mr. Cottrell stated that, although he is encouraged by progress in the civic action programs, it is necessary to remember that we are engaged in an eight to ten year struggle. The MAAG is giving emphasis to the Strategic Hamlet concept in its civic action programs, as is USOM and the Government of South Vietnam. CIAʼs program is more in the field of security than civic action, with emphasis on paramilitary training for youths and villagers.” (Department of State, Special Group (C.I.): Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62)

2 Not found.

3 See Documents 103 and 113.

124. Editorial Note 124. Editorial Note

On March 22, 1962, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Admiral Felt, Ambassador Nolting, General Harkins, and numerous other officials met at CINCPAC Headquarters in Honolulu for the fourth Secretary of Defenseʼs Conference. A full record of the meeting is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SecDef Conf., Mar. 1962. For a summary record, see Document 125. Regarding the third Honolulu Conference, February 19, see Document 71.

125. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 125. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, March 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

SecDef Honolulu Conference on South Viet-Nam, 22 March 1962

The following items developed at the Honolulu conference are of special interest.

a. President Diem has asked General Harkins to continue with the crop defoliation program and to provide helicopters to his province chiefs. In the first instance, General Harkins recommends using defoliants on a selected basis for crop denial. SecDef said he would try to obtain Washington concurrence in delegating some authority to Saigon for defoliation operations of this type. On the second matter, General Harkins suggested that H-19ʼs now being declared surplus by the Vietnamese could be turned over to the province chiefs. SecDef concurred.

b. General Harkins said Diem has approved a border patrol. Discussion indicated this referred to 20 base camps along the Lao border and 68 along the Cambodian border, many of which are already established. They will be manned by 10 ARVN and 13 Montagnard ranger companies. (An earlier report indicated that 5,000 personnel would be assigned to this type of border patrol. There has been no mention of means of mobility nor of organization for command and control. This project should be investigated further to determine if it really supports the purpose of your recommendation and does not, in fact, tie down additional troops in static positions. I am checking it out through the TF.)

c. There was discussion as to the advantages and disadvantages of arming helicopters. Admiral Felt was opposed; General Decker was in favor. Although the matter was brought up in only general terms SecDef suggested the disagreements indicated there was a problem. He asked General Decker to determine what was required and to make recommendations to him.

d. Ambassador Nolting said that Nhu had directed that strategic hamlets, being built in all provinces now, are to be completed as soon as possible. The Ambassador commented that this objective may be optimistic in terms of the projected availability of troops to provide required protection.

e. General Harkins stated that the training of civil guard and self-defense corps personnel not yet trained will be completed by the end of 1962. Efforts are continuing to increase the capacity of existing training sites.

f. SecDef asked what percent of the SDC was armed. No one present knew. Ambassador Nolting commented that GVN reluctance to issue weapons to the SDC reflected some doubt as to the loyalty of those troops. SecDef said we cannot let 50,000 to 60,000 SDC remain unarmed or ineffective (with old French arms) and asked General Harkins to look into this matter. (This is related to carbine issue to SDC.)

g. Capability to resist subversion in Thailand was discussed. There was agreement that military capabilities are improving. The question of providing a Thai airborne unit was discussed at some length. There was some difference of opinion whether to convert existing non-airborne units or to form an entirely new unit. In view of the under strength status of the Thai Army, Admiral Felt recommended conversion although the Thais desire a new unit. Admiral Felt did not consider this an urgent problem but, based on a counter-argument by General Lemnitzer, agreed to review the entire problem including supporting airlift.

Admiral Felt reported that he had directed Chief JUSMAAG to move ahead on a Central Intelligence Organization for Thailand. He had just received a message from Ambassador Young indicating nonconcurrence on the basis that this was premature and not yet required in Thailand. Admiral Felt said that … is resisting the idea and is influencing the Ambassador.

h. There was a broad discussion of both military and AID communications systems in Thailand. Proposed systems would connect Udorn and Okinawa by 31 March 62, and Ubon with Pleiku, Bangkok, and Saigon by 1 Sep 62. These systems would require about 450 additional US personnel to operate the several links envisaged. Ambassador Young has not agreed to these personnel increases; SecDef said he would authorize the introduction of a radio relay company (350 men) for a period of one year to fill personnel needs until the Thais develop a requisite capability. He asked Mr. Bundy to follow up with State to gain Ambassador Youngʼs concurrence.SecDef further requested a list of AID communication projects in Thailand so that he could consult with State and avoid long-term delays which have occurred in Viet-Nam. He indicated AID could subcontract to Defense in order to get the job done.

i. SecDef asked General Anthis how important it is for US pilots to continue to fly Jungle Jim aircraft after Viet-Nam pilots have been trained. General Anthis said it was very important in order to continue learning about counter-insurgency operations and to monitor Vietnamese proficiency. SecDef pointed out the need to plan for the increased close air support capability which will exist in June as a result of present training and provision of additional aircraft; Ambassador Nolting cautioned that we should be sure of the political effect before stepping up air operations beyond the current level.

j. General Harkins reported there is unanimous opinion that the five-man US advisory team for each ARVN battalion is too large. There should be one Captain and two Sergeants per battalion and four Lieutenants per regiment for observers. SecDef concurred.

k. Ambassador Nolting indicated the AID program was being modified to emphasize short-range impact programs. He said the big problem was getting things done through the GVN.

l. SecDef said this would be the last conference but that he expected to be in Saigon in May.

W.H.B.2

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Top Secret.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

126. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, March 23, 1962, 11:30 a.m. 126. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, March 23, 1962, 11:30 a.m.1

Pentagon, Washington, March 23, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

[Here follow a list of participants and discussion of items I-IV.]

V. ICC Implications of U.S. Force Buildup in Vietnam

Mr. Johnson said that State had placed this item on the agenda in order to cite the concern of Indian and Canadian ICC representatives over the open introduction of unconcealed military equipment into Saigon. They have asked that we reduce this activity insofar as practicable. They have stated that they know what we are doing and desire to be helpful. However, it would be advantageous to all if we could avoid flaunting our deliveries to Saigon. Mr. Johnson said that we realize Saigon is the only good port and that we must continue to use it. He asked if it would be possible to fly in the Marine helicopter squadron which is due to be delivered by April 15. This would be far less conspicuous than ship delivery to Saigon. General LeMay said that we can take some actions, but not a whole lot, to avoid the problem. He added that people appear to be much more sensitive to our actions than they do to those of the Soviet side.

Mr. Johnson said that the President had taken a positive decision on our position on the ICC. This matter was discussed thoroughly and he had decided that we would recognize the ICC and we would not renounce the accords. We would just act in the face of them and this causes problems like the present one. … Mr. Johnson then said that he would like to have JCS agreement to the following paragraph in a proposed message to Ottawa, New Delhi and Saigon. “We will henceforth avoid open and flagrant introduction of personnel and equipment such as unloading unconcealable military equipment in Saigon which have not been notified to ICC so as to avoid charges of violations of Agreement. In this regard we understand fourth helicopter squadron can fly into Vietnam and need not be unloaded in Saigon.”2 Admiral Ricketts said that this was a good objective and the JCS would do their best to meet it. However, no specific commitments could be made. He added that the only dock in Saigon was situated just in front of the Imperial Hotel.

Mr. Cottrell indicated that most of the objectionable heavy equipment had already been delivered and that the remaining immediate project which could cause trouble was the Marine helicopter squadron. General Shoup said that this squadron was in the Philippines and that if it is the one to go to Vietnam it can be flown in from as far out at sea as fuel capacity will permit. Admiral Riley said that the language of the proposed cable must be altered since it would tie the hands of the military. General Decker said that the JCS would ask Admiral Felt to act to meet our objectives in the delivery program to Vietnam. Mr. Johnson agreed with General Deckerʼs observation that the ICC was spending too much time in Saigon and not enough time in Hanoi.

Mr. Nitze asked if the group would like to spend a moment discussing rules of engagement3 for the four F-102 aircraft being deployed to Vietnam for possible employment against intruder aircraft. General LeMay said that the proposed rules were such that if any intruders were shot down it would be a sheer accident. He pointed out that the identification procedures were impossible to comply with at night. General Decker said that the rules were drafted by CINCPAC and the JCS would have to work out the problem with that Hq. Mr. Johnson asked if the F-102 could actually shoot down the slow-moving, low-flying intruders and General LeMay said that they could. Mr. Johnson said that we must not attack commercial aircraft. Mr. Nitze said that the F-102s could not be employed against the intruders without reference back to the President.

[Here follows a short paragraph on another matter.]

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Minutes. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the Pentagon. A note on the source text reads: “Department of State draft, not cleared with DOD.” U. Alexis Johnson led the Department of State delegation; Mr. Amory represented the CIA; Messrs. Nitze and Bundy, DOD; and Bromley Smith the NSC.

2 The original draft of telegram 1137 to Saigon (Document 130) included this statement as paragraph 2. (Briefing material for Under Secretary Johnson, March 22, Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172)

3 Not found.

127. Airgram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 127. Airgram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 23, 1962.

A-257

SUBJECT

Assessment of Political and Economic Factors in Vietnamese War

Following is assessment of political and economic factors in Vietnamese war, prepared for use at current SecDefense meeting in Honolulu:2

1. Political Factors

The main political factors bearing on the question of who is winning the war in Viet-Nam, the GVN or the Viet Cong, relate to organization and working methods of the Government, establishment of non-Communist unity against the VC, and winning the positive support of the mass of the people in the countryside. These are the political factors which were stressed by the U.S. Government at the highest levels following the visit to Viet-Nam by the Taylor Mission in October 1961.

2. Organization

Organization and working methods constitute one of the essential keys to success against the VC. There is no question but that the DRV has established an extremely efficient organization for the conduct of the war on the Communist side, and is carrying on the war most successfully despite the difficult self-imposed handicap of clandestinity. To counter this ruthless efficiency requires a properly functioning administration on the GVN side involving delegation of authority and the use of working methods which encourage subordinates to do the job properly. Ineffectiveness in administration at the national level, in carrying out the central functions of the government and in extending services to the countryside represent one of the GVNʼs main weaknesses.

Some progress had been made prior to the February 27 bombing of the Palace in improving the organization and operations of the GVN, but the renewed mistrust flowing from that incident will very likely slow down progress again. The GVN revived the National Internal Security Council in December 1961, and has made limited use of it since that time. Intelligence has probably reflected most progress administratively, with the delegation of some real authority starting about November 1961 to the Director of the CIO and the concurrent naming of him as Chief of the NPSS. In the military field, naval and air force representation has been added to the Joint General Staff, but there has been little in the way of effective improvement in the authority delegated to the Field Command for the conduct of military counterinsurgency operations. On the question of systematic area pacification, Diem, after more than a monthʼs delay, has signed the General Directive for the Delta Pacification Plan,3 but has not yet signed the various Instruction on Coordination, Population Controls, Strategic Hamlets, etc., designed to implement the General Directive. There has also been confusion as to who is actually to be in charge of this operation—General Cao (who has been handling it to date) or Colonel Y (the Director of CIO) and an assistant (whom the President may be intending to name as officials in charge of pacification). It is likewise not clear whether the military have been directed to give adequate support to the pacification of the first province in which the Plan is being put into execution.

Because of GVN reticence U.S.-GVN cooperation on the civilian side has not developed extensively in the sense of direct assignment of U.S. advisors to GVN agencies, except in the intelligence field. The cooperative effort represented by the joint provincial surveys has had success in carrying out the survey of three provinces, but this project has not been pushed on the GVN side (perhaps because of personnel shortages) as rapidly as we would like, nor has the GVN (because of Diemʼs opposition) permitted the coverage in the political and economic fields which we had hoped for.

3. National Unity

Over recent months the GVN has taken a series of mobilization measures to increase popular participation in the war effort and improve the morale of the armed forces. Specific measures have included the drafting of educated persons for officer training, the institution of womenʼs military training (the thrust of which is, however, open to considerable question), limited military training for civil servants in Saigon and other cities, similar training for the members of the youth organizations in various areas, increased pay or allowances to the lowest two ranks in the armed forces and the Civil Guard, reduction of the period in which a drafting stays in conscript status before attaining the status of a regular soldier, the creation of NCO ranks in the Self Defense Corps, legislation establishing employment preference for veterans both in the Government and in private business, the establishment of a program for the training and employment of disabled veterans, and proposed measures to help war widows and orphans.

Steps have also been taken over recent months to establish the National Economic Council, the Constitutional Court, and provincial councils. The National Economic Council has served as a sounding board for the opinion of both trade unions and employers, and in a step in the right direction of freer expression and greater sense of participation. The Constitutional Court has had no noticeable effect. Since the provincial councils are just in the process of establishment, it is too early to determine whether they will have any political impact.

The educated classes continue to present an unresolved political problem which is of importance for several reasons: (1) The Government needs all available talent to fight the war against the VC, and Ambassador Nolting has urged the members of this class to offer their services to the Government in this emergency. However, because of their political dissatisfaction with the Diem Government and their belief that their services are not wanted, there is a tendency among many of them to sit on their hands (just as many Vietnamese did during the Indochina war when they did not like either political alternative—the Communists or the French). (2) The dissatisfaction among the educated classes tends to influence the masses at least toward apathy in the present struggle. This influence is attributable to the special position which the intellectual or scholar occupies among the larger masses of the people in a Confucian society like that in Viet-Nam. (3) Perhaps most important of all, the educated class exerts a strong, probably predominant influence on international opinion because of the tendency of the foreign press to accept this classʼs judgment of the GVN rather than the official views which we and the GVN put forth. Therefore, what the educated class thinks about the GVN is an important factor influencing the degree of international support which the GVN will get in its fight against the VC.

Various possible measures might be taken by the GVN to develop a more favorable attitude on the part of the educated class. For example, liberation of non-Communist political prisoners, greater freedom of the press and assembly, allowing the National Assembly to become more of a real parliamentary body rather than a puppet organization, and the authorization of opposition parties to operate. None of these measures has been taken to date by the GVN.

There are no indications that the VC have made any material political headway themselves among this class by the use of the “national liberation front” tactic.

4. Winning the Support of the Villagers

The first essentia1 for this purpose is to provide the villagers with a minimum of effective protection against VC terror and pressures. Only with this can the Government hope to obtain the cooperation and intelligence of the villagers. Systematic planning and execution of the strategic hamlet program, coupled with the development of paramilitary forces in adequate numbers and kinds, should restore a sense of security among the villagers. It is not certain, however, that these programs will be developed systematically since Nhuʼs pushing could well lead to overhasty, ill-advised development by officials at all levels in a manner which would alienate rather than gain the support of the people. In addition, there is the danger that Nhuʼs attempted use of the strategic hamlet program for a “revolutionary change of society” at the hamlet level could lead to further division among the population at the time when the aim should be to establish unity. (In control Viet-Nam Ngo Dinh Canʼs pragmatic approach (as opposed to Nhuʼs theoretical approach) may enable the hamlet defense program to be carried out without giving rise to the risks described above.) The SEC training and equipment program now being carried out is vitally related to this matter of giving the villagers protection, but it appears a considerably greater pare-military force will be required in order to provide each hamlet with a defense force capable of dealing with small VC groups and of trying to hold off larger groups until help can arrive from the Civil Guard and the RVNAF.

Economic and social development of the villages is also essential in order to gain the positive support of the villagers as opposed to apathy on their part. The specific goals of such a program were outlined in the Joint U.S.-GVN Communiqué of January 4, 1962.4 Much has already been accomplished in the fields of agricultural credit, education, health, etc., and what is now aimed for is extension of most of these programs to cover every village. USOM has established an organizaniona1 set-up designed to facilitate implementation of this program by backing up civic action cadres with training, advice and supplies, and the question now is whether the GVN can also be organized for rapid, prompt implementation. General Cao has been training and using rural rehabilitation teams since July 1961, for the development of strategic hamlets in the provinces just north of Saigon, and is expanding these teams in connection with the Delta Pacification Plan. These teams have some socio-economic flavor, though probably not sufficient at present. USOM expects to be able to work directly with General Caoʼs organization in the socio-economic field, but Cao will still need the cooperation and resources of the various Ministries of the Government in this field. No effective coordinating organization exists as yet for the village socio-economic program in other areas, including those which are relatively white. An interministerial committee on strategic hamlets was established at the beginning of February, and it may turn out to be the coordinating mechanism in the economic and social fields as well, but this is not yet clear.

On the political and psychological side, various actions are also desirable to counter the effect of VC propaganda. Payment of the salaries of village officials, now often enough not met because of the inability of the village to collect taxes, is necessary. The Minister of Interior is now understood to be making Central Government resources available for this purpose, and to be checking to see whether the funds furnished are actually being used to pay the salaries of village officials. This requires further checking (perhaps during province surveys) to determine actual status. The Government also needs an effective information program at the rural level, but it is doubtful that this can be mounted as long as the ineffectual Mr. Tho remains Director General of Information. The Government also faces the major obstacle of the skepticism and disbelief of the populace in what the Government says. Therefore, the only information program likely to succeed is one based on concrete accomplishments by the Government in the security, economic and social fields, thus restoring credibility in the Governmentʼs word. Aside from that, the information program should explain the record for population control measures, as well as continuing to paint the VC in their real colors.

Perhaps most important of all in the political sense for generating mass support are inspired leadership from the top in the Government and the creation of a politically attractive public image. The President continues to travel in rural areas, but the security shield necessary during these trips vitiates much of the favorable impact. Efforts have been made for years to induce the President to make frequent use of radio for popular talks, since this would reach a much vaster audience in the rural areas than his trips, but thus far there has been no real success. Continuing effort is also required to induce the President to switch his theme in rural areas from sacrifice and discipline to that of improvement in security and living standards with the help of the Government. In other words, the theme needs to be what the Government can do to help the people (together with their own efforts) and not what the people should do for the Government. The GVN has also seriously weakened its domestic position by publicly airing imaginary or historical differences with the U.S., its principal source of military and economic aid and international support.

5. Economic

Aside from the economic and social programs at the village level discussed above, other economic factors are also important in the war against the VC. At the end of 1961 the Government took measures that resulted in de facto devaluation of the currency, thus imposing a more severe financial burden which primarily rests on the well-to-do, who are, by and large, the heaviest consumers of imports. This step was designed to enable the Government to expand the piastre resources available for both security and socio-economic programs. The amount of piastres which will be generated for this purpose will be determined by the level of imports, which in turn depends upon the demand of a free market. VC activities in the countryside have tended to cause this demand to contract somewhat over the past year or more. There will probably be no permanent change in this trend until security begins to be restored systematically in the countryside. The markets in Saigon and in the provincial centers, and in many villages, are well stocked with both domestic and imported goods; prices on the whole are stable; and deficiency of imports in no way inhibits the current snuggle.

The GVNʼs efforts to collect internal taxes on land, on incomes, and from various excise measures are being intensified, and the realities of their financial situation are bound to require internal borrowing as well, a course on which the Government has decided.

For the first time the GVN is launching an appreciable deficit financing; in the past two months it has borrowed VN$1 billion from the National Bank, borrowing of some VN$800 million by the Industrial Development Center from the National Bank (to help finance the 5/7 tax or capital/equipment) is expected during 1962, and the 1962 budget is expected to result in a deficit of VN$2.5 to 3.0 billion out of total expenditures of VN$23.4 billion. Most recent proposals imply an additional deficit of VN$700 million by June 30, 1962, from a further increase in the military budget. Thus, a minimum deficit of VN$3.0 billion seems indicated for 1962. As against the VN$37.2 billion total money and credit outstanding on December 30, 1961, this means an increase of some $75. Also, an expected decrease in minimum bank reserve requirements with the National Bank may permit expansion of bank credit by as much as VN$3 billion. Indeed, the new effective exchange rate requires a considerable increase in bank credit-which, however, should be largely siphoned off as taxes.

Yet most expert observers believe that the economy can stand this increase without serious inflation. In the first place, all evidence of the past several years points to a very low velocity of money circulation, and hence a low multiplier effect.5 Despite uncertainties caused by VC and floods in 1961,6 money supply remained stable and there were indications of hoarding money. Secondly, the exchange black market is affected more by security conditions than economic conditions, and there has been virtually no forward speculation in exchange or conditions in anticipation of devaluation. Third, the modest price increases of imported goods were caused by tax increases, not speculative demand or inflationary pressure. Food staple prices, which were sensitive to VC disturbances and the Mekong flood in the final quarter of 1961, and which mean more than imported goods to the masses, are continuing their normal downward seasonal trend. And the GVN for the first time is building reserve rice stocks as a result of better organized commercial paddy collection price guarantees, and imports from America. Fourth, there are sound implications that the GVN is continuing to grow, as well as population (thus offsetting the expected increase in money supply). Finally, the economy is becoming increasingly monetized.

The GVN and the VC are engaged in a battle for rice, the main crop of South Viet-Nam. VC control of extensive rural areas, their ability to blackmail peasants everywhere in the Delta, and their harassment of communication lines, cut down rice shipments to Saigon over the past two years, with the result that Viet-Nam, which is normally a rice exporting country, is this year now importing rice. The GVN has been having a fair success, however, in the battle over the past three or four months for the rice harvest in the Mekong Delta area, with the result that rice deliveries to Saigon have improved. Unless these deliveries can be maintained at a more satisfactory level, the GVN will be loath to export rice, and it may face a shortage next summer in Saigon and Central Viet-Nam.

The VC have the capability of bringing about major disruption in rubber production and exports, but up to date have refrained from exercising this capability. Since rubber is Viet-Namʼs major foreign exchange earner, and a fall in exports would seriously embarrass the GVN, it must be assumed that the VC are not interfering with rubber because of funds which they collect from rubber plantations or because of their belief in ultimate victory and the desire to avoid destruction of the asset which the rubber trees represent.

VC activities have totally disrupted the trade in cinnamon, which was once a significant export.

The other side of the economic coin is the ability of the VC to obtain necessary supplies from the people and their levying of taxes on the people. There is not question that the VC live off the land, and the greatest hope of gradually squeezing them in this respect is through the strategic hamlets program. Denial of food to the VC through this program ought eventually be relatively successful in Central Viet-Nam and the provinces north of Saigon, but the prospects are considerably less bright in the food-rich Mekong Delta provinces.

6. Conclusions

a. One of the main weaknesses of the GVN in its ineffectiveness in administration at the National level, is carrying out the control functions of government and in extending services to the countryside.

b. GVN programs in rural areas—the strategic hamlet program and village-level economic and social developments-aim in the right direction, but depend upon effective implementation for success in restoring security to the villages and winning the support of the villagers.

c. The present GVN theme in rural areas “sacrifice and discipline” is not winning the support of the people and should be changed to “improvement in security and living standards with the help of the government.” Any rural information program to be successful must be based on concrete security and socio-economic achievements.

d. GVN is short of trained personnel to carry out its political, economic and psychological programs in the countryside at all levels. However, because of GVN reticence U.S.-GVN cooperation on the civilian side has not developed extensively in the sense of direct assignment of U.S. advisers to GVN civilian agencies at all levels.

e. The GVN is doing little to develop a favorable attitude on the part of the educated class, who have some influence on the masses of the people and considerable influence on the international opinion of the GVN.

f. Confronted with the efficient military, political and propaganda attack of the VC, the GVN has not yet organized an effective set-up to deal with the insurgency, nor has it taken the actions necessary to establish unity and win the support of the people in this fight. Unless the GVN develops a coordinated system of government among all fields (security, political, economic and psychological) at all levels from top to bottom, prompt to act and aimed at winning the people, it will not be able to turn the insurgency tide which has run against it for over two years.7

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-2362. Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall and cleared with Gardiner, Fippin, and Bogardus. Repeated to all Asian posts, and CINCPAC, London, Paris, and Ottawa.

2 See Document 124.

3 Document 113.

4 See Document 4.

5 Next to this sentence were written the words “Not related.”

6 Regarding the floods of 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 153 ff.

7 At the end of the airgram, Cottrell wrote the following: “I think: a) This paper reverses the priorities. The villagers are the key, gov't efficiency next, and non-commie unity third. b) The focus of our effort and appraisal should be: How are the VN doing in efforts to provide security and benefits to the villages? The answer is coming out thru the strategic village effort. If successful, we are on our way to victory over the Viet Cong. Cot”.

128. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 128. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Geneva, March 24, 1962—1 p.m.

Secto 100. For Acting Secretary from Secretary. Reference your recent report strange aircraft over South Vietnam2 I believe it of utmost importance that we not permit other side to establish precedent of air supply, reconnaissance or other chores on behalf of Vietcong. We must not let them repeat Xieng Khouang maneuver in South Vietnam. Hope arrangements are being made to see that hostile aircraft over South Vietnam are shot down.

Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam, Country Series 3/1/62-3/12/62. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only; Limit Distribution.

2 See Document 120.

129. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Geneva 129. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Geneva1

Washington, March 24, 1962—5:33 p.m.

Tosec 140. Eyes only for the Secretary from the Acting Secretary. Secto 100.2 There has been full agreement here with your view but problem has been locate and get to South Viet-Nam aircraft with capability locating and destroying supply planes operating at slow speeds and very low altitudes. Four F-102ʼs night fighters were immediately sent Saigon and are now there but very doubtful they can be effective against this type target. We hope they can soon be withdrawn and replaced by more suitable propeller night fighters when Defense can locate and get some to area. We have recommended to the President approval for the use of these aircraft against hostile aircraft over SVN territory under rules of engagement which have been carefully worked out with DOD.

Ball

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series 3/23/62-3/26/62. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Johnson, cleared with Pezzullo, and approved by Ball.

2 Document 128.

130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 130. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, March 24, 1962—7:23 p.m.

1137. Ref: Deptel 1119.2 In view 1) difficulties we now facing with ICC/VN, 2) favorable action in ICCʼs legal committee on subversion and 3) fact that to get along with ICC we will have to play game partly their way i.e., a) limited ad hoc approach (case by case without involving large legal principles) and b) maintenance when possible decent veil hypocrisy, Department concludes and Defense concurs we should modify our approach to ICC and proposes following courses of action: 1. We have prepared comprehensive memo3 of our legal position which we shall discuss with Canadians in first instance and Indians later. We will not, initially, seek any agreements or undertakings on this paper. (Paper being pouched all addressees.) We shall state we agree on objectives that Geneva Agreement should be maintained (this depending on cessation of DRV aggression) and that ICC remain in being. We shall express understanding ICC problems and shall ask Canadians specifically what they have in mind ….

2. While realizing that Saigon has the only satisfactory deep water terminal facilities for off-loading in SVN, the JCS will instruct CINCPAC, when practicable, to utilize to the maximum other ports for off-loading unconcealable equipment and materials which are undeclared to the ICC.4

3. We should seek further evidence Bloc importation men and matériel into North Viet-Nam. Realize this most difficult, but evidence need not be conclusive. In this connection ICC should be encouraged increase demands on DRV for access to North Viet-Nam points of entry. DRV refusals could be cited. Canadian Counselor Rettie said re Gia Lam airport ICC now restricted by its own “periodicity” ruling which only permits visits to airport one day a month (!) GVN might request reconsideration this ruling. We prepared help Canadians informally and if asked with legal problems they face in ICC.

4. We must further step up: a. efforts increase ICC patrols DMZ.

b. public release all possible evidence VC infiltration into Viet-Nam (hopefully as ARVN patrols augmented there should be more evidence).

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/3-2462. Secret. Drafted by Wood; cleared with Czyzak, Rice, Pezzullo, and Heinz (DOD) and approved by Johnson. Also sent to Ottawa and New Delhi and repeated to London, Moscow, and CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 119.

3 Not found.

4 For the original version of this paragraph, see Document 126.

131. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Geneva 131. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Geneva1

Washington, March 26—1962—8:20 p.m.

Tosec 150. Eyes only for the Secretary from the Acting Secretary. Tosec 140.2 President has now approved rules of engagement for US aircraft to intercept Communist aircraft over South Viet-Nam. Public posture is to be one of discreetness and we are asking field to work it out so that if US-marked plane actually destroys Communist plane, public handling will be simply that Communist plane crashed, thus attempting avoid problem of degree to which Americans engaged in active hostilities in SVN. We feel confident Communists will in any event receive message loud and clear.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2059. Secret. Drafted by Johnson, cleared with Rice and Pezzullo, and approved by Ball.

2 Document 129.

132. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staffʼs Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 132. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staffʼs Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)1

Washington, March 26, 1962.

SACSA-M 63-62

SUBJECT

Civic Action in Vietnam

1. Responding to your request of yesterday for my comments on Brigadier General Lansdaleʼs memorandum (attached)2 I have three reactions; two associated directly with the paper; one related to the paper indirectly.

2. As a general proposition, I consider General Lansdaleʼs appraisal of the Vietnamese civic action problem to be exactly on target. He has described the basic need accurately; and his direct action program, embracing the dispatch of a skilled and objective team, will achieve results.

3. Beyond this, I believe it well to reflect that even the most effective results-and I believe these will be achieved through the program suggested by Lansdale—will be far from dramatic. What we face is an urgent need to reverse a basic oriental conception—that the dignity of the common man is unimportant and that his basic rights are few. Heavy-handed conduct on the part of the soldiery is the normal thing in Asia. A lack of fiscal integrity on the part of officials is wide-spread, and generally accepted. Regrettably, these things are deeply ingrained in the fabric of the very people whom it is so important that we influence—the military, the police, and the minor officialdom. Thus, it is that the best we do will be none too good, inasmuch as it runs counter to the instincts of those with whom we must deal. Nevertheless, this is still the essence of civic action; and the best way to get on with it will be, as Lansdale says, to procure the total services of a few people who are enthusiastic, knowledgeable, and oriented directly toward the project.

4. Such a proposal as General Lansdale makes brings to my mind the multitude of similar good ideas which can well up through the Special Group—or could do so, were we properly organized for the task. In this regard, I am mindful of Mr. McNamaraʼs expression of concern as to whether or not we are properly organized for counterinsurgency, Model 1962. I would like to address the problem here.

5. To begin with, and in the face of speeches to the contrary, the counterinsurgency issue that faces us today is different, is not compatible with existing organizational concepts, does need a fresh look.

6. This is true because our insurgency misery is a Communist creation, one designed on a pattern that does not fit neatly into the organization geometry of the system which has been so successful, heretofore, in meeting our countryʼs troubles.

7. The conception that the shooting begins when all else ends was fine for Metternich and safe for Disraeli, but it has no identification whatever with today, when the traditional lines of authority, the traditional compartments of responsibility, and the traditional mechanisms of coordination have been discarded by the aggressor, and he having discarded them, our countervailing arrangements must be correspondingly altered.

8. Here is where we run into trouble. The State Department says, “Stabilization of our allies, inducing them to our persuasion, is pure diplomatic business—our business. It has been so for years.”

The military community says, “Insurgents? Guerrillas? Terrorism? That is certainly no mystery to us. We have thousands of skilled fighters to handle it. Just let us at them.”

The MAP or AID people say, “Stability? Yes, it is primarily a product of elevated standards; and dollars, well dispensed, are the real elevator. Whatever else is involved, the provision of financial help is still first, and that, of course, is our affair.”

And the information people; they feel much the same. “Enlightenment is the answer, the real enduring answer, and we have that in hand.”

9. And on it goes. The fact is, they are all wrong; and they are all right, too. If we are to succeed in beating the Reds at their own game, our problem-solving mechanism somehow has to synthesize the strengths of all of these fine activities, somehow has to blot out the organizational lines and function as a single matrix of power. The time is past when we can hope to meet the Communists with a system in which diplomacy, guns, propaganda, and dollars all seek to function alone, each immured in its own well-defined proprietary area. The Communists are organized for aggression on a homogeneous basis. Regrettably as they are on the offensive, they call much of the tune, and we simply have to organize to meet them.

10. That brings me to the Special Group (CI). This, to me, forms the beginning of our answer, since it draws together, at a decisive level, the same resources that the Communists employ habitually against us as a unified entity. In other words, this Special Group idea gives us the mechanism to face consolidated aggressive power with consolidated quick-reacting power. I believe the Special Group scheme is the counterinsurgency answer—at the Washington level: a. If all of the participants can identify themselves with the executive function and avoid identification as institutional representatives

b. If they are confronted with only problems of major magnitude (there are certainly enough of these); and

c. If they are supported adequately and dynamically by a working group which seeks to unite, at a lower level, these same functions which go to make up our counterinsurgency strength.

This latter arrangement, we do not now have, or we have on only the most informal and uncertain basis.

11. Therefore, it would be my idea that each member of the Special Group (CI) should designate a working deputy; these deputies to meet regularly on matters placed on the CI Group agenda by the Group; that the working deputies should dispose, by accord, of the counterinsurgency matters of lesser concern and present to the Group, staffed and in condition for decision (hard though it sometimes may be), the matters of prime concern.

12. It may be said that this contemplates more work; probably it does, but it will be worth it in the speed-up of counterinsurgency decisions. It may also be said that this whole CI Group idea is wrong, inasmuch as it transgresses organizational lines; but, as I implied before, this is the view that conveys real comfort to Mr. Khrushchev.

V.H. Krulak
Major General, USMC

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 77-131, Republic of Vietnam, 1961-1963. Secret. At the top of the first page is written: “Check idea of ops. deps. with Lansdale.”

2 Not attached to the source text; presumably a reference to Document 122. Gilpatricʼs request for Krulakʼs comments has not been found.

133. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 133. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 27, 1962—6 p.m.

1231. Deptel 1131 and Embtel 1222.2 Gen. Harkins and I together saw President Diem this morning. After reviewing results Honolulu meeting3 and general discussion situation here, during which Diem was relaxed and in rather optimistic mood, I raised subject of two correspondents of US publications threatened by expulsion. I said I had been happy to learn through Thuan that expulsion order for Bigart had been countermanded by President, and that I hoped very much that, upon reflection, President Diem had decided also to countermand the expulsion order against Sully. I made it clear that I was not defending Sully as a person, and that I did not always agree with the line taken by Newsweek regarding Viet-Nam; but that I felt very strongly, and had been explicitly so instructed by US Government, that the expulsion of the correspondent of an influential US publication would have a most damaging effect on public and Congressional opinion at home, and would greatly complicate our relations. Pointing out that it seemed to me that public approval in the US for our policy of support to the GVN was steadily increasing, I asked President Diem not to jeopardize this by action to expel Newsweekʼs correspondent. General Harkins supported this, pointing out that he too felt encouraged by the increased recognition by US correspondents here of the success of efforts being made by the GVN with our assistance.

Diem said that this whole matter was painful to him. He wished to make it clear, for his part, that Sully had for many years been both derogatory and insulting in what he had written and said about the GVN and specifically about the President, members of his government, and members of his family. Diem said that he realized his government was not perfect, that one could truthfully point out weak spots, errors, and failures but there were good things to be said also, and these should not be neglected. But most especially, he said, he objected to those journalists who went out of their way to malign the personal integrity of the chief of state, his ministers, or his family. He said this was particularly true of Sully. He asked whether President Kennedy would permit a foreign correspondent who publicly questioned his personal integrity to remain in the US and enjoy its facilities. He again mentioned his conviction that stories emanating from certain US correspondents here published in the US press contributed to the political unrest in Viet-Nam, and specifically to the recent near assassination of himself and his family.

I again said that I hoped he did not misinterpret my démarche (and I am sure he did not); that I was not defending a person or a publication, but was insisting, for the sake of our common cause, that he not make a “cause celebre” which would create real political difficulties between us. After considerable discussion, it came out that he had decided to allow both Bigart and Sully to remain until the expiration of their visas, and then not to renew their visas. He said that he understood Bigartʼs visa expires toward the end of April and Sullyʼs in June or July. I said that I had understood from Thuan that there was no further sanction hanging over Bigart, that I was disappointed now to hear that Bigartʼs visa would not be renewed if requested. This would cause grave difficulties. The President replied that this was a normal prerogative of government and was a simple and unspectacular way to handle both men. I said that I did not question his prerogative, but that from point of view of our common endeavor such a course would be most unwise.

We left it for the present that no positive action would be taken against either Bigart or Sully. (Diem said that the lifting of the ban against Sully was “tres penible” to him.) As to the future, I said that I would want to talk with him again on the question when the renewal of the visas came up, and I hoped very much that in the meantime he could think the matter over in the light of our conversation.

Diem gave no indication of willingness to change his mind further, but I am hopeful this may be a face-saving device. I drew rather heavily on credits at the bank on this one, but detected no personal animosity.

The press corps here is naturally very much interested in this affair. I am telling Newsweek, through Robert Elegant, the following: (1) that the expulsion order against Sully will be rescinded; (2) that if and when the question of renewal of his visa comes up, I do not know what the GVN decision will be; (3) that I expect both Newsweek and the US press generally to refrain from publicizing this matter as official US pressure on the GVN on behalf of US correspondents. I believe it is best not to reopen the question with Bigart, who apparently now understands there is no hindrance to his remaining here. If and when the renewal of his visa is requested, and if difficulties then arise, we can take the matter up again.

Elegant said to me yesterday that he feels that Sully has “been here too long”, and is therefore too emotionally involved for balanced judgment. This lead might be worth following up in Washington.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/3-2762. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad and to Tokyo for Harriman.

2 Neither printed.

3 See Document 124.

134. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 134. Memorandum From the Naval Aide of the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, March 29, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam Task Force Meeting, 28 March 1962

1. Items of particular interest which were developed at the Task Force meeting today are listed below.

Mr. Cottrell reported on the Saigon request at Honolulu2 that Washington delegate authority to the Embassy and General Harkins to approve local Vietnamese defoliant operations. Such operations would be on specific targets restricted to Viet Cong crops, laid by Vietnamese helicopters, using chemicals made available by the US. Since these chemicals are commercially available and the Vietnamese have been carrying out crop destruction by burning on the ground, one course of action is for the US to remain aloof and let the Vietnamese carry out operations as they desire. Ambassador Nolting, however, sees some advantage in our issuing chemicals on the spot and thereby retaining a “foot in the door” so we know what operations the GVN are planning and executing. Cottrell asked for opinions within the Task Force. Military … were in favor; State and USIA were doubtful or in opposition. Cottrell will discuss this with Alexis Johnson, coordinate with Defense, and probably come forward to the White House with a proposal for delegating authority under carefully defined parameters.

The concept for the border patrol as outlined by General Harkins in Honolulu was discussed and questioned as to its relevance to your recommendation since it involves 88 posts over a frontier area of approximately 250 miles. Admiral Heinz was requested to send a message to Com USMACV to get a fuller expression of the approved concept.

There was a short discussion on the need for broader-based, more effective planning in South Viet-Nam for civic action. This proposition is understood and supported by Defense and AID; Mr. Cottrell resisted early action. AID and Defense representatives, however, are preparing a draft message for Cottrell outlining the overall strategic requirement for civic action and requesting information from Saigon as to existing plans and specific recommendations for US support.

Defense also has been able to crash through with a draft telegram prodding Saigon to outline a plan to use both military and civilian assets for the deployment of medical teams in the rural areas. The military side, which is already in pilot stage, will be expanded around the ARPA project. AID bought the ARPA idea 100 percent and acted as if they had never seen it before. This is the same project we tried to push through Mr. Cottrell almost two months ago and which you brought up at the Special Group meeting two weeks ago.

As a related matter, you should know that the new AID representative at the Task Force, Mr. Stoneman, who is also the AID Viet-Nam Desk Officer, is aggressive and far-seeing and already getting results. You may wish to comment on this to Mr. Hamilton.

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-133-69. Secret.

2 See Document 124.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

135. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Aide (Clifton) to the National Security Adviser (Bundy) 135. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Military Aide (Clifton) to the National Security Adviser (Bundy)1

Washington, March 29, 1962.

During the March 1st meeting of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secretary McNamara with the President,2 the President stated a requirement for a contingency plan for South Vietnam in the event our present efforts fail. I believe that about April 1st you should ask Secretary McNamara how this project is coming.

Secretary McNamara indicated that we need a plan for the induction of U.S. forces before the loss of the total interior of South Vietnam, if such a catastrophe were about to overtake us. An important item in this planning, according to the President, is the timing of a decision for U.S. action and the factors that go into such a decision.

[Here follows a paragraph on another matter.]

The President has placed a requirement on us to bring him a report of the political and economic operations in South Vietnam. Two items especially concern him: ten provincial surveys were approved but only two or three teams so far are in action; second is the civic action teams that follow the military activities. It was reported that civic action teams were not going out into the country, that the South Vietnamese had no stomach for this operation, and that we would have to do something about it.

Is the JCS going to send the Caribou aircraft out to South Vietnam in June or are they going to send helicopters?

[Here follows a paragraph on another matter.]

C.V. Clifton3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda-Chester Clifton, 3/61-6/62. Secret. Also sent to Bromley Smith.

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

136. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to Vice President Johnson 136. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to Vice President Johnson1

Washington, March 30, 1962.2

RE

Viet Cong Activity

Viet Cong activity is being intensified on an increasingly broader spectrum. Attacks against reserve forces have been enlarged to supply lines, communications, transportation, and even to units of South Viet Namʼs regular forces.

On March 27 Viet Cong attacked and derailed four trains and tore up the tracks. On the same day the VC for the first time attacked two vehicles of the International Control Commission and wounded two individuals. The vehicles were plainly painted and marked with insignia of the Commission.

In the face of this increased activity, South Viet Nam statistics, in one area in particular, are somewhat alarming. Desertions from the regular forces have increased to 1,000 a month. Even this does not include the figures among the pare-military forces. When the battle casualties are added the total losses are expected to increase to the point where an overall increase in the effectiveness of the South Viet Nam armed forces is doubtful. The significance of the high desertion rate is indicative of military and national leadership. More fundamentally, it reflects the willingness of the South Vietnamese to free himself from the Communist menace.

The Chief of the British Advisory Commission, Mr. Thompson, feels that the philosophy of the present effort in South Viet Nam is wrong. Based on his experience in Malaya, he feels that the conflict is between the Communists and South Viet Nam citizens instead of between Diemʼs government and the Viet Cong guerrilla forces. The village is the foundation of the social structure of Viet Nam. The villages also constitute the base of Viet Cong organization and support. Thompson concludes that present government action will never be too successful unless this fact is dealt with and the role of the civil defense forces increased. Therefore, he recommends that the villagers be encouraged or even rewarded to resist the VC. He would also concentrate training of the villagers even at the expense of units of the regular forces to disrupt the base of VC efforts.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security Files, Memos from Colonel Burris, Jan. 1961-June 1962. Secret. A notation on the source text reads: “VP has seen.”

2 The date on the source text is March 20, which is incorrect. Telegram 1243 from Saigon, March 29, substantiates the information regarding the attacks referred to in the second paragraph. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-2962) Presumably the correct date is March 30.

137. Letter From President Diem to President Kennedy 137. Letter From President Diem to President Kennedy1

Saigon, March 31, 1962.

Mr. President: I believe the facts of Communist aggression against the Vietnamese people are now well known to you. Despite Communist lies, the evidence on record cannot be hidden.

However, I would like to draw your particular attention to the January 18 Hanoi announcement of the founding of the so-called peopleʼs revolutionary party. This announcement is virtual admission of Hanoiʼs direction and control of the Viet Cong rebels who are brutally attacking our people.

On January 18, the Hanoi radio broadcast the declaration of the new Communist creation, the so-called Vietnamese peopleʼs revolutionary party. This declaration states that in the last days of 1961 “Marxist-Leninists” in South Vietnam established a new party, with its “immediate tasks” being to unite the people and “to overthrow” the Government of Viet-Nam. It also declared that the party “calls on the people in the North to build an ever more prosperous and strong North Vietnam, making it a solid basis for the struggle for peaceful reunification of the country, to give active support to their compatriots in South Vietnam in their revolutionary struggle.” Here at last is a public admission of what has always been clear-that the Viet Cong campaign against my people is led by Communists.

The North Vietnamese admission that the Viet Cong attacks on the free people of Viet-Nam—attacks which now average more than 400 per week and claim total casualties of nearly 800 per week—are henceforth to be openly Communist directed must be a matter of concern for all nations.

The Communists have now themselves made it clear that they are making another brutal attempt in their effort to achieve world domination.

This attempt is not new. For more than seven years the Communists have most cynically violated the Geneva Accords of 1954. The central purpose of these Accords, which established a cease-fire, is to maintain the peace in Viet-Nam. The Communist regime in Hanoi is violating this basic purpose by its direction and support of the expanding guerrilla war which it is carrying on in South Vietnam.

The Hanoi regime made clear its objective when the Communist (Lao Dong) Party in North Vietnam stated at its 1960 congress that a strategic task of “the Vietnamese revolution” is “to liberate South Vietnam”—the Communist jargon for conquering a country already free. Evidence based on captured documents and prisoners shows that, in order to carry out this task, the Hanoi regime is infiltrating armed personnel by the thousands into South Vietnam to mount over increasing guerrilla war activities.

In view of this guerrilla campaign, the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam has been compelled to appeal for increased military assistance and support from free world countries to help prevent it from being overwhelmed by massive subversion from Communist North Vietnam, backed by heavily increased support from the Communist bloc. Even the regime in Hanoi has recognized that the free worldʼs increased assistance is needed and being used in South Vietnam for defensive purposes. In an interview broadcast over Hanoi Radio January 1, 1962, Major General Nguyen Van Vinh, chairman of the so-called “National Reunification Commission”, stated that the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam supported by the United States is not now preparing for a “march to the North.”

On the other hand, the Communist bloc has conducted an extensive airlift of military supplies into North Vietnam for aggressive purposes for well over a year. Part of this military material has been sent on to Laos to support the rebels and Viet Cong fighting the legitimate Government there, but much of it has been turned over to the Communist regime in North Vietnam to build up its war potential against South Vietnam.

A grave threat to peace thus exists and can be removed only if the Communist regime in Hanoi is forced to desist in its guerrilla war against the legal Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam, of which I have the honor to be President. World opinion is likely to serve as an important factor in the future decisions of the Communist authorities about this guerrilla war. I am, therefore, writing to you, Excellency, to bring the facts about the serious situation in Viet-Nam to your attention and to request that you raise your voice in defense of freedom and peace in this area of the world by condemning the Communist aggression against the duly constituted Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam.

Yours sincerely

Ngo Dinh Diem

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/3-3162. Official use Only. This letter was also sent to the Pope and 92 heads of state in non-communist countries. The Australian Mission to the United Nations had agreed to circulate the letter to all member delegations, but on April 26 Madame Chuang, the Vietnamese Ambassador to the United Nations, undertook the distribution herself.

138. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 138. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, April 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

The Diem-Nolting understanding of December 4,2 upon which we based our expanded support, contained the following undertakings: 1. Basic immediate objective is to enable the GVN to take and maintain the offensive against the VC.

Results: Achieved. General Harkins reports good morale, offensive spirit, and operations.

2. Increased GVN effort will be mounted. Fundamental responsibility of GVN for conduct of the war will not be impaired. A closer relationship will be established with the U.S.

Results: Increased effort has been mounted. By too much publicity and military zeal we may be impairing GVN responsibility. Closer relationship has been established.

3. U.S. will increase forms of aid previously furnished, and new steps will be (a) participation of U.S. personnel in operational missions with GVN forces and (b) closer consultation with U.S. advisors.

Results: Achieved.

4. GVN will take measures to increase its efficiency, and to increase its public support at home and abroad. It will: (a) Reactivate its National Internal Security Council.

Results: Achieved.

(b) Consult with U.S. on reorganization of the Military Command structure.

Results: GVN has consulted, has set up a Joint General Staff, a Joint Operations Center and a Tactical Air Control, but has moved slowly on any other basic changes.

(c) GVN has set up a Central Intelligence Organization and is prepared to accept U.S. Intelligence personnel in the military headquarters from the Joint General Staff down through divisions.

Results: U.S. personnel are in JGS, and each level from JGS to province headquarters and battalion level. 49 of 196 were installed as of February.

(d) GVN agrees to joint provincial surveys, it being understood they will be directed principally to military and intelligence matters.

Results: 3 provinces surveyed. More to be surveyed.

(e) Border Ranger Forces will be provided against infiltrators.

Results: 10 companies of ARVN rangers and 14 companies of Montagnard rangers released for Border Ranger Force on March 20, 1962.

(f) GVN agrees to closest coordination of GVN and U.S. military commanders.

Results: Achieved.

(g) U.S. advisers will be accepted in certain GVN administrative organs, subject to the request of the GVN, on a case by case basis.

Results: GVN has not yet requested any advisers. (It also may not be in the best U.S. interest to get into such a close relationship and be held responsible for GVN decisions.)

(h) Legislation has been enacted giving the President broad emergency powers during the next two years, adequate to carry out this agreement.

5. GVN has taken a variety of actions to win public support at home and abroad. These include creation of a National Flood Relief and Rehabilitation Organization, creation of Provincial Councils, institution of military training for women, investigation of speculators, proposals to reduce official salaries and entertainment, plans for improved military allowances and survivor benefits, and the creation of a National Economic Council.

6. The GVN will take prompt measures of its own to (a) Give a broader sense of participation in the war effort to the people of Viet-Nam.

Results: Fair to poor.

(b) Develop more contacts between officials of the GVN and the people.

Results: Good. Over 600 civic action cadres in all provinces are now in the field representing the GVN.

(c) Develop a more effective public information service.

Results: Not satisfactory. They have new a press spokesman which helps some. Minor progress such as village newspaper, film production and press trips. Radio poor.

(d) Bring non-Communist prisoners promptly to trial.

Results: Poor. No political prisoners of note have been brought to trial.

(e) Develop and announce an amnesty policy for Viet Cong defectors.

Results: GVN has developed a plan approved by Thuan and General Ty. Embassy likes it, but it has not yet been coordinated between ministries.

7. GVN recognizes the importance of developing at all levels its democratic institutions and will take all practical and feasible steps to this end.

Results: Poor. Provincial councils, proposed village elective councils, and some additional freedom for National Assembly are among small steps taken. War footing and Diem suspicions inhibit dramatic progress.

[Attachment]

STEPS TAKEN BY THE GVN SINCE DECEMBER 4, 1961

Political

1. National Assembly enjoying greatest period of activity since its creation, including criticism of GVN administration.

2. National Internal Security Council re-activated.

3. National Economic Council convened and consulted.

4. Constitutional Court established.

5. A Ministry of Civic Action re-organized and operating actively.

6. An Inter-Ministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets has also been created.

7. The Republican Youth Movement subsidized by the GVN is displaying an ever expanding Civic Action and Self Defense capability.

8. Provincial councils created, with the privilege of direct appeal to President.

9. Unpopular “Social Pacification Bill” resumed to Assembly for amendment by President.

10. Opposition leaders not being actively harassed.

Psychological

1. Greater press freedom-appointment of effective Presidential press officer. Quality and credibility of Vietnamese press coverage has improved.

2. President making increased visits remote areas of country.

3. A number of officials guilty of graft being punished, speculators curbed.

4. Peopleʼs Letter Box established by GVN. Receiving and replying to 3,000 letters per month.

Economic

1. De facto devaluation of the piaster undertaken in 1961, thus generating more piasters.

2. Collection of taxes and excises is being intensified.

3. The decision was made to borrow internally-deficit financing.

4. Maintenance of stable rice prices and control of inflationary tendencies.

5. Measures taken to provide increased safety for delivery of rice to market.

6. Public works projects being undertaken; steps being taken to reduce unemployment.

Military

1. The Delta Plan approved March 19, 1962.3

2. Operation Sunrise initiated March 22, 1962.4

3. Better organization. a) Central Intelligence Organization making good progress; ….

b) Joint General Staff set up including Navy and AF representation.

c) Improvement of joint planning through a Joint Operations Center.

d) Assignment of U.S. advisers in military and intelligence fields.

4. Joint provincial surveys are being undertaken. Three are completed with more to follow.

5. The base of the military effort is being broadened: a) Womenʼs military training programs carried out.

b) Limited military training for civil servants.

c) Training of youth organizations.

d) Drafting educated persons for office training.

6. Some austerity measures have been taken with respect to civil population and civil servants.

7. Measures taken to improve the morale of the military: a) Increased pay and allowances for the lower ranks and Civil Guard.

b) Reduction of period draftee stays in conscript status before becoming a regular soldier.

c) Creation of NCO ranks in Self Defense Corps.

d) Employment preference for veterans.

e) Training and employment of disabled veterans.

f) Measures to help war widows and orphans.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-362. Secret. No drafting information is given on the source text, but it is signed “Cot.”

2 See the enclosure to Noltingʼs December 5 letter in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 307.

3 The Delta Plan was actually approved on March 16; see Document 113.

4 See Document 103.

139. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 139. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, April 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Implementation of an Effective Strategic Concept for South Vietnam

Herewith, the summary I promised you of recent progress in implementing the strategic concept for South Vietnam in recent months. A systematic counterinsurgency operation has been launched very recently in an effort to eliminate Viet Cong guerrilla-subversive forces and rehabilitate the countryside on an area-by-area basis. The most notable progress, however, has been in the civilian rather than in the military sector. The strategic village concept, for example, has taken hold within both the Vietnam Government (GVN) and the US Mission; this concept is now a matter of national, high-priority policy for the GVN. Also, the GVNʼs Civic Action program has been reoriented and is being revitalized and expanded. Indeed, strategic village and Civic Action concepts now are integrated and vital in the GVNʼs general effort against the Viet Cong.

Specific examples of this progress are noted below.

A. A Systematic Counterinsurgency Plan

1. President Diem approved the implementation of the Delta Pacification Plan on March 19, 1962.2 This plan calls for a systematic military-civilian counterinsurgency operation to clear the Viet Cong from the Mekong River delta and re-establish government control on an area-by-area basis by giving protection to the villagers and cutting off Viet Cong access to the villages. (See Embassy Telegram 1191, March 20, 1962, Secret.)3

2. The first part of such a plan has been initiated in the form of “Operation Sunrise.” The operation is confined to Binh Duong province but once its objectives have been achieved, a similar plan (as modified on the basis of experience) will be applied in other delta provinces and ultimately throughout most of the country. (See COMUSMACV MACV 127, March 19, 1962, Secret, and Embassy Telegram Toaid 647, March 13, 1962, Secret.)4

3. “Operation Sunrise” consists of three phases. The first phase, initiated a month or two ago, involves essentially the necessary planning. The second phase involves military operations, the relocation of hamlets into compact and fortified strategic villages, and Civic Action activities within these villages (since this phase began on March 22, 1962, it is too early to make an assessment of it). The third phase is the period of consolidation emphasizing stepped-up Civic Action activities. The objectives during this phase are to strengthen security, build a socio-political base at the village level, and tie the villages into the national governmental system and the national fabric. The success of “Operation Sunrise” is overridingly keyed to strategic village and Civic Action concepts, thus reflecting the essentially political nature of the problem in South Vietnam. (See CINCPAC 3010, February 24, 1962, Secret.)

4. The US Mission in Vietnam, when asked by the Vietnam Task Force whether all Saigon agencies concurred in the validity of the Thompson approach to counterinsurgency, replied that the Delta Plan “accords in essence” with counterinsurgency planning as worked out and approved by the Mission. (See Embassy Telegram 1159, March 9, 1962, Secret.)5

B. Strategic Hamlets or Villages

1. President Ngo Dinh Diem signed a decree on February 3, 1962, creating a special “Interministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets” which will coordinate the strategic hamlet or village program on a country-wide basis. (See Embassy Despatch 355, February 27, 1962, Unclassified.)6

2. Although precise information is not available, it is estimated that 150-200 strategic hamlets or villages have been established throughout more than half of Vietnamʼs 39 provinces. In one province, Vinh Long, the province chief claimed the completion of 60 strategic hamlets by January 1962. (See Embassy Despatch 334, February 12, 1962, Official Use Only.)

3. The village of Tam An and the hamlet of Tan Phu in Bien Hoa province are examples of the effectiveness of the strategic hamlet or village approach for re-establishing government control in the countryside and promoting self-reliance among the peasantry. (See Embassy Despatch 375, March 16, 1962, Confidential.) a. The Tam An administration, virtually eliminated by the Viet Cong, was re-constituted in October 1961, following an army sweep of the area. A well-built defense post was constructed on a strategic site, equipped by a radio and defended by small locally recruited Self Defense Corps and Civil Guard units. A new village council was created, gifts of medicine, clothing, and rice were given by the province chief, and no reprisals were taken against villagers who once were suspected of cooperating with the Viet Cong. This village has since remained free of the Viet Cong.

b. Tan Phu had been for years prior to July 1961 under almost complete Viet Cong control. Following a security sweep of the area in November 1961, the province chief began to transform Tan Phu into a typical strategic hamlet (surrounding ditch, barbed-wire embankment, defense post, watch tower, etc.) and defended by a small locally recruited Self Defense Corps unit. The administrative system was strengthened and improved by the addition of vigorous and interested officials. Tan Phu continues to remain free of the Viet Cong.

C. Civic Action

1. On January 19, 1962, the Vietnamese Department of Civic Action was reorganized, creating (i) a central Civic Action Service in Saigon by combining related and heretofore separate services within the Department and (ii) an integrated Civic Action office in each province and district. (See Embassy Despatch 380, March 15, 1962, Confidential.)

2. As of January 24, 1962, a chief and deputy chief for Civic Action reportedly had been appointed in every province in South Vietnam. (See CS-3, 502,549, Saigon, February 27, 1962, Confidential, Noforn, Continued Control.)

3. Civilian Civic Action teams have been operating generally in the Mekong River delta and primarily in Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, and Phuoc Tuy provinces. (See Embassy Telegram Toaid 647, March 13, 1962; Embassy Telegram 1196, March 20, 1962, Confidential; and COMUSMACV MACV 127, March 19, 1962, Secret.) a. The teams consist of up to 20 specialists in health, agriculture police, education, information, public administration, public works and communications

b. Recently, the mission of these teams has been increasingly focused on the strategic hamlet or village program.

c. Civilian Civic Action activities are coordinated by the Department of Civic Action, assisted in men and material by the other departments and operationally directed at the local level by the district and provincial administrative authorities.

d. In instances where they are employed in a systematic counterinsurgency operation, as in “Operation Sunrise,” Civic Action teams are temporarily under direct military control but will subsequently revert to district and provincial civilian control.

e. USOM has established a committee to provide on a priority basis direct US assistance (and to coordinate such assistance) to Civic Action operations through the relevant Vietnamese Government agencies.

4. The Vietnamese Defense Department is now planning its own Civic Action program. (See Embassy Telegram 1196, March 20, 1962, Confidential.)

D. Security and Police

1. The importance now attached to the counterinsurgency role of the rural security services is reflected in the US Missionʼs recommendation that the strength of the Self Defense Corps be increased to 80,000 by fiscal year 1963 and that of the Civil Guard to 90,000 by fiscal year 1964. (See Embassy Telegram 1135, March 5, 1962, Secret.)

2. Planning in USOM and in AID is proceeding with respect to the development of a rural police force. USOM has drawn up the guidelines for this force, has asked for 20 rural police advisers, and has recommended that 4.8 million dollars in US aid be allocated to the Vietnam police advisory program for fiscal year 1962. (See Department Telegram 1010, February 21, 1962, Secret; and Embassy Telegram Toaid 579, February 24, 1962, Secret.)

E. Village Communication System

1. Of the 133 village radios shipped to Vietnam to date, 44 have been installed in Gia Dinh province, 48 are to be installed in An Xuyen province during April 6-25, and most of the remainder are to be installed concurrently in Binh Duong province where “Operation Sunrise” is now in progress. Priorities have also been established for four other delta provinces. (See Embassy Telegram Toaid 739, March 27, 1962, Confidential.)

2. The public safety role of village radios was demonstrated on March 20, 1962, when a joint USOM-Vietnamese radio installation team was attacked by Viet Cong guerrillas. The security escort engaged the Viet Cong while the team proceeded to install the village radio and then notified district headquarters and other village radio stations. Assistance was despatched and resulted in an ambush of the Viet Cong as they were fleeing toward another village which had been alerted. (See Embassy Telegram Toaid 716, March 22, 1962, Confidential.)

F. US AID Project Priorities

The US Governmentʼs ability to render non-military assistance to Vietnam on an increasingly effective basis was decidedly strengthened by AIDʼs action in March 1962 establishing priorities, first, second, and third, for projects within its Vietnam program. The categorization of these projects was based on their immediate impact on the “counterinsurgency and short-range security objectives in accordance with current US policy.” (See Department Telegram Aidto 556, March 7, 1962. Official Use Only.)

G. Military Tactics

A military operation in late February or early March of this year reflects the effective utilization of security forces and artillery in counter-guerrilla warfare. A combined Vietnamese Army ranger, Civil Guard, and Self Defense Corps force, supported by an Army artillery unit, engaged a Viet Cong guerrilla company in a pre-planned operation in Kien Hoa province. The Viet Cong initially stood and fought but then broke and attempted to withdraw. At that point, artillery fire was requested on the retreating Viet Cong and inflicted severe casualties. In large measure, this operation succeeded, first, because artillery was not employed at the outset (which would have alerted the Viet Cong and permitted them to escape) and, second, because the use of Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps forces (which are essentially defensive forces) in an offensive mission was supported by a participating regular army unit. (See CHMAAG Vietnam Magpo 1441, March 4, 1962, Secret.)

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Countries, Vietnam. Secret; Noforn.

2 Diem actually approved the Delta Plan on March 16; see Document 113.

3 Document 117.

4 Unless otherwise indicated in footnotes, the remaining documents cited in this memorandum are not printed.

5 See footnote 2, Document 101.

6 See Document 46.

140. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 140. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, April 3, 1962.

Congressman Saund of California, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, made an informal suggestion recently that in Viet-Nam more use should be made of nationals of countries nearby and thus reduce the number of U.S. servicemen required. Having been born in the area, the Congressman was especially convincing in presenting this point of view.

Since then we have given considerable attention to the question and I brought it up for discussion in a meeting with the officers of the Joint Staff of the JCS. I believe that it meats current consideration.

The U.S. servicemen or their replacements may be in Viet-Nam for many years; the 5,200 there now evidently will be increased to 8,000 or 10,000 with arrivals reported frequently in the press.

The nationals most likely to be available and acceptable in Viet-Nam are those of the Philippines but others of the area might be usable. Filipino civilian technicians of the Eastern Construction Company are said to be working effectively in Laos.

Psychologically, it would be of obvious benefit to us in the Far East and in our international relations generally, if other nations of the area were cooperating with us militarily in Viet-Nam as a visible demonstration of solidarity against Communist attack. There would also be psychological advantages in the United States.

You are aware of the Presidentʼs desire for us to induce other nations to work with us to the extent feasible in Viet-Nam, as evidenced in point 6 of the May 1961 Program:2

“Cooperate with the GVN in planning the most effective use of assistance offered by other governments to assist Viet-Nam in its actions against the Viet Cong, including the provision of certain expert personnel with long experience, e.g., in Malaya.”

In view of the above considerations, I suggest that the Cottrell Task Force be asked to take a new hard look, and endeavor to come up with positive recommendations for action now or later in line with the idea advanced by Congressman Saund.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 2-B.4 GVN. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Cot—Please consider. I agree with the principle. WAH”

2 Printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 42.

141. Memorandum From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to the President 141. Memorandum From the Ambassador to India (Galbraith) to the President1

Washington, April 4, 1962.

SUBJECT

VietNam

The following considerations influence our thinking on Viet-Nam: 1. We have a growing military commitment. This could expand step by step into a major, long-drawn out indecisive military involvement.

2. We are backing a weak and, on the record, ineffectual government and a leader who as a politician may be beyond the point of no return.

3. There is consequent danger we shall replace the French as the colonial force in the area and bleed as the French did.

4. The political effects of some of the measures which pacification requires or s believed to require, including the concentration of population, relocation of villages, and the burning of old villages, may be damaging to those and especially to Westerners associated with it.

5. We fear that at some point in the involvement there will be a major political outburst about the new Korea and the new war into which the Democrats as so often before have precipitated us.

6. It seems at least possible that the Soviets are not particularly desirous of trouble in this part of the world and that our military reaction with the need to fall back on Chinese protection may be causing concern in Hanoi.

In the light of the foregoing we urge the following: 1. That it be our policy to keep open the door for political solution. We should welcome as a solution any broadly based non-Communist government that is free from external interference. It should have the requisites for internal law and order. We should not require that it be militarily identified with the United States.

2. We shall find it useful in achieving this result if we seize any good opportunity to involve other countries and world opinion in settlement and its guarantee. This is a useful exposure and pressure on the Communist bloc countries and a useful antidote for the argument that this is a private American military adventure.

3. We should measurably reduce our commitment to the particular present leadership of the Government of South Viet-Nam.

To accomplish the foregoing, we recommend the following specific steps: 1. In the next fortnight or so the ICC will Present a report which we are confidentially advised will accuse North Viet-Nam of subversion and the Government of Viet-Nam in conjunction with the United States of not notifying the introduction of men and materiel as prescribed by the Geneva accords. We should respond by asking the cochairman to initiate steps to re-establish compliance with the Geneva accords. Pending specific recommendations, which might at some stage include a conference of signatories, we should demand a suspension of Viet Cong activity and agree to a standstill on an introduction of men and matériel.

2. Additionally, Governor Harriman should be instructed to approach the Russians to express our concern about the increasingly dangerous situation that the Viet Cong is forcing in Southeast Asia. They should be told of our determination not to let the Viet Cong overthrow the present government while at the same time to look without relish on the dangers that this military build-up is causing in the area. The Soviets should be asked to ascertain whether Hanoi can and will call off the Viet Cong activity in return for phased American withdrawal, liberalization in the trade relations between the two parts of the country and general and non-specific agreement to talk about reunification after some period of tranquillity.

3. Alternatively, the Indians should be asked to make such an approach to Hanoi under the same terms of reference.

4. It must be recognized that our long-run position cannot involve an unconditional commitment to Diem. Our support is to non-Communist and progressively democratic government not to individuals. We cannot ourselves replace Diem. But w. e should be clear in, our mind that almost any non-Communist change would probably be beneficial and this should be the guiding rule for our diplomatic representation in the area.

In the meantime policy should continue to be guided by the following: 1. We should resist all steps which commit American troops to combat action and impress upon all concerned the importance of keeping American forces out of actual combat commitment.

2. We should disassociate ourselves from action, however necessary, which seems to be directed at the villagers, such as the new concentration program. If the action is one that is peculiarly identified with Americans, such as defoliation, it should not be undertaken in the absence of most compelling reasons. Americans in their various roles should be as invisible as the situation permits.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 77-131, Republic of Vietnam, 1961-1962. Secret. Also printed in Galbraith, Ambassadorʼs Journal, pp. 297-299. Transmitted to President Kennedy under cover of a letter of April 5 from Galbraith (ibid., pp. 296-297) that dealt, for the most part, with subjects other than Vietnam. Galbraith was in the United States, March 27-April 8, to testify before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on India. Forrestal sent this memorandum 131 to McNamara for DODʼs comments on April 7.

142. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the President 142. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the President1

Washington, April 4, 1962.

U.S. POLICIES IN THE FAR EAST

Review and Recommendations

[Here follow a three-page introduction, a six-page section entitled “The Shape of East and Southeast Asia in 1962,” a four-page section entitled “The U.S. Position in the Region,” and the first three pages of a section entitled “U.S. Objectives Regarding Non-Communist Asia.”]

3. A third U.S. objective in non-Communist Asia should be the maintenance of an effective but unprovocative military presence capable of deterring an overt attack by Communist forces.2

At present the Seventh Fleet and other U.S. forces provide such a deterrent. Even among the unaligned nations the importance of this military shield is increasingly recognized in private discussions, even though not always in public statements.

However, the failure of the Lao and South Vietnamese governments, with almost unlimited U.S. support, to create viable societies which their people are prepared vigorously to defend has led to a direct U.S. confrontation with Communist forces in Southeast Asia. This in turn has raised far-reaching questions about the political framework in which our military forces can be most effectively employed.

As I have noted in an earlier section, many vigorously anti-Communist Asians believe that Western-sponsored regional defense organizations, such as SEATO, do more damage than good to the cause of regional unity and security. Similar doubts as to SEATOʼs usefulness were expressed by several of our Mission Chiefs at the recent Regional Operations Conference at Baguio.

Although our abrupt abandonment of this organization now might be interpreted as an act of weakness, I believe that on balance it has hindered rather than helped our efforts during the last few years.

Moreover, it could be persuasively argued that a conspicuous American military presence in an area bordering directly on Communist China may, in certain circumstances, serve more as a magnet for Communist pressures than as an effective defense.

When we contrast the ability of such unaligned nations as Cambodia and Burma to destroy indigenous Communist guerrillas and to contain Communist infiltration across their borders with the vulnerability of Vietnam and Laos, which are closely associated with us, it is difficult to escape such a conclusion.

This is not to deny the importance of the U.S. military role in those unaligned nations that are not under direct Communist pressure.

For instance, the Pentagonʼs training of Indonesian officers has created powerful pro-U.S. attitudes within the Indonesian armed forces which may be the key to Indonesiaʼs political future.

Similarly, American military missions can help train and arm indigenous forces, on the model of the new Cambodian army, that combine an effective counter-guerrilla capacity with skill in building bridges, roads, schools, and clinics. This provides a counter-subversion force that can also act as a powerful bridge between the people and their government.

4. A final objective for U.S. policy is the stabilization of the three outstanding politico-military situations which now endanger the region and in which our own military forces have become indirectly or directly involved.

These are the impasse in Laos, the war in South Vietnam, and the precarious balance in the Taiwan Straits.

[Here follows a brief section on the impasse in Laos.]

B. South Vietnam.

Here again the new Administration has taken courageous steps to save a situation that had been rapidly deteriorating.

Yet the outcome remains unclear; the situation in Vietnam may develop in any one of three ways.

1) One possibility would be a clear-cut military victory by the South Vietnamese government, the destruction of the Vietminh guerrillas and a restabilization of the divided country along the lines of the 1954 Geneva Agreement.

Much as we desire this outcome, it appears to me unlikely, given the present Vietnamese leadership. It is difficult to see how our weapons and training can compensate for the politically weak base on which Diem operates; his liabilities will tend to limit the effectiveness of the most carefully planned military tactics.

2) A second eventuality would be the drastic worsening of the existing situation and the threat of total collapse of South Vietnamese armed resistance. What should we do then?

It may be argued persuasively that the Rubicon has already been crossed, that U.S. prestige is now irretrievably committed, that our failure to throw in whatever force may be required-regardless of the Chinese military reaction-will result in the collapse of all the independent nations of Southeast Asia and the total humiliation of the United States.

In rebuttal, it may be said that a French army of 350,000 failed to defeat or contain Vietminh forces that were less well organized than those now operating within gunshot of Saigon; that this failure cost the French 90,000 casualties without active Chinese Communist participation; that under present circumstances the Chinese would quite probably react to a major American military effort near their borders by entering the war as they did in Korea; that if the Vietnam government should collapse under pressure, our embarrassment, although acute, would not be fatal; and that the independent nations of Southeast Asia, finally free of any illusions about the immediacy of the Communist danger, could then be rallied for effective defense.

If the President should determine that deeper U.S. military involvement is not worth the likely consequences, some skillful balancing will be required.

On the one hand, we will need to avoid public statements which may later compound our embarrassment if the situation in fact should turn against us. On the other, we should continue to leave the Vietminh, Communist Chinese, and Soviets with reason to fear a massive U.S. military movement against the heart of the Vietminh operations in Hanoi if such action should prove necessary to save the situation in South Vietnam.

3) A third possibility-and one which our skillful operations of the last few months make most likely-is that there will be neither total victory nor total defeat but rather the development of an uneasy fluid stalemate with the Viet Cong unable to crack the U.S.-supported government forces, yet still able to maintain an effective opposition.

Although we Americans have never found it easy to accept such a situation, the prospect is not wholly discouraging. With the Viet Cong threat held in check, the South Vietnamese government would have another chance to build a solid foundation of popular support while at the same time we could explore the possibilities for a more permanent negotiated political settlement.

[Here follow two more pages in the section “U.S. Objectives Regarding Non-Communist Asia,” an eight-page section entitled “U.S. Objectives Regarding Communist Asia,” and the first five pages of “Recommendations.”]

C. Policy in Regard to Southeast Asia.

Objectives:

The development of viable, neutral, and independent nations on the Southeast Asian mainland, able to defend themselves against internal subversion or border pressures and increasingly willing to work together, thereby forcing the Chinese either to forgo aggression or to attack overtly in a manner which can be met by the U.S. with world-wide support.

Lines of Action: 1. Clearly and publicly define our political objective of a neutral and independent Southeast Asian area as stated above.

2. With an absolute minimum of direct U.S. involvement and fanfare, strive to stabilize the military situation in Vietnam; our minimal aim should be a deadlock which will provide a basis for meaningful negotiation (i.e., a situation in which operations have become so costly to the Vietminh that continued fighting becomes unprofitable).

3. Without further committing U.S. military forces, keep the Vietminh, Communist Chinese and Soviets apprehensive that we may move vigorously against North Vietnam and even China in response to any increased effort on their part south of the 17th parallel.

4. Decide what specific political terms will be acceptable to us and to South Vietnam, as we have already done in Laos, and make known through a third party our willingness to negotiate with the Russians or others on that basis.

5. Continue our efforts in Laos to create a neutral and independent government under Souvanna. At the same time, prepare a contingency plan for the De facto partition of Laos, in the event of a breakdown in the present negotiations.

6. Keep unaligned nations such as India, Indonesia and Burma informed of our genuine desire for a Vietnam and Laos settlement that will assure a neutral and independent Southeast Asia and the ultimate withdrawal of an overt U.S. military presence.

7. On a step-by-step basis, move toward the dissolution of SEATO and the replacement of its guarantor functions by U.S. bilateral guarantees, on an interim basis, and ultimately, by great-power guarantees of Southeast Asiaʼs security from external aggression.

The following steps would be relevant: a) The termination of SEATOʼs non-military aspects and the transfer of its viable non-military program (e.g., the Graduate School of Engineering in Bangkok) to other sponsorship;

b) The granting of an interim bilateral guarantee to Thailand similar to our present guarantees to the Philippines and Pakistan, and a public reaffirmation of our commitment to defend the protocol states (Laos, Cambodia, and South Vietnam); at the same time, we should de-emphasize our military presence in Thailand, while vigorously supporting the Thai government in economic and political development and reform in the north and northeast, backed by civic action and counter-subversion units.

c) An intensive, confidential information program within the region in the course of these steps, to explain this process of gradual dissolution and to reassure the relevant states.

d) As the situations in Laos and Vietnam move toward stabilization, probe the Soviets and Chinese on their willingness to join in a guarantee for the region as a whole; in respect to the Chinese, this step relates to the possibility of grain shipments for local currencies under the carefully prescribed conditions to which I have already referred.

e) Throughout this process, continue to make clear U.S. determination to oppose with whatever force may be required any and all overt aggression in Southeast Asia by either the Chinese Communists or the Vietminh.]

[Here follow two additional pages of “Recommendations,” and a nine-page section entitled “Political Implications of these Recommendations.”]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, Bowles. Secret. The memorandum totals 54 pages and includes a table of contents at the beginning. Bowles transmitted the paper to the President under cover of a memorandum of April 4 in which he indicated that it was the second of two papers growing out of his recent trip, that he was limiting the number of copies due to the controversy sure to be generated by the conclusions, and that he would like to discuss the proposals with the President after he had read it. (Ibid., National Security File, Meetings & Memos, Staff Memos, Chester Bowles) He also sent copies to Bundy and Forrestal in the White House and Walt Rostow in the Department of State. The President had sent Bowles on a mission to the Middle East, Africa, South Asia, and the Far East, February 8-March 19; while in the Far East, Bowles chaired the Baguio Chiefs of Mission Conference, March 10-11.

2 The first two objectives were: (1) “to help create independent states, free to make their own choices, capable of maintaining their own internal security, and ready to cooperate with us in case of overt aggression;” and (2) “the fostering of increased cooperation among the nations of the region.”

143. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 143. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 4, 1962.

SUBJECT

Hilsman Memorandum2

This memorandum makes two points of interest: a. Continued reluctance in Saigon to propose that Americans participate with, as opposed to coordination with, the GVN in any governmental task.

b. Mr. Hilsmanʼs misgivings on Operation Sunrise are shared by General Harkins.

While Binh Duong is an exposed area, any area which starts the pacification campaign will suffer from some degree of isolation. My understanding of the concept is that regular troops will remain until the strategic hamlets are constructed and occupied and CG/SDC troops take over defense responsibilities. At that point we want the VC to attack on the premise the positron can hold until reserves can be moved in by hero. This is the classic Malagan concept, you may wish to discuss it with Mr. Thompson on Friday, 6 April.3

A suggested draft note of reply to Mr. Hilsman is attached.4

W.H.B.5

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69.

2 See Document 114.

3 No record of a meeting between Thompson and Taylor on April 6 has been found.

4 Not found.

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

144. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 144. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 4, 1962—2:01 p.m.

1171. Refs: (a) Saigon Toaid 647;2 (b) Deptel 1166;3 (c) CHMAAG to JCS MAGAR OT (PS)687, 3-05Z Jan 62.4 Task Force Viet-Nam. Ref (a) received with much interest. Need urgent for complete integration of our civil and military civic-action and rural rehabilitation programs without regard for restrictions imposed by departmental or agency terms of reference and funding procedures.

To this end, we need ASAP: a. Overall US-GVN time-phased civic action plan principally keyed to, but not restricted to geographic areas to be affected in near future by politico-military strategy of clear and hold. For ARVN role, consideration should be given to recommendations in Viet-Nam Civic Action MTT Report which was approved and recommended to GVN (Ref c).

b. Estimate and schedule of personnel and materials assets required to support timing and thrust of plan.

c. Your specific recommendation as to who will do what.

Imperative that Civic Action proceed expeditiously. Because of lead time involved urge advance estimates be cabled on hard-core of any new funding procurement and personnel requirements so that we may arrange quickly to support field requirements. We will sort out required authority for dispensing services on cross-service basis and for requesting with GVN further third-country support.

Aside from conviction that success in Viet-Nam depends much on successful civic action program, an unparalleled opportunity exists to demonstrate functioning inter-agency and international effort, which could serve as guidance in other free world struggles. Program for medical civic action sought in ref (b) could be a guidepost in this field.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-462. Confidential, Priority Drafted by Wayne James (DOD/ISA) and cleared with Heinz, Cottrell, and Stoneman Also sent to CINCPAC for Polad and repeated to COMUSMACV and USOM in Saigon.

2 Not found.

3 Telegram 1166 to Saigon, April 2, concerned improvement in medical care supplied to the rural population. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-262)

4 Not found.

145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 145. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 4, 1962—6:07 p.m.

1173. For Ambassador Nolting from Harriman.

1. Department increasingly concerned over constant implications in press generally of U.S. participation and direction, rather than purely support and training of Vietnamese against Viet Cong. Elements of international press and critics of our present policy continue to emphasize “growing U.S. involvement” the “moral responsibilities” and other similar concepts, implying Vietnamese situation is becoming more of a U.S. rather than a Vietnamese war. Even names of operations, such as Sunrise, Farmgate, suggest U.S. rather than GVN planning.

2. Part of this press picture is probably developed by observing support and advisory activities in which American presence is conspicuous, leading to conclusion U.S. is assuming leadership of operations, and noting public statements of partnership or joint relationship implying assumption U.S. responsibility.

3. An article in the New York Times Sunday Review Section April 1 by Homer Bigart reports a large group of American colonels and civilians inspected stockade in Operation Sunrise. Why do large groups of Americans inspect anything? It leads Bigart to report that “Americans were taking on a drastic program that was certain in the initial stages to be bitterly resented by the peasantry whose allegiance must be won.” His references to a U.S. officer helping to plan Sunrise further involves U.S. responsibility. In the eyes of the world these reports lead to this becoming our war rather than their war. This should be prevented.

4. There are two dangers, first, adverse international reaction to assumed U.S. dominance, and secondly, Viet Cong using conspicuous US military role to gain popular support from nationalists and anticolonialists by portraying U.S. as assuming former French role. American teams with battalions must not give local impression that they in command of operations.

5. It cannot be overstressed that the conduct and utterances public and private of all U.S. personnel must reflect the basic policy of this government that we are in full support of Viet-Nam but we do not assume responsibility for Viet-Namʼs war with the Viet-Cong. This responsibility remains with the GVN.

6. You should bring this telegram to the attention of all senior members of Task Force Saigon and request them to take appropriate action to impress this policy clearly upon all members of their respective organizations, and also in other ways get the cooperation of all concerned to devise means of minimizing U.S. presence and reducing public impression U.S. going beyond announced objectives.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-462. Secret; Priority. Also sent to CINCPAC for Polad. Drafted by Harriman and Cottrell, and cleared with Johnson.

146. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Director of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) 146. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Director of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow)1

Washington, April 5, 1962.

I have given your memorandum of April 2,2 concerning Congressman Saundʼs suggestion on Viet-Nam, to Cottrell. Itʼs an old story to me, going back to Korea. There is a lot of real reluctance on the part of the military. If anything is to be done about it, top-side pressure has to be brought. I personally agree with your thought, but I donʼt know if anybody else involved in the operation would want to do it. An exploration was made at the request of the President some months ago, and the seed didnʼt take. There are obviously logistic and command difficulties, but I still believe that as you say we are likely to be in Viet-Nam for a long period of time. Command difficulties could probably be worked out. We also might expect some trouble with the Vietnamese—but I donʼt know how serious that is. If anything is to be done on this whole subject, it will have to be on orders from on high.

W. Averell Harriman3

1 Source: Harriman Papers, Vietnam, 1962. Secret. A typed note at the bottom indicates that Harriman dictated but did not read the memorandum.

2 Actually April 3, Document 140.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

147. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 147. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 5, 1962.

SUBJECT

Thompson briefing to Viet-Nam Task Force2

Mr. Thompson replied to questions at the Viet-Nam Task Force today for an hour and a half. He fully covered his pacification strategy. Some of his opinions/conclusions are of interest.

a. Setting up of strategic hamlets and defended villages should not be rushed, should be phased with availability of required resources, material and human.

b. Next dry season will see first test of pacification strategy as VC must react to maintain contact with the population. Question is will GVN be able to resist VC attacks successfully.

c. He is reluctant to estimate the time required to beat the VC, but is thinking in terms of 3-6 years.

d. He stresses need for border ranger force.

e. US should get the GVN machinery working properly (administration and supervision), but stay clear of the sharp end (village level). He thinks the village organization is the best element in SVN.

f. SVN river forces do not yet control the Delta waterways.

g. The SVN troops are tiring; some units must be rotated out of combat or security tasks.

His talk carried unexpressed implications which I suggest you may wish to explore Friday morning:3 a. GVN organization and capability for control, planning, and public information, and intelligence remains ineffective.

b. The numbers of Americans in SVN is growing too large; the VC can develop a case that the US is running the show and have in fact replaced the French with all its implications.

I have attached suggested questions which can probe these issues further.

W.H.B.4

[Attachment]

SUGGESTED QUESTIONS

1. Is the GVN capable now of waging a successful war against the VC?

2. To what extent will Diem respond to advice as to organization for, and implementation of, the province pacification strategy?

3. Is there a need for closer liaison with GVN ministries at the seat of government by selected and limited US (or UK) personnel with special qualifications?

4. Why is Diem resisting release of ranger companies for mobile operations along the border areas?

5. What deficiencies, prejudices, or capabilities are slowing GVN effectiveness in the public information and intelligence fields?

6. Are there too many non-Asian advisors now in Saigon? In the countryside?

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 Thompson was in Washington April 2-7 to brief U.S. officials on the situation in South Vietnam. He traveled from Saigon via CINCPAC Headquarters in Honolulu, where he arrived on March 30.

3 April 6; no record of this meeting has been found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

148. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman), White House, Washington, April 6, 1962, 4:55 p.m. 148. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman), White House, Washington, April 6, 1962, 4:55 p.m.1

White House, Washington, April 6, 1962, 4:55 p.m.

South Viet-Nam

The President read the letter from Ambassador Galbraith dated April 5, 1962 with the enclosed memorandum.2 Governor Harriman indicated that while he agreed with some of the conclusions in the memorandum, he had difficulty with others. He thought it was important that the overt association of the U.S. with military operations in Viet-Nam be reduced to absolute minimum. He showed the President a telegram to Ambassador Nolting on this subject.3 The President agreed with the position expressed in the telegram.

Governor Harriman also said he supported the idea of using the forthcoming ICC report, if it adopted a strong enough position, as a means of investigating whether a common reduction of involvement by the Viet Minh and the U.S. could be achieved. The Governor said he was not in favor, however, of an attempt to reconvene the Geneva Conference or to seek a neutral solution in Viet-Nam.

The Governor said that while he thought that Diem was a losing horse in the long run, he did not think we should actively work against him, because there was nobody to replace him. Rather our policy should be to support the government and people of Viet-Nam, rather than Diem personally.

The President asked that Ambassador Galbraithʼs memorandum be forwarded to Secretary McNamara for his comments. (I will do.) The President asked what instructions should be given to Galbraith with respect to an Indian approach to Hanoi with a view to exploring the possibility of getting them to withdraw from Viet-Nam in conjunction with us. Governor Harriman replied that we should await the ICC report before deciding our reaction to an Indian approach to Hanoi. If the report is strong, the approach might be worthwhile. The President agreed but said that instructions should nevertheless be sent to Galbraith, and that he would like to see such instructions.4 (Harriman will do early next week; I will make sure the President clears.) The President observed generally that he wished us to be prepared to seize upon any favorable moment to reduce our involvement, recognizing that the moment might yet be some time away.

The President thought it was very important and specifically requested that we prepare now a U.S. position on the anticipated report from the ICC. (I will pass this along to State.)

The President asked why defoliation had not been tested elsewhere than Viet-Nam before being tried. He asked Forrestal to investigate.

[Here follows a section on Laos.]

MVF

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, 1/62-5/62. Top Secret. Prepared by Forrestal. The meeting was held at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs log. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Appointment Books)

2 See Document 141.

3 Presumably Document 145.

4 The instructions referred to here have not been found.

149. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 149. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, April 6, 1962.

SUBJECT

Thompson Visit

R.G.K. Thompson, formerly Permanent Secretary of Defense in Malaya, now Chief of the British Advisory Mission in Saigon, during his visit in Washington between April 2 and 7, made the following points in various conversations held with Department, Defense and TF/VN meetings.

1) Diem. Generally unpopular in Saigon, particularly with the “intellectuals”. Much more respected in rural areas. They seem to appreciate that Diem has always insisted that Viet-Nam is an agrarian country whose pattern of life is centered in the villages. His agroville program, his frequent visits to the villages and public statements have all emphasized this orientation. For instance, the last Presidential election, although opposing candidates were weak, did not reveal a rigged, forced vote for Diem. It was apparently held with a minimum of coercion. Chances of getting anything better than Diem is very “chancy”. If there were an Army split struggle for power, upon an event of accident to Diem, you could have a chaotic situation wherein the Communists might be able to move in. Therefore, it seems the most prudent policy to go along with the Diem regime, attempting to urge improvements where possible.

2) Villages. This is the key to the Vietnamese situation. You must obtain support of the villages in order to win the war. You cannot win unless you get it. There is tremendous energy in the villages, and if a proper framework is established which will provide them security they will fight in their own behalf to preserve a traditional village system against the Viet Cong. Other considerations are important but peripheral. Diem is a strong village man and has in effect said “the hell with the intellectuals”. It is a fact that the villages are anti-Communist, not necessarily pro-Diem.

3) Nationalism and Communism. It is most important to press the distinction. Many so-called Viet Cong are not fighting for Communism. They are with the Viet Cong because they still believe that the Viet Cong are fighting a nationalistic war against foreign domination. Psychological and informational activities should be directed to destroying the link between Nationalism and Communism which now exists. This means that foreign assistance to Viet-Nam must be played in the lowest possible key. Vietnamese should kill Vietnamese but never foreigners killing Vietnamese. The Viet Cong would love to get the Americans more committed to combat in Viet-Nam because they could then wrap themselves in the cloak of Nationalism and recruit more Vietnamese for the fight against the foreign devils. This is why the British believe we should play down U.S. participation. Conclusion: We should avoid putting a large number of foreigners “at the sharp end”.

Translated into operations this means that the U.S. presence in the field where they are visible to villagers and Viet Cong should be minimized. On the other hand, doctors, USOM people, or Civic Action people who are handing out services or goods cause no problem.

4) Strategic Hamlet Problem. Brother Nhu has taken a very active interest and for the first time has assumed an executive role as Administrator of the Strategic Hamlet Program. Much of his thinking is good although the program was kicked-off in exaggerated terms. He set up targets of 12,000 strategic hamlets to be completed in 18 months and this started a race between the Province Chiefs to frantically build these installations with attendant imposition on the villagers. Twelve of these new hamlets got hit badly in one Corps area because security infrastructure had not been set up concurrently. Nhu now has lowered his sights and is proceeding more slowly. Thompson has insisted that the hamlet program be carefully integrated into the Delta Plan with the necessary security measures keeping pace with the construction of the hamlets. They now seem to be on the right track. Experience in Malaya indicates that the Government must be firm in resettling villagers and that a certain amount of resentment can be expected at the outset. Later, however, when the benefits, both security and social, become apparent to villagers they generally get to like the system.

5) Communications. This is not yet working properly. Villages where communications have been installed, the results are excellent. The point behind communications is that Viet Cong bands on the move can keep twenty-four hours ahead of any news about them. However, if their presence is communicated from village to village they can be intercepted and cut up. If the network of communications is set up covering sector after sector in connecting links, it would drastically cut the mobility of the Viet Cong. Every effort should be made to hasten the construction of the communications network. Radio should not be put in every hamlet because this is too confusing. Hamlets can use gongs, flares, drums and other simple devices to alert the nearest village.

6) Navy. GVN control of the waterways in the Delta area is one of its major weaknesses. Time after time the Viet Cong attack and get away over the rivers in dugouts. This should never happen. The GVN must work out methods of controlling and denying the use to the Viet Cong. A program seems to be under way with U.S. help but it must be made effective at the earliest possible moment.

7) Civil Guard. Training seems to be going ahead as fast as it can. Civil Guard river patrols are most necessary and getting the civil guard into place to protect the new villages is essential.

8) Self Defense Corps. Beginning to function. Must be tied into the “dear and hold” operations. Self Defense Corps is the key in the village to lead the defense.

9) Sunrise. Plan by the Province Chief of Binh Duong and the Minister of Interior. Thompson is a bit worried about this plan because it involves one of the toughest provinces and the forces needed to keep it clean will be tied down to defense duties. He had urged unsuccessfully that the “clean and hold” operations start in easier areas and push forward against the stronger provinces. It does, however, show a good spirit on the part of the Vietnamese and indicates the right direction.

10) Air Power. Thompson was worried several months ago about the damage from any indiscriminate attacks. Says he thinks the situation is much improved through the installation of a JOC and TAC. However, the use of air in the form of the helicopters, 123, and attack planes has been remarkably effective. It has crippled Viet Cong freedom to attack in large formations and has had a telling effect on Viet Cong morale. He thought the overall effect of some villagers being killed accidentally in attacks on villages probably depended upon how other villagers reacted. He thought it might be minimum because it was his impression that the villages are fairly self-contained units psychologically and are relatively indifferent to the fate of the other villages. He said there probably would be certain bad reactions by mistakes which would make it more difficult to reclaim previous Viet Cong controlled villages which may have been attacked but thought in general the application of air power was being handled properly.

11) Delta Plan. The original concept paper2 has been approved by Diem but he does not know about the four implementing instructions. He said he hopes they do not publish them widely because it would assist the Viet Cong. However, instructions must be issued. Question in his mind is whether the GVN would modify them.

12) Chain of Command. Unfortunately, almost all of the province chiefs are Army officers. He has suggested that they all be put in civilian clothes to emphasize the civilian function of their work. Acting as they do, as military men, the Regimental Command of the ARVN is presently wasted. The Province Chief should rely on the Regimental Commander as his military arm. Now battalions are scattered all around the provinces under the Province Chief. He said if he had his way he would cut the telephone lines between Province Chiefs and Diem, in order to prevent the present crossing of wires.

13) Intelligence. Much should be done. Self Defense Corps should be basic intelligence unit “winkling out” the Viet Cong from the villages, collecting intelligence through the villagers and in sounding the alarm when attacked.

14) POWs. In Malaya they sorted them out into white, gray, and black. The whites were given relative freedom and attempts were made to reintegrate them quickly back into society. The gray took longer treatment and the blacks were hard-core Commies. The only occasional success they had with the blacks was to use an ex-Commie who was smarter than the black. They found that the blacks all had a certain fixed conviction which could not be shaken except by an ex Commie.3

15) Length of the War. The Malayan emergency lasted twelve years but after the first six years the battle had essentially been won. The last six was a mop-up operation. Some factors are more favorable in Viet-Nam but some less. Thompson said he would not like to have this go on record, but a rough guess would be not less than three years to win the main battle and it might be five or six. One of the main favorable factors is the remarkable vigor and strength of the Vietnamese villagers which has been true historically. One of the more unfavorable factors is that Viet-Nam is bordered by three sanctuaries, Cambodia, Laos and North Viet-Nam.

16) Crop Destruction. This should be left for the GVN. Foreigners should not be actively involved. At present there is no shortage of food for the Viet Cong so efforts at crop destruction would probably not be too effective. After provinces have been all cleared of Viet Cong then crop destruction would work more effectively. In Malaya they did very little by air. Most of it was done on the ground when they ran into patches in the jungle which were being used by the terrorists.

17) Montagnards. They have been badly treated to date because the Vietnamese have failed to appreciate the differences and make allowances for tribal customs and ways of life which were different from the rest of the Vietnamese. Important point is if the Montagnards are on the GVN side no Viet Cong could exist in the jungle.

18) Rangers. Most important that rangers be put back in their proper role. They should be trained to work in the jungle for up to six weeks at a stretch. At present they are unwilling to live in the jungle longer than a week or so. The secret is that ranger companies must deliberately get lost from the Viet Cong. At that point they become extremely dangerous because the Viet Cong movements are hampered by the very fact that they donʼt know where the ranger companies may be.

19) Casualties. After the security structures are in place and Viet-Cong casualties go up their recruiting afterward becomes very difficult. Morale sags fast among terrorists who are hit frequently and hard. One of the principal weaknesses of the guerrillas is that they must carry off their wounded. This has a bad effect on the remainder particularly if they are unable to leave them in villages for medical attention.

20) Civic Action. The Ministry is not so good and Corps has touch of the old Hitler youth. The idea of arming them is wrong because Civic Action people should not be soldiers or intelligence officers, otherwise they reinforce the distrust of the district and provincial officers. They should be used as manpower to join those under orders of the provincial and district officials. Most important, Civic Action Teams should not usurp the functions of other Departments. For instance, the Health Department and the Education Department should be relied upon for those services in Civic Action.

21) Multi-National Effort. This has certain political advantages in spreading the load and responsibilities but from the Vietnamese point of view we are all tarred with the same brush. Only the Vietnamese should shoot Vietnamese. This is a GVN war against Vietnamese terrorist intruders. We should help but not get out and fight or turn it into a multi-national war against the Viet Cong.

22) ARVN vs Viet Cong Dedication. Ideology doesn't play too strong a role since 70-80% of the Viet Cong are locals. They are fighting for reasons other than Communist ideology, Nationalism being one of the strongest. The ARVN chaps seem to be well motivated against the Communists but many of them have been fighting too long and need a rest.4

23) Information. This is one of the weakest links and is not properly organized yet. Radio, newspapers, pamphlets, propaganda need coordinating so that the GVN is telling the same story through all media. The political and psychological barrier against the Viet Cong should be done through proper information.

24) Terminology. Although it seems rather inconsequential it is important to get the labels straight. For instance, the use of “psywar” is often misused in connection with friendly population instead of enemy. Another example is Viet Cong, dignifying them by labeling them as Vietnamese whereas in Malaya they deliberately called them “Communist terrorists”. A number of these labels should be adjusted if possible.

25) Administration. The villages are the best administrative units in Viet-Nam and the central government probably has the poorest administration. In Malaya the Government still practices the way they were taught by the British, namely, that the decisions of the Cabinet were relayed to the various ministries in clear written form. The ministries then had the authority they needed to proceed. Thompson said he might be able to make an impression on the Vietnamese Government to follow the administrative line in a saner fashion. He said Thuan was very receptive to the idea and urged him to hammer on these points with Diem. For tactical reasons, Thompson said, he thought it was a mistake to press too many “reforms” at one time and up to this point he was concentrating on getting the village system set up with adequate security. When he goes back he will pursue some other ideas including this administrative one. He said he thought it was vital to get our priorities straight in Viet-Nam. The security system comes first and the rest later. He said he thought the next six months would be vital in determining whether the villages were going to be able to reorganize themselves in all fields to achieve ultimate success. In the meantime the foreigners should provide and assist and advise [as] unobtrusively as possible.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 67 D 54, Poll 7. Secret. No drafting information is given on the source text but it is signed “Cot.”

2 Document 113.

3 At this point is the following notation in an unidentified hand: “As I heard it, 'which could be shaken by a smarter ex-commie, and which had to be replaced by something else.

4 At this point is the following notation in an unidentified hand: “Hence, 1,000 desertions/month!”

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 150. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 7, 1962—8 p.m.

1277. For Assistant Secretary Harriman from Nolting. Deptel 1173.2 Your message has been read by all principal officers Task Force Saigon and its importance stressed. We have all been striving for many weeks to prevent and correct the kind of reporting to which you refer, for the reasons given your tel. Will continue do everything possible to keep reporting in perspective, stressing, as we have been doing, fact that US role here is advisory and supporting, and does not involve US direction, control, leadership, or responsibility for Vietnamese struggle. Since receipt Deptel 1006,3 I think we have made headway in enlisting cooperation of majority US press corps here, but there are still certain exceptions. Davis has been working constantly and effectively on this and related problems. Given scope and magnitude US assistance, however, attainment our objectives will require self-discipline on part of press and interest in more accurate and balanced reporting.

Vietnamese themselves invented code word “Binh Minh” (translate “Sunrise”). We taking steps to assure that shorthand names for other GVN operations have indigenous character.

Bigartʼs reference to “large group Americans” inspecting stockade apparently confuses military operation with dedication ceremony of Cu Chi strategic village. No large group Americans involved in either, but about a dozen Americans, representatives of civilian agencies as well as military, attended dedication ceremony Cu Chi March 28 on invitation GVN. Numbers were deliberately held down below those invited.

All members team Saigon will continue do their utmost on this problem.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/4-1762. Secret Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 145.

3 Document 75.

151. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 151. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 9, 1962.

SUBJECT

Galbraith letter on SVN2

The memorandum enclosure of a letter from Amb Galbraith to the President is attached; the views of the President and Gov Harriman on the letter, as expressed at the Friday meeting,3 are also appended.

A summary of the content of these papers follows.

Ambassador Galbraith

1. Use the forthcoming ICC report4 on DRV and GVN/US violations of the Geneva Accords to seek withdrawal of DRV support of the Viet Cong. The US, in exchange, would reduce its assistance to SVN to normal levels.

2. The Communist view on accommodation would be ascertained through approaches by India or the USSR. Any subsequent agreement would be sought on the basis of the Geneva Accords.

3. Corollary goals would be trade relations between north and south Viet-Nam and eventual reunification. The US would play down its support of Diem.

4. In any event, the US should resist further increases in US personnel in SVN and avoid direct US participation in the pacification strategy and other rural activities.

The President

1. The US involvement in SVN should be reduced at the first favorable moment although it is recognized this may not be possible in the near future.

2. A US position should be prepared now on the anticipated report from the ICC including draft instructions to Amb Galbraith on a possible approach to India.

Governor Harriman

1. The objective to play down US participation in the SVN conflict is a sound and previously agreed course of action.

2. US policy use of the forthcoming ICC report should be formulated after the substance of the report can be studied.

3. It is not advisable to reconvene a Geneva conference or to seek a neutral solution in Viet-Nam.

4. We should not actively work against Diem because there is nobody to replace him.

It seems to me that the Galbraith proposals pose certain basic considerations which should be faced, at least informally, before we move too far toward accommodation: 1. What are the US objectives in SVN and Southeast Asia and what are the prospects of achieving those objectives?

2. Is the establishment of a neutral belt in Southeast Asia a practical concept and does it satisfy US objectives in the area?

3. The Geneva Accords of 1954 were formulated prior to Communist intrusions into Laos. Should we initiate action for accommodation in SVN before the particulars of a Laos settlement are known and tested?

W.H.B.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-030-69. Top Secret. At the top of the document, Taylor wrote: “See me.”

2 See Document 141.

3 See Document 148.

4 See Document 208.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 152. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 10, 1962—8 p.m.

1289. Our 1273.2 Trueheart and Mendenhall had second talk with Lac April 9. Lac will be attached to Thuan in latterʼs capacity as Coordinating SecState for Security. Lac indicated he expects work as “chief of staff” to Thuan in coordinating pacification planning and operations in Delta. Expects maintain close liaison with other ministries including Civic Action and Interior in particular. Does not expect issue orders in his own name to other ministries or to regional delegates or military officers outside Saigon but rather to work through tact and persuasion and any orders issued will be in name of Thuan or President.

Since we understand overall Delta Pacification Directive says Thuan will be responsible to President for execution of plan but SecState Interior still responsible for strategic hamlet program (despatch 355),3 we asked Lac how this would work. He anticipates no trouble since Thuan sits on strategic hamlets committee and SecState Interior comes under Thuanʼs overall coordinating authority in latterʼs capacity as Coordinating SecState for Security.

Lac told us President has not yet approved four “instructions” under overall Delta Pacification Directive on coordination. strategic hamlets, population control and civic action. Lac himself in process studying drafts of these instructions with view toward recommending to Thuan and President form they should take and any substantive changes he considers necessary.

Specific problem on which he focusing is coordinating mechanism in corps tactical zones, specifically 5th, 7th and 21st Division areas in 3rd Corps tactical zone. Lac inclined recommend formula that Division commander should be head of coordinating committee because of his control of troops which may have to be used outside as well as within area encompassed in Delta Pacification Plan. Exception might be made in case of General Cao, whose pacification operations in 5th Division area already well advanced.

Lac now beginning assemble his staff but evidently this is going to take time. He feels (and we agree) that it would be wiser use personnel who will be permanent members his staff to conduct studies in provinces as base for developing pacification planning rather than drawing in temporary personnel. He quite prepared that we work with him on these planning studies in provinces.

As foreshadowed reftel province studies moving in different direction from earlier generalized provincial surveys. Can be expected new studies in conjunction Lac and his staff will be keyed closely to specific pacification planning needs. We are sure Dept will agree this is desirable shift in emphasis. Appears to us under these circumstances that Americans working with Lac and his staff on province studies should be those who will continue work with him and lower echelon Vietnamese officials in execution plans in order maintain continuity of familiarity with situation and what is being done about it. Will be desirable also associate USOM directly with these studies and believe in view Lacʼs present attitude this should be readily possible.

In view length time which may still be involved before new type province study gets underway as well as desirability maintaining continuity American personnel working on pacification we reluctantly conclude that Heavner should probably return Washington. Regret it has not been possible induce GVN move faster on surveys while he was here but think it has nevertheless been useful to Task Force Vietnam for him to have had fresh first hand look at Vietnam. Heavner would like stay an additional ten days or two weeks in order visit several southern provinces on his own prior return. Request instructions re Heavner.4

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.S/4-1062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Telegram 1273 from Saigon, April 6, reported on a talk between Mendenhall and Lac on April 4 about provincial surveys. Lac, who impressed Mendenhall with his intelligence and straightforwardness, had not previously heard of the provincial surveys but was awaiting an appointment with Thuan to ascertain his responsibilities. (Ibid., 751K.5/4-662)

3 See Document 46.

4 Heavner was in Vietnam during March and April to assist with provincial surveys) see Document 173.

153. Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Vietnam Affairs, Agency for International Development (Stoneman) 153. Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Vietnam Affairs, Agency for International Development (Stoneman)1

Washington, April 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Inter-Agency Meeting on Vietnam Civic Action Problems—April 10, 1962

The attendees are listed on the attached sheet.2

Mr. Stoneman explained that he had asked Mr. Wood, Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force, to be co-chairman of this meeting, which had grown far beyond what had originally been intended, namely, an informal discussion between himself and a few DOD officials on the current status and problems of civic action in Vietnam.

It was recognized at the outset that the questions being discussed at this meeting were dependent more on action by the GVN and U.S. Missions co-ordination in Saigon than on Washington action. It was also pointed out that recent cables such as Embtels 1166 and 11713 were already sent to elicit information from the field which appears necessary to enable Washington to more effectively support field endeavors in civic action.

The meeting agenda consisted essentially of the following series of questions with an attempt to formulate lines of action for dealing with them: 1. What is the relationship among civic action (which by definition is performed by military forces), rural development (as supported by AID), and other programs supported by USIA … ? Mr. Stoneman proposed that the principal focus of action be on how to help the GVN to gain and hold the allegiance of the rural population throughout Vietnam without respect to bureaucratic considerations as to whether it is technically civic action being done by military types, or rural development being done by civilians being supported by AID, USIA or CIA. It was emphasized that the sweep of action which is necessary to make the pacification program a success in Vietnam requires that help to the villages be a continuum and not unduly segmented because of agency and funding categories. It was proposed that in all planning and staff work with respect to this problem, the focus be on continuous attention to the villages and that, to this end, the phrase “Civic Action (military)—Rural Development” be employed. It is hoped that this approach will help assure that there are not gaps between various agency functions, and that in Washington staff work attention will be focused on the total spectrum of what is being done for the rural population, rather than on individual agencyʼs program.

2. What is the co-ordinating mechanism in being, and what new might be needed, with respect to military-civil activities (a) within the Vietnamese government, (b) within U.S. agencies in Vietnam, and (c) within U.S. agencies in Washington? Some discussion revolved around the fact that the Ministry of Civic Action of the Vietnamese Government is in fact concerned with civilian-type assistance to the villagers. It was also pointed out that by virtue of their superior organization and staffing, the Vietnamese military have more capability than the civil agencies for civic action-type work.

With respect to co-ordination of U.S. agencies in Saigon, it was suggested by some that this was quite effective, but there remains an uneasy feeling that there seemed to be several unexplained gaps in information and the flow of work that might indicate that more effective co-ordination is yet to be desired. There was discussion as to whether a single director should be appointed to preside over all U.S. agenciesʼ efforts within any particular field, such as medical services.

With respect to co-ordination in Washington, Mr. Stoneman (with Mr. Woodʼs concurrence) suggested that closer and more regular interagency co-ordination might be fruitful, but that in lieu of any more standing committees, this need be met by adding a regular civic action agenda item to the weekly meetings of the Vietnam Task Force. Among other things, this would frequently bring civic action specialists into the TF/VN forum. Emphasis would be more on solving problems than on formal reports.

3. Considerable discussion revolved around whether a problem in fact remained with respect to the reported inability to use MAP funds for certain types of civilian aid such as medicines to be dispensed to civilians by VN military civic action teams, and as to whether there were AID procedural blocks to the fullest of AID support of military civic action activities. It was widely agreed that what is needed is a completely integrated approach to the basic problem of pacification in Vietnam, and that there needs to be complete flexibility with respect to cross-servicing between the U.S. military and civilian agencies with the primary criteria being (a) what is the need, (b) who can best meet it within the time-frame involved. Specific questions regarding such things as cross-servicing on medical supplies and on personnel are to be vigorously explored among various agency staff members present.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 8. GVN, 1962, Information & Civic Action. Confidential. Stoneman prepared the memorandum on April 18.

2 Not printed.

3 Document 144 and footnote 3 thereto.

154. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 154. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 11, 1962—8 p.m.

1296. Task Force VN. Following is interim reply Deptel 1171.2 In recognition urgent need for complete integration civil and military civic action and rural rehabilitation programs, Task Force Saigon established late March inter-agency committee on province rehabilitation chaired by DCM. Committeeʼs principal role is to coordinate all US programs to maximize our assistance to GVN rural rehabilitation activities. It is working closely with Secstate Thuan and with Col. Lac, newly appointed head of Delta Pacification Program, and expects meet this week with Nhuʼs interministerial committee for strategic hamlets.

Considerable planning already done on US side and there was completed some time ago time phased “Outline Plan for Counterinsurgency Operations” (being pouched)3 which includes overall concept of operations, machinery for control and coordination (that is, who will do what on GVN side), detailed outline of military, political, economic, and psychological counterinsurgency operations; time-phasing and geographic phasing concepts. Plan approved by TF Saigon and is being used as guidelines for above committee. On GVN side, President Diem on March 16 promulgated much of Thompson Delta Pacification Plan in presidential decree no. 1/QP.4 Text will be sent Dept for TF as soon as Col. Lac furnishes us Vietnamese copy to compare with informal English translation we now have. With this decree we have for first time an approved policy framework for provincial rehabilitation programs much as we visualize. Another breakthrough was March 28 issuance OCAG-developed Military Civic Action Program as JGS Directive.5

Re geographical phasing, decree establishes category of first priority provinces in third corps tactical zone compatible with MAAG priorities developed separately. Our next step will be to refine these priorities with GVN to launch across-the-board civil/military rehabilitation operations simultaneously, if possible, in 31st, 32nd, and 33rd Division tactical zones. At same time we proposing separate similar operation for Quang Ngai Province, or, if GVN should prefer, other area outside Delta.

Until provincial priorities assigned and detailed planning for these operations begun, we shall not be in position develop meaningful estimates of material and personnel requirements. We shall have better idea of requirements and magnitude of problem as provincial rehabilitation activities get off ground in days ahead.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-1162. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 144.

3 Document 11. Pouched in despatch 429 from Saigon, April 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-1662)

4 Document 113.

5 Not found.

155. Circular Telegram From the Department of State 155. Circular Telegram From the Department of State1

Washington, April 11, 1962—4:58 p.m.

Circular 1730. 1. Department seriously concerned by impression created by some press reports that the war in Viet-Nam is a U.S. war, and which imply that it is war which U.S. is directing, in which U.S. is participating and for which U.S. is responsible. Critics of our present policy emphasize “growing U.S. involvement,” “U.S. moral responsibilities,” and similar concepts, as well as role of U.S. military personnel. This erroneous impression carries two dangers: a) adverse international reaction to assumed U.S. involvement and b) psychological support for Viet Cong who can gain popular backing from nationalists and anti-colonialists by pointing to conspicuous U.S. military role and portraying U.S. as assuming former French dominance.

2. This impression is factually wrong and lacking perspective. Purpose this message therefore is to enjoin on all posts in discussing Viet-Nam war to avoid above terms but rather to make following points: a. U.S. has given Viet-Nam military assistance since 1950 and at GVN request this assistance has been expanded in the past two years to help GVN defeat the Communist subversive aggression.

b. Assistance consists of materiel and equipment for Vietnamese security forces; advisers to these forces; and air transport capabilities, cargo planes and helicopters, to supplement presently inadequate Vietnamese capabilities.

c. U.S. military personnel are not participating directly in war nor are they directing war. Major U.S. effort is to train instructors rather than troops. However, given fluidity and ubiquity of guerrilla warfare, necessarily Americans suffer occasional casualties in carrying out their training and logistical functions—e.g., taking part in training patrol exercises.

d. In view of the seriousness of the Viet Cong aggression U.S. effort consequently substantial. Quite naturally American correspondents find U.S. effort most newsworthy subject for American public. This emphasis however tends distort facts: it is Vietnamese war. They are fighting it and retain full responsibility for it. U.S. role is limited to assisting them in maintaining independence.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-1162. Official Use Only. Sent to Embassies in 15 Asian countries and to Canberra, Wellington, Paris, London, and Ottawa. Drafted by Chapman; cleared with Cottrell, Manell, Usher, and Link; and approved by Rice.

156. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Williams) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 156. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Williams) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, April 14, 1962.

I-16294/62

Problem: To respond to the Presidentʼs request for your comments concerning Ambassador Galbraithʼs memorandum on Vietnam.2

Discussion: The Presidentʼs request for comments did not specify that only military aspects should be treated. In view of the nature of Ambassador Galbraithʼs memo, meaningful comment necessarily ranges beyond the narrow military implications. However, the proposed comments conform with Special National Intelligence Estimate No. 10-62, dated 21 Feb 62.3

Mr. Cottrell of the Department of State advises that Ambassador Galbraithʼs memorandum has not been referred to State for formal staffing and comment. Mr. Harriman regards it as a private communication to the President from Ambassador Galbraith. However, an initial draft of the attached memorandum to the President was reviewed by Mr. Cottrell and his comments have been considered.

Recommendation: That you sign the enclosed memorandum.

Concurrences: None required.

[Attachment]

Memorandum for the President4

SUBJECT

Policy Toward Vietnam

Comments concerning Ambassador Galbraithʼs memorandum of 4 April 1962 on the subject of Vietnam are submitted in response to your request.

The burden of Mr. Galbraithʼs proposals appears to be that present US policy toward Vietnam should be revised in order to seek a political solution to the problem of Communist penetration in the area. The effect of these proposals is to put the United States in a position of initiating negotiations with the Communists to seek disengagement from what is by now a well-known commitment to take a forthright stand against Communism in Southeast Asia. The various measures approved for implementation by the United States in support of our objectives in South Vietnam have not yet been underway long enough to demonstrate their full effectiveness. Any reversal of US policy could have disastrous effects, not only upon our relationship with South Vietnam, but with the rest of our Asian and other allies as well.

We accept the judgment of the U.S. intelligence community expressed in SNIE 10-62 (21 February 1962) as follows: “The long-range Communist Bloc objectives in Southeast Asia are to eliminate U.S. influence and presence and to establish Communist regimes throughout the area. Although the Communist powers have some differences of view as to tactics and priorities and the risks to be run in pursuing their objectives, they have thus far maintained a basic unity of ultimate objectives and a high degree of policy coordination with respect to Southeast Asia.”

Ambassador Galbraith may not be aware that although our military assistance and support of South Vietnam has grown, our military commitment has continued as stated in your letter of 14 December 1961 to President Diem: “Your letter underlines what our own information has convincingly shown—that the campaign of force and terror now being waged against your people and your Government is supported and directed from the outside by the authorities at Hanoi. …5 In response to your request, we are prepared to help the Republic of Vietnam to protect its people and to preserve its independence. We shall promptly increase our assistance to your defense effort. … If the Communist authorities in North Vietnam will stop their campaign to destroy the Republic of Vietnam, the measures we are taking to assist your defense efforts will no longer be necessary.”

Our present policy in South Vietnam does contain some risk of military escalation. The alternative is U.S. withdrawal, which is tantamount to abandoning South Vietnam to the Communists. The Department of Defense considers this unacceptable. To prevent the fall of South Vietnam to Communist aggression and subsequent loss of the remainder of the Southeast Asian mainland must remain our unalterable objective. The military considerations involved are clear. Also of major importance is the psychological impact that a firm position by the United States will have on the countries of the world—both free and Communist. South Vietnam is a testing ground of U.S. resolution in Asia.

More important than these immediate losses are the eventualities which could follow for the remainder of non-Communist Asia.

The problems raised by Mr. Galbraith with regard to our present policy have been considered in the coordinated development of that policy. There follows discussion of several points in Ambassador Galbraithʼs memorandum which are seriously questioned by the Department of Defense.

There is general recognition of the deficiencies of the present Government of Vietnam. At the same time it should be recognized that the Government also has notable strengths and has recently taken measures to increase its popular support and to mobilize the entire country in support of the war effort. The present policy of supporting the Diem regime, while applying continued pressure for improvement, appears to be the only practicable alternative at this time

The parallel between the present U.S. and past French roles in Vietnam is unjustified. The following statement in your State of the Union Address bears on this point: “The systematic aggression now bleeding that country is not a ‘war of liberation’—for Vietnam is already free. It is a war of attempted subjugation and it will be resisted.” French forces participated directly in the prior struggle; U.S. personnel have only an indirect role and are not subject to “bleeding” in the sense implied.

We are mindful of the probability that the Communists will attempt to identify the U.S. with initially unpopular measures associated with pacification. Accordingly, the activities of our advisors are being regulated to avoid conspicuous participation in these measures.

We concur that the door must be kept open for a political solution, but the policy advanced by Ambassador Galbraith does not address the basic problem. His proposal contains the essential elements sought by the Communists for their takeover by providing a set of rules which the free world would be forced to obey, while the Communists secretly break the rules to gain their objective. The Department of Defense concurs with Secretary Rusk in his statement of 1 March 1962: “In reference to the demand by the Communists that the co-Chairmen of the 1954 Geneva Conference and other countries concerned consult regarding Vietnam, the U.S. is always willing to talk about situations which represent a threat to the peace, but what must be talked about is the root of the trouble; in this case it is the Communist aggression in Vietnam in disregard of the Geneva Accords… . There can be peace overnight in Vietnam if those responsible for the aggression wish peace. The situation is just as simple as that.”6

It must be recognized that a suspension of Viet Cong activity would be readily terminable by the Communists and is not a concession equivalent to a “standstill on an introduction of men and material” and “phased American withdrawal.” Such withdrawal would leave South Vietnam incapable of continuing development of a permanent basis for resisting Communist subversion and would be, in fact, a surrender of Vietnam.

Because of the foregoing, the Department of Defense cannot concur in the policy advanced by Ambassador Galbraith, but believes strongly that present policy toward South Vietnam should be pursued vigorously to a successful conclusion.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files. FRC 65 A 3501, Vietnam 1962,-2. Secret. At the bottom of the page is the following handwritten note: “For record-SecDef has talked to Amb Galbraith and feels no reply needed. Mr. Forrestal informed this date none would be sent. April 17.” The memorandum, but not the attachment, is also printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, p. 466. A less detailed memorandum from Lemnitzer to McNamara, April 13, which makes some of the same points as the attachment, is ibid., pp. 464-465.

2 Document 141.

3 Document 78.

4 Drafted by Colonel Kent on April 14.

5 These and following ellipses are in the source text.

6 See Document 94.

157. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 157. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff1

Honolulu, April 15, 1962—7:23 p.m.

160523Z. SVN op for pacification. A. Your 4030 DTG 13144 3Z. B. Saigon 1296 to State DTD 11 Apr. C. Saigon airgram A-257 to State DTD 23 Mar. D. COMUSMACV 40313Z Cite MAC J5 364 (PASEP).2

1. Ref A requested info on Diemʼs plans to initiate pacification ops in three of the northern provinces, on status of Outline Plan for Counter-Insurgency ops, and on status of border control concept and ops.

2. Ref B will give you much of info desired. Outline plan desired has been pouched.3 Diem 16 Mar decree4 adopted much of Thompson Delta Plan and establishes certain provinces in central part of 3rd corps area as first priority. This is compatible with plans prepared here and by CHMAAG. GVN has accepted our concept that concurrent with ops in Delta region, additional ops will be conducted in 1st and 2nd Corps areas to keep enemy off balance and prevent fractioning of the country.VC build up in Quang Ngai area prompts selection this and adjacent provinces for early attention. In other words, Diem is responding favorably to American military strategic advice. It would appear also that headway is being made in areas other than military as, for instance, issuance of Civic Action Program on 28 Mar by Jt General Staff. However, there are reasons not to be starry-eyed.

3. Ref C prepared by Embassy Saigon is an assessment of political and economic factors in Vietnamese war. After reading the report, I requested COMUSMACV view as he sees situation through military eyes. Ref D is his reply in which you will note his comment that a master plan has not reached a final stage. The outstanding ingredient still lacking is efficient administration and coordination of the several programs. Further reforms are still necessary to success.

4. The above applies to paras 1 and 2 of your request (Ref A). In regard to border control, latest concept was discussed at SecDef Conf here on 21 Mar. CHMAAG ltr of 8 Nov 615 is somewhat [garble]. It was merely a collection of ideas—some good and others proven to be not so.COMUSMACV will keep us advised as border ops get underway.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Top Secret. Repeated to COMUSMACV and four other military commands.

2 Telegrams 4030 DTG 131443Z and COMUS MACV 40313Z Cite MAC J 5 364 (pasep) have not been found. Telegram 1296 and airgram A-257 are printed as Documents 154 and 127.

3 Document 11.

4 Document 113.

5 See Document 125; the letter has not been found.

158. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 158. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 16, 1962—8 p.m.

1309. Sihanoukʼs reiterated public urgings of international conference on Vietnam cause us growing concern. We believe that, unless prompt action is taken to put forth United States position of opposition to such conference, our political position vis-à-vis GVN will be impaired and, even more importantly, confidence of Vietnamese people and armed forces in United States support in war with Viet Cong may begin to waver.

Carefully nurtured efforts over past year by President Kennedyʼs statements and letters to Diem, Vice President Johnsonʼs visit to Vietnam and Taylor-Rostow mission to maintain confidence of Vietnamese in United States may well be brought to naught unless this move toward international conference on Vietnam is spiked as far as United States is concerned. Sihanoukʼs frequent headway to draw analogy between conference on Laos and conference he pushing on Vietnam is very thing most likely to raise serious doubts in Vietnamese minds about future United States intentions.

We believe therefore as a minimum United States should (a) make clear to Sihanouk its opposition to international conference on Vietnam (realizing that position conveyed to Sihanouk will almost certainly be made public by him) and (b) inform Diem what we are telling Sihanouk. We believe for sake our position among Vietnamese people and armed forces as well as to show international opinion clearly our stand on this issue it would be preferable for United States to make its own position public immediately after informing Diem and Sihanouk.

We recommend substance United States position be as follows: 1. Only issue for current discussion re Vietnam is cessation of aggression by Communist regime of North Vietnam against people and legally constituted government of South Vietnam. United States is quite prepared discussion this issue bilaterally through diplomatic channels with appropriate countries (meaning UK and USSR but without saying so publicly) in order make clear that its extraordinary military assistance measures to Republic of Vietnam will cease once guerrilla war in South Vietnam directed and supported by Communist regime in Hanoi has come to halt.

2. Since this is only issue for discussion and United States message on this score can be conveyed through bilateral channels to those whom it concerns, there is no reason at all in United States view to consider calling international conference on Vietnam and United States does not intend to consider matter further.

3. International conference already held on Vietnam at Geneva in 1954 agreed on cease-fire in Vietnam. United States and GVN have consistently respected this provision for sake of maintenance of peace. It is however Communist regime of North Vietnam which by its guerrilla war against Republic of Vietnam has upset the peace and stability established in Vietnam by the international conference held in 1954. There is no point whatsoever in convening a new international conference on Vietnam involving Communist regime in North Vietnam since it is violating basic purpose of Geneva Conference of 1954—re-establishment of peace in Vietnam.

4. As for idea neutralizing of South Vietnam sometimes bruited about, it is evident that peace of Vietnam and of Southeast Asia would be much better assured if it were North Vietnam that were neutralized since it is present Communist regime in that area that has upset the peace.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-1662. Secret; Priority. Repeated Phnom Penh, CINCPAC for Polad, London, Paris, Bangkok, Vientiane, Geneva for FECON, Taipei, Hong Kong, Manila, New Delhi, Ottawa, and Moscow. In a memorandum of April 17, Bagley informed Taylor that President Kennedy was interested in the view of the Department of State on this telegram and that Harrimanʼs initial reaction was not to make the public repudiation suggested by Nolting, but rather to inform Sihanouk privately that the United States opposed a conference. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69)

159. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President 159. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President1

Washington, April 16, 1962.

RE

Threats to Diem

Following the many rumors of a coup and possible assassination of Diem the two South Vietnamese pilots bombed the palace and Diem escaped.2 This action set off full-scale plotting against Diem to the extent that there are now three principal groups which have been organized to take over the country at the slightest provocation or opportunity.

The first group is composed mostly of political leaders and Diemʼs brother has even expressed his support of this particular element. A second group is a mixture of lesser political and lesser military personalities and is considered less likely than the other two to achieve success. The third group is potentially the most powerful since it controls the Armed Forces and can easily assume control of the Government. The leading figure is the Commanding General of the Army Field Command.

While no disaffection has yet appeared, it nevertheless seems certain that Diem will be overthrown. This would resolve one of the comparative minor problems of his conduct of government along lines suggested by the United States. However, precipitant action by one of these groups could well reverse the trend toward liberalism which Diem has begun to observe.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, Memos from Colonel Burris, Jan. 61-June 62. Secret.

2 See Documents 87 and 88.

160. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 160. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 17, 1962—5 p.m.

1311. Task Force Viet Nam. President Diem called me in April 16 to discuss question of crop defoliation. He made clear that he is as much in favor of this program as ever and indeed regards its implementation as “one-third of the battle” in the VC controlled areas where he wants to use it. In this conversation, he also showed much greater awareness of the need to employ crop defoliants with discrimination, i.e., in such a way as to avoid destruction of non-VC crops. Diem also emphasized that a prompt decision is necessary if another growing season is not to be missed.

I recalled to Diem that I had previously told him that at the last SecDef meeting in Honolulu2 it had been agreed that Washington would be asked to give us authority here in Saigon to authorize crop defoliation missions on a case by case basis. We had not yet received such authorization but he would appreciate that this was a difficult problem for the US Government.

Diem said that Colonel Trach (Vietnamese head of CDTC) had charge of this matter on Vietnamese side and was making careful study of suitable targets. He proposed that representatives of Colonel Trach and US representatives jointly overfly possible targets, map them and reach joint assessment of their suitability for defoliation. I agreed to put this proposal to my government.

General Harkins and I recommend that we be authorized to participate in joint target assessment with Vietnamese and again request authority to authorize Vietnamese crop defoliation missions on case by case basis.

Nolting

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security File; Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad. Attached to the source text was a memorandum from Bagley to Smith, April 25, noting that Cottrell was preparing a reply to be recommended to the White House.

2 See Document 124.

161. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) 161. Letter From the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) to the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell)1

Honolulu, April 17, 1962.

Dear Cot: In certain CINCPAC contingency plans the question arises of what our aims would be if military operations should ever develop against North Viet-Nam. That is, would we include the reunification of Viet-Nam by military means as one of our aims?2

As far as I can determine our position on the reunification of Viet-Nam remains that set forth in the Bedell Smith declaration of July 21, 1954 at Geneva3 which included the following: “In connection with the statement in the declaration concerning free elections in Viet-Nam my Government wishes to make clear its position which it has expressed in a declaration made in Washington on June 29, 1954 as follows:

“ʽIn the case of nations, now divided against their will, we shall continue to seek to achieve unity through free elections, supervised by the United Nations to insure that they are conducted fairly.ʼ”

I have seen no new policy pronouncements on this subject.4 Therefore, I assume that reunification of Viet-Nam by peaceful means continues to be our objective. I also assume, however, that reunification of Viet-Nam by military means would not be an aim of any military operations which might develop against North Viet-Nam short of a general war situation. I should be interested in any information you may have as to whether or not these assumptions are correct.

Sincerely yours,

Ed

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 20.1 GVN 1962. Secret.

2 Next to this sentence the word “No” was written.

3 For Smithʼs declaration, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. XVI, p. 1500.

4 Next to this sentence were written the words: “I believe this is correct.”

162. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 162. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 18, 1962.

SUBJECT

GVN responsiveness

Recent assessments of the situation in SVN stress that future success depends on the GVN ability to correlate diverse administrative requirements to implement the pacification strategy.

Doubts are expressed that the GVN can achieve this task. Diem has created a number of committees and councils in the past 3-4 months ostensibly designed to decentralize administrative control. No observer feels confident that these actions will be, or are, effective; the same deficiencies noted during the period of your mission prevail.

At the same time, Diem continues to resist basic improvements recommended by the US. Thompson has met a similar response when he engages in discussion of details. The Ambassador, General Harkins, and Mr. Thompson, from contact on the ground, caution slowness in pressing Diem along these lines.

The US, however, has executed in full measure its commitments to Diem, which stemmed from your mission, and assumed thereby a degree of responsibility for success. A vital part of the US-GVN contract was recognition that the GVN should seek improvement in administration and public image. Few think the victory can be won if Diem does not take steps toward limited liberalization of his regime. To assist him, the US offered, on GVN concurrence, to provide selected advisers on a mutually acceptable basis; Diem has not chosen to take up this proposal.

The question now is whether the US should continue to exert such influence it can on Diem and hope the GVN can do the job, or should it insist on certain minimum actions which will increase the odds that the GVN will do the job.

This issue was a difficult one last November and a source of US-GVN disagreement. Nevertheless, it is important we develop some sort of rationale on the problem. I suggest that this is the time for State to study the prospects in SVN. Recommendations should be made as to whether we should expect Diem to respond more positively in accordance with our jointly undertaken agreement or, alternatively, if a projection of present levels of progress represents a risk of future increased US involvement.

W.H.B.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-030-69. Secret.

163. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 163. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 18, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam Task Force Meeting 18 April 1962

Items of interest of Task Force meeting today were: a. State is in receipt of a telegram from Saigon (we do not yet have) requesting authority to allow Viet-Nam to use US chemicals to spray Viet Cong crops.2 Saigon suggests the US join with the Vietnamese in identifying targets and recommends that the Ambassador be given authority to approve such Vietnamese operations on a case by case basis. This telegram formalizes the oral request made by Ambassador Nolting in Honolulu 22 March, which has not been acted on by State. In Cottrellʼs absence, Mr. Wood gave the usual State discourse on the adverse effects of using defoliants regardless of selective targetting.

b. Mr. Wood suggested to AID that action should be taken to obtain foreign doctors for use in Viet-Nam without waiting further for answers to outstanding telegrams on this subject which have been sent to Saigon. Wood mentioned the Presidential interest in creating an atmosphere of international support for the SVN Government. There were some differences of opinion on whether this should be acted on immediately or whether Saigon should be pushed for an answer. The issue was left dangling.

c. There was a very interesting and concise briefing by an AID Communications Specialist, Dr. Winfield, who had just resumed from a short survey trip to South Viet-Nam. He indicated progress was being made in the installation of community listening equipment in the villages; the recently commenced rural newspaper was off to an excellent start; and bids had been received from US and Japanese sources for transistor radio receivers for distribution throughout South Viet-Nam. The tentative decision on the receivers is to use US sources entirely, some of which will be delivered as assembled sets while others will be shipped in units for assembly in Saigon. The estimate is 4 to 6 months before the first of these receivers is ready for distribution by sale or, as an alternative, by buying through the US economic assistance program and distributing without cost to the populace. In the meantime, Dr. Winfield felt the normal sales of transistor receivers in Saigon was resulting in some of the distribution that we desired.

d. He also reported on the status of transmitters which the US is installing in South Viet-Nam. The 5 main transmitters should be on the air by June (2 or 3 of these are operating now). Tests indicate coverage of all South Viet-Nam except an area in the Kontum-Pleiku Plateau; possible installation of a 1 KW transmitter at Pleiku to cover this section is under study. A directional antenna for the HVE transmitter is being installed and, when operational, will permit radio coverage of all of North Viet-Nam, except the northern and western border areas.

Dr. Winfield emphasized that we are rapidly approaching the point when South Viet-Nam will have a very modem and extensive system to promulgate information throughout the country. The content of such information, as now produced by South Viet-Nam, is ineffective. There is an urgent need that US advice and experience in this field be utilized by the GVN. So far all such approaches have been unsuccessful. Dr. Winfield recommends a firm approach at a high level.

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 Document 160.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

164. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 164. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State1

New Delhi, April 19, 1962—6 p.m.

3313. For Harriman. Reference: Saigonʼs 140 to New Delhi, sent Department 109.2 While I have no desire to extend my range of concern I continue think that South Vietnam is our most dangerous problem and I would take strong exception to reference telegram. While respecting your judgment as to the timing of any conference, the latter could be extremely useful in moving this from a military to a diplomatic solution and search for diplomatic solutions is after all the business of diplomacy.3 In different ways offensively and defensively the Geneva accords are being violated on both sides of the line. It could well be the business of the conference to consider ways of getting full observance4 and the effect of course would be to focus world public opinion on the issue and as the Laos cease-fire has shown this can have a restraining influence.

I also take strong exception to the cliché which is so persistently damaging in our diplomacy that we must subordinate our policy to whatever will maintain the confidence of the regime to which we are accredited. This leads us to the absurdity that any action, however sensible, may undermine confidence if it doesn't fit the particular preferences of the government we are supporting. Nolting suggests that confidence of Vietnam people and war with Viet Cong may begin to waver if we show disposition to diplomatic discussion. In fact they should never be in any doubt about our preference for diplomatic settlement.

Finally I confess to some concern over the attitudes exemplified in the first paragraph of reference telegram. If we must fear losing our position vis-à-vis a government as utterly dependent on our military and charitable support as that of Diem our diplomacy is in a sorry condition. And if we can only inspire confidence by emphasizing willingness to fight war we are in even worse shape and ought to get Dulles back to take charge. I would also note typical tendency in telegram to identify the people with Diem and vice versa, an identification which no close observer of the South Vietnam scene can take seriously.

Galbraith

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-1962. Secret; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 158.

3 Next to this sentence were written the words “Not entirely.”

4 Next to this sentence were written the words “DRV pull-out.”

165. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of the Army (Stahr) 165. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of the Army (Stahr)1

April 20, 1962

SYNOPSIS OF SECRETARY OF THE ARMYʼS FAR EAST TRIP, 5-20 APRIL 1962

The following summarizes principal impressions of my recent trip to the Far East. I am aware of the dangers of reaching conclusions on the basis of hit-and-run visits, but since I had had fifteen months of daily concern with one aspect or another of our problems in the Far East, and my sources of information were themselves very much attuned to the situations in their own countries, I was able to get quickly to the point in most cases. And, because it was known that I served in Asia with Asian troops two years in World War II, I was received with genuine trust.

[Here follow accounts of Stahrʼs visits to Hawaii, Kwajalein, Korea, Okinawa, and Taiwan.]

Saigon—32 hours

Principal persons with whom discussions were held: US Ambassador Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.

General Paul D. Harkins

Major General C. J. Timmes, Acting Chief, MAAG

Vietnamese H.E. President Ngo Dinh Diem

Hon. Nguyen Dinh Thuan—Secretary of State for the Presidency and Under Secretary for National Defense

General Le N. Ty, Chief of the Joint General Staff, RVNAF

Briefed by USMACV; commanders and staffs of I and II Corps, Vietnamese Army; Commanding Officers of Army helicopter and light aviation companies recently deployed to Vietnam.

Principal sites and activities visited: extensive flight from Saigon over a major portion of Vietnam, with stops at Da Nang and Nah Trang.

Comments—I found the President bright and serious and talkative. As is well known, he is unwilling to delegate authority sufficiently and appears adamant about maintaining a dual chain of command for military operations, but he still seems to be far and away the best man for us to rely upon. In this regard I found the feeling among the U.S. on Saigon that those South Vietnamese intellectuals who oppose and criticize Diem seem unable to convert their criticism into any form of constructive assistance. He himself appears to have a very clear grasp of his military problem. He has studied in great detail the causes of the failures of the French and is determined not to repeat them.

My own eyes convinced me that the difficulty of terrain of which I had heard so much for so long is not a myth but very real. It seems to me important that key U.S. decision makers find the time to look for themselves at this country.

The Vietnamese are greatly encouraged by our policy toward them and by our strong support. Slowly but surely they are working out the techniques of counter-insurgency and of civic action. They seem fully aware of the importance of associating the ideas of military and civic actions in the minds of the villagers. They also realize the importance of training villagers to perform civil guard and self-defense roles and are facing up to the tough problem of having to keep the villages protected while simultaneously conducting the training for the civil guard and self-defense units. Gradually they are learning to use the new techniques which we are making possible, such as the use of helicopters and direction finding equipment. In this regard our buildup in their country is very fast by their standards; we must be a little patient as they try to assimilate the new resources and absorb the related operational techniques.

The Armed Forces of South Vietnam are committed to a larger degree than I had realized to the village defense and counter-insurgency roles. They are so spread-eagled by these deployments that a conventional attack by major units of the North Vietnam Armed Forces would present them with a hard choice between concentrating to meet the conventional threat (knowing full well that the rear areas would immediately erupt with increased Vietcong activities), or alternatively, pitting small regular Army forces against greatly superior conventional forces of North Vietnam. As I see it, this clearly adds up to a requirement for us to prepare to come quickly to their assistance if they are jumped by conventional forces from North Vietnam. Ground combat troops could be supplied by, e.g., the GRC and ROK, but our Naval and Air Forces could play very important roles.

With respect to Laos, their “open back door,” they were too polite to complain openly about our policy but referred over and over to the extreme difficulty of cleaning up their country while the Vietcong have such an opportune means of access. One of the South Vietnamese pointed out the analogy of Greece, making the point that only when Tito closed his border and denied the guerrillas both access and sanctuary were the Greeks able to eradicate them from their country.

The Army of South Vietnam impressed me as one which, though certainly not up to the standards of the Korean much less the Chinese Nationalist, is nonetheless very promising. It has some good young officers and mostly needs continued good training and experienced leadership. Within the Army there is a recognition that the struggle will be long and difficult, but, possibly for the first time, they believe there is reason to be quietly optimistic about the long pull. General Harkins has taken hold well. He spends much time in the field and is at once firm and friendly in his dealings with the Vietnamese. He and Ambassador Nolting work well together.

There were a few random impressions worth noting. The feeling was expressed by Minister Thuan that the mainland Chinese (and other Asians) have not been so brainwashed as to have lost a basic good will toward the United States. They are practical people who have duly noted our according independence to the Philippines and who remember such things. He further expressed the opinion that now is the time for the ChiNats to hit the ChiComs, a feeling which he says he distinctly did not have at the time of Quemoy and Matsu. He bases this estimate on his assessment of the bad conditions in China and also North Vietnam. He added that the ChiComs are putting the squeeze on North Vietnam in the same way the Russians are squeezing the ChiComs. He said that the full impact of our decision to keep South Vietnam free is greater than we may realize. He believes it has actually recreated an opportunity to free Southeast Asia from communism. He indicated quite spontaneously that his country is very happy with Ambassador Nolting and that the Thais like Ambassador Young.

A high-ranking and apparently able and astute Vietnamese officer expressed his concern that we seem content to remain strategically, strictly on the defensive in the field of guerrilla warfare. He pointed out that there is always a great disparity in numbers between those who fight as guerrillas and those who play the role of counter-guerrillas (ratios of counter-guerrillas to guerrillas normally range from 10 to 1 to 20 or more to 1). He reasoned from this basic fact that we must necessarily ourselves become the guerrillas and place the onus on the communists to provide the much larger numbers of counter-guerrillas.

[Here follow accounts of Stahrʼs visits to Japan and Alaska.]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Departments and Agencies, Army, 1961-1962. Secret. The source text provides no indication of the date of preparation.

166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 166. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 20, 1962—7 p.m.

1331. Reference: A. Deptel 1213; B.Embtel 1297.2 Number of French military training personnel and cadres in Viet Nam in 1954 documented in Embassy despatch 420 of May 27, 1960.3 As indicated therein source is French Military Attaché who obtained the information for us from Paris.

Agree 3,500 figure not now particularly helpful in view present number US military personnel. Therefore would envisage arguing US right to introduction additional military personnel on ground that total number French military personnel in Viet Nam in 1954 far in excess of what we have and that, as Canadians stated in memorandum given Department March 15, 1962,4 basic purpose of Geneva accords was to “freeze” balance of military power in Viet Nam. From technical point of view justifying presence US military personnel under wording article 16, would not appear necessary relate US military personnel to either nationality or function foreign military forces in Viet Nam in 1954. Article 16 prohibits introduction of “any troop reinforcements and additional military personnel” except for rotations of units and groups of personnel, etc. without making distinction as to nationality or function of troops. Thus article 16 solely concerned with preserving military status quo in terms numbers of foreign military personnel. Would endeavor to avoid being drawn into discussion as to whether we seeking replace French “combat” troops by simply pointing out US military personnel in Viet Nam are training, advisory and support personnel, and not combat forces.

Believe we can best ascertain whether ICC prepared accept new figure as basis justification for US military personnel in Viet Nam by informal discussion with Canadians and subsequently with Indians along lines suggested reference B

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/4-2062. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi, Ottawa, London, CINCPAC for Polad, and Moscow.

2 Telegram 1213 to Saigon, April 16, asked whether the Embassy envisaged making the case to the ICC that the United States was entitled to replace French combat troops in Indochina in 1954 under Article 16 of the Geneva Accords. (Ibid., 751G.00/4-1262) Telegram 1297 from Saigon, April 12, recommended that the Department of State make the case with the Canadian and Indian representatives on the ICC that the United States was complying with the Geneva Accords by only replacing French troops that were present in Indochina in 1954. (Ibid., 751G.5/4-1262)

3 Not printed. (Ibid., 751K.5-MSP/5-2760)

4 Not printed.

167. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 167. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Debriefing by Mr. John Anspacher

John Anspacher, just resumed from Head of USIS in Saigon, gave a debriefing on 19 April.

He covered a wide range of subjects, but in his own field of information he made the following points of interest: a. There are only 2 or 3 Vietnamese who are professionally qualified to administer the information service, but they are not utilized. Diem continues to provide guidance personally and it is ineffective.

b. US advice is given, but not followed except in technical areas. At the same time, the US is providing most of the physical and technical means for the SVN information program.

c. There are 25 SVN newspapers m Saigon; none elsewhere. Deliveries to the provinces are infrequent and in small quantity.

d. Sometime in the next 6-18 months the US will be faced with the decision as to whether to use our resources unilaterally to project the required GVN public image or to insist on Diem (and Nhu) accepting our counsel.

e. If the impact of the psychological assets are not altered to appeal to the people, the growing GVN military superiority will be of no avail.

Anspacher has indicated to me he has some concrete ideas on how to gain improvement in this area. I will see him Thursday after his return from a trip to New York.2

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 See Document 171.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

168. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 168. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 20, 1962—6 p.m.

1330. Our 1309.2 Contains verbatim text. Following statements have come out of Hanoi past two days on international consultations or conference on Vietnam: 1) On April 18 at close long report to current session DRV National Assembly on US “Colonial War” in South Vietnam and the “just fight” of the South Vietnamese people, Deputy Nguyen Van Vinh stated:

“Of late world opinion has paid attention to seeking measures to check war and maintain peace in Indo-China—the proposal for reconvening the Geneva conference, for instance. US have had to talk of international conference on SVN question. But they want to take advantage of this conference to slander Vietnamese people and give fig leaf to their acts of aggression in South Vietnam.

“Since Geneva agreements have been sabotaged more and more seriously by US and Ngo Dinh Diem, it is very necessary to reconvene Geneva conference to discuss Vietnamese question. But this must aim at checking US intervention and fully achieving sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity of Vietnamese people in keeping with spirit of 1954 Geneva agreements on Indo-China”.

Vinh report also welcomes initiatives of bloc, Sihanouk and “certain political circles in Britain, India, France and elsewhere, aiming to maintain peace in Vietnam and Indo-China”.

Vinh is also chairman of National Reunification Commission, post of Ministerial rank in DRV Council of Ministers, HC [as?] well as Major General and Vice Minister of National Defense. He regularly reports to DRV National Assembly on reunification question. While he apparently spoke in capacity as Deputy, executive position he holds would make it appear international conference proposal on verge becoming official DRV policy.

2) Hanoi “Voice of Vietnam Radio” April 19 broadcast commentary welcoming recent suggestion of Sihanouk for international conference on Vietnam and stating it deserves serious consideration. Commentary also refers to DRV FonMin note March 15 to Geneva cochairman calling for consultations (our 11973 ).

3) DRV Foreign Office spokesman in statement April 19 criticizing British note of April 16 to USSR on Vietnam situation reiterated passage in DRV Foreign Ministerʼs March 15 note to co-chairmen requesting international conference.

Comment: DRV seems quite evidently to be moving close to call for international conference. Believe this further points up urgency putting forth US position vis-à-vis conference as proposed reference telegram.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-2062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Phnom Penh, London, Paris, CINCPAC for Polad, Moscow, Vientiane Bangkok, Geneva for FECON, New Delhi, Taipei, Manila, and Ottawa.

2 Document 158.

3 Dated March 20, it reported that, although the DRV had not actually called for a new international conference on Vietnam, it had come close to doing so on several occasions, among them the March 15 note to the 1954 Conference co-chairmen. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/3-2062)

169. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 169. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam Task Force Meeting, 25 April 1962

Meeting was devoted to a briefing by Mr. Cottrell on his recent 2-day visit to Saigon with General LeMay.2

The main points made were: a. There is confusion on both the GVN and US side in Saigon, apparently due to organizational uncertainties. The Ambassador and DCM have had long recent conversations with Nhu and Thuan and are hopeful of some progress in clearing lines of command. Cottrell is mulling over the idea of using lower administrative levels as the point of contact for advice. … Mr. Trueheart (DCM) thought this would be difficult to do in other ministries.

Cottrell asked Thuan why the GVN had not asked for US advisors per the joint December Memorandum of Understanding.3 Thuan implied concern with past experiences with advisors from Michigan State, and preferred to continue profitable contacts with institutions such as Brookings, who were giving them useful studies. The obvious impression was that there were enough US advisors in SVN without formalizing specific positions.

(There is a renewed State interest in the whole matter of US advice; the extent to which it is needed and the probable results if it is not accepted by the GVN.)

b. Cottrell is impressed with the execution of air support in SVN, both US and GVN. (This is a complete switch based on his look on the ground and talks with Gen. LeMay.)

c. Cottrell backs selective defoliation, including against VC crops, and thinks the chemicals will do the job against food crops. (This is also a 180 degree turn resulting from talks with Diem and Trueheart; the reason for his confidence in the chemicals is not clear.) He recognizes some political hazards, but considers them acceptable for the gains involved.

d. He talked with Mr. Walton, the USOM police advisor. You will recall Walton was very critical last fall of the situation in SVN. He now thinks there is real improvement; the police link with the Surete is good, and equipment and training facilities are improved.

e. US advisors to Province Chiefs are in place in 11 provinces. Diem is pushing for helos and vehicles for provinces so the chiefs can get around; some have not visited the greater majority of their villages because of the security situation.

f. Implementation of Staley reforms has produced GVN budget shortages. AID and State are studying this matter to see what can be done. A prime factor is a general let-down in business activity.

g. In a talk with Gen. LeMay, Diem produced a long shopping list of items desired. Included were jet T-33 aircraft, radars, ULA helicopters for province use, photo processing facility, air photo capability.4

As a separate but related matter, I understand at the JCS meeting 25 April,5 Gen. LeMay said the Army was not employing air support in SVN often enough in routine and set-piece operations though for reaction type missions it is well used. He noted there is significant unused air capacity. He complained that his people could not get by the Chief of Staff (Marine Gen. Weede) to talk this over with Gen. Harkins. (Gen. LeMay talked with Gen. Harkins in Saigon so presumably this matter is resolved.) Reportedly, Gen. Shoup said if the senior Air Force officers in Saigon were not man enough to insist on seeing the Commander on a vital issue we were in greater difficulty there than he had thought.

W.H.B.6

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 LeMay visited Vietnam April 16-21. It is unclear from his report of April 24 which of these days he spent in Saigon. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 320 thru 370.05)

3 See the enclosure to Noltingʼs letter to Diem, Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 307.

4 A summary account of this meeting is in LeMayʼs final report; see footnote 2 above.

5 No record of this meeting has been found.

6 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

170. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 170. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Forrestal View on Defoliants

1. I talked with Mr. Forrestal on the several factors involved in the question of employing chemicals for crop destruction.

2. The essential element in his view is a desire for assurances that the potential gain will be worth the possible adverse propaganda and political results. He sees particular sensitivity in US association with action that decreases food supply in a generally food-short continent such as Asia. He is not convinced the intelligence that is available will provide more than a few clear-cut cases in which crop destruction might serve its purpose. He feels these limited gains would not offset the other disadvantages. On the other hand, if the target survey indicated a significant potential gain against the VC he would tend to give the political disadvantages less weight. He distinguishes between Communist propaganda on recent defoliation and that which would follow crop destruction.

3. On this basis, I sense he would not object to telling Saigon to go ahead with a joint study of possible targets, but will resist any suggestion that the Embassy be authorized to give a go ahead for crop destruction on the basis of such a survey without Washington once again considering the issue.

4. Since writing the above, I understand the new State/Defense draft calls for a review in Saigon of crop destruction tests previously conducted in SVN;2 if on review, the Amb and Gen Harkins are convinced these tests indicate effectiveness, a combined target survey with SVN is authorized; on completion of the survey, Washington will then consider any recommendations for crop destruction operations and advise Saigon accordingly. This looks like the best action we can get and, in my mind, is sound if undertaken expeditiously.

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 See Document 174.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

V. Consideration of an International Conference on Vietnam and the Preparation of the ICC Report of June 2, April-JuneV. Consideration of an International Conference on Vietnam and the Preparation of the ICC Report of June 2, April-June

171. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, April 27, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret.

172. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, April 27, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 2-B.4, GVN 1962. Secret.

173. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs (Heavner) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Saigon, April 27, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, TF(j), Taylor Program, Provincial Surveys, 1962. Secret; Limited Distribution. Sent to Nolting through Mendenhall and Trueheart.

174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 30, 1962—6:27 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cottrell on April 26, cleared with Rice and Little of the Department of State, Williams of DOD, Riley of JCS, and Johnson of the White House; approved by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

175. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin)

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 20.1, GVN 1962, Secret; Official-Informal. The source text is undated, but since it indicates that the letter was written on a Monday, it may have been April 30.

176. Draft Memorandum of Conversation, White House, Washington, May 1, 1962, 11 a.m.

White House, Washington, May 1, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Laos, 5/1/62-5/10/62. Top Secret. Drafted by Hilsman. The meeting was held at the White House. At the top of the document was a notation by Hilsman that the memorandum of conversation was for INR use only and that it should be placed in his top secret file.

177. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Johnson) to the Director (Rostow)

Washington, May 1, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron. Secret.

178. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, May 2, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-030-969. Secret.

179. Minutes of Staff Meeting, United States Information Service, Saigon, May 2, 1962

Saigon, May 2, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67A677, USIS 1962. Confidential. The meeting was held at the U.S. Information Service. No drafting information was found on the source text.

180. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 3, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Davis. Attached to the source text were an agenda for the meeting of May 10, a memorandum on counterinsurgency terminology, and a transmittal memorandum from S/S.

181. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, May 3, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret.

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 3, 1962—6:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5811/4-2862. Secret. Drafted by Cottrell, and cleared with Loftus, Harriman, and Rice. Also sent to Seoul and repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

183. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 5, 1962—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-562. Secret; Limit Distribution.

184. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, May 9, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

185. Editorial Note

186. Letter From the Ambassador in India (Galbraith) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

New Delhi, May 10, 1962.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, EFGH. Confidential.

187. Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense

Washington, undated.

Source: JCS Files. Top secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but declassification markings indicate that it was prepared in the Department of Defense. In addition to the summary of the trip to Vietnam, May 8-11, printed here, the report, which is 71 pages in length, includes an introduction stating that McNamara was accompanied by Lemnitzer and Sylvester, a summary of the Thailand portion of the trip, May 8-9, and 10 appendixes, including itineraries, maps, force strengths charts, descriptions of some ARVN operations, and a summary of Operation Sunrise.

188. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Hong Kong, May 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, Official-Informal Letters, GVN 1962. Secret. Transmitted from Hong Kong under a letter from Wood to Cottrell, May 11. Signed for Wood by Marshall Green, the Consul General in Hong Kong, who appended a note stating that he agreed with the conclusions but would have phrased Woodʼs points differently.

189. Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Laos, Top Secret. Drafted by Neubert (INR/RSB) and Coolidge (INR/RFE).

190. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Laos. Top Secret. Transmitted to the Secretary of State through the Executive Secretariat.

191. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 16-E.I, GVN 1962, Presidential Letters. Secret. Drafted by Heavner on May 14 and cleared with Cottrell, Manell, Rice, and Greenfield. Sent to Secretary Rusk through S/S and Under Secretary Johnson. On May 19, Walter Cutler of the Secretaryʼs staff returned the package to Johnson with the following note: “Upon reviewing the attached memorandum the Secretary expressed strong doubt as to the advisability of sending the letter to Diem at this late date and having the President refer to it at a press conference. The Secretary would appreciate your reconsidering this matter in the light of his reservation.”

192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, May 16, 1962—9:44 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-1062. Secret. Drafted by Harriman and cleared with Forrestal and Little.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 16, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-1662. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Moscow, and CINCPAC for Polad.

194. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 17, 1962—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-1762. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi and CINCPAC for Polad and pouched to London and Ottawa.

195. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 17, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-1762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to New Delhi and CINCPAC for Polad and pouched to London and Ottawa.

196. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (C.I.), 1/1/62-7/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Parrott, Executive Secretary of the Special Group (Counterinsurgency).

197. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Deputy Public Affairs Officer (Baumgartner)

Saigon, May 17, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677. USIS 1962. Secret.

198. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, May 18, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

199. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Saigon, May 18, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 a 677, USIS 1962. Secret; Eyes Only.

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 22, 1962—1:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-2262. Secret. Drafted by Heavner. Repeated to London, Bangkok. and CINCPAC for Polad.

201. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, May 22, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/5-2262. Secret. Repeated to Saigon, London, Ottawa, and CINCPAC for Polad.

202. National Security Action Memorandum No. 155

Washington, May 22, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that copies were sent to the Secretary of State and the Director of the Agency for International Development.

203. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 23, 1962—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-2362. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, Taipei, London, New Delhi, Singapore, Hong Kong, Hue, and Fuchu. The Department of State was requested to pass copies to various intelligence and military agencies in Washington, as well as to AID; CINCPAC was requested to pass copies to its subsidiary commands; and Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, and Manila were requested to pass copies to their respective military representatives. A handwritten notation at the top of the source text reads: “Hurrah!”

204. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 23, 1962—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-2362. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, London, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, and Manila.

205. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan) and the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart), Gia Long Palace, Saigon, May 24, 1962

Saigon, May 24, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 6.1-C GVN 1962, Agrovilles. Secret. Drafted by Trueheart. Attached as COPROR/DOC/25 to the minutes of a meeting of the Committee on Province Rehabilitation of May 25, COPROR/SR/10. The meeting was held at Gia Long Palace.

206. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs National Security Adviser (Bundy)

Washington, May 29, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, Staff Memoranda, Michael Forrestal.

207. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 31, 1962.

Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Chron. Top Secret.

208. Editorial Note

209. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 4, 1962—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/6-462. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC, Clark Air Force Base, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, Taipei, New Delhi, Singapore, Hong Kong, Hue, and Fuchu.

210. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 6, 1962—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-662. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

211. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 6, 1962—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-662. Secret; Priority. Designated for AID Director Hamilton, Assistant Secretary Harriman, McNamara, and Taylor.

212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 8, 1962—7:22 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-662. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Stoneman, Furst (AID), Wood, and Spurgin (State) and cleared in DOD, Treasury, and BOB. Forrestalʼs name had been typed in as clearing officer for the White House but was crossed out. Designated for the attention of James Fowler of AID, then in Vietnam. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

213. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, June 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Top Secret.

214. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the President

Washington, June 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings & Memos, Staff Memos, Chester Bowles. Secret.

215. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, June 13, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-185-69. Confidential.

216. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 14, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-1462. Secret, Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 14, 1962—8:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/5-3062. Secret. Drafled by Heavner on June 11; cleared with Cottrell, Wood, Rice, Horgan, Hubbard, Chayes, and Czyzak; and approved for transmission by Harriman. Repeated to New Delhi, Ottawa London, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and CINCPAC for Polad.

218. Memorandum From Senator Mansfieldʼs Legislative Assistant (Valeo) to Senator Mansfield

Washington, June 15, 1962.

Source: University of Montana Library, Mansfield Papers, Box 105, Folder 19. Unclassified.

219. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, June 15, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Pentagon, Washington, June 15, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Minutes. Top Secret. A notation on the source text indicates that this record was a Department of State draft, not cleared with the Department of Defense. The meeting was held in the Pentagon. A memorandum from Guthrie (S/SS) to Brubeck (S/S), June 15, indicates that the briefing material on U.S. policy in the event of loss of Diemʼs leadership was included only in Johnsonʼs briefing book (not found) in view of its “sensitivity.” (Ibid., State-JCS Meetings: Lot 70 D 328)

220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 15, 1962—8:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-1462. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to CINCPAC for Polad. Drafted by Stoneman, and cleared with Peterson and with AID, DOD, Treasury, and BOB.

221. Letter From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, June 18, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350. Counterinsurgency Plan. Secret; Limit Distribution; Official-Informal.

222. Editorial Note

223. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, June 20, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret.

224. Editorial Note

225. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 21, 1962—4:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-1962. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Furst, Silver, and Cottrell, and cleared with Peterson (State), Pelikan (Treasury), Furst (AID), Heinz (DOD), and Forrestal (White House). Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

226. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 25, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/6-2562. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

227. Memorandum From the Special Consultant for Counterinsurgency, United States Operation Mission (Phillips) to the Acting Director of the Mission (Fippin)

Saigon, June 25, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350.Counterinsurgency Plan. Secret. Copies were sent to the Ambassador; the Deputy Chief of Mission; Chief, MAAG; Chief, MACV; and Chief, OSA.

228. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Counselor for Political Affairs in Vietnam (Mendenhall) and the Chinese Ambassador in Vietnam (Yuen Tse Kien), Saigon, June 26, 1962

Saigon, June 26, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret; Limited Distribution. This memorandum and Document 229 were transmitted to General Taylor in the White House by Rostow on July 31. Covering the two memoranda of conversation was an intra-office transmittal slip from Taylorʼs office with the following message: “These memoranda deserve special note. I have marked key parts, but suggest all are worth reading. Major point made is need to accelerate CI effort and more liberal social-economic actions are mandatory. Time is of essence because of growing sentiment for neutral solution. Perhaps latter point is means to press Diem?” Also sent to Nolting, Truehart, Richardson, Harkins, Weede, the Vietnam Working Group in Washington, INR, and the Embassy in Taipei.

229. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Counselor for Political Affairs in Vietnam (Mendenhall) and Vice President Tho, Saigon, June 26, 1962

Saigon, June 26, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret; Limited Distribution. See footnote 1, Document 228, concerning routing of this memorandum. Also sent to Nolting, Trueheart, Richardson, Harkins, Weede, the Vietnam Working Group in Washington, and INR.

230. Status Report on Southeast Asia, Prepared by the Southeast Asia Task Force

Washington, June 27, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 264, Followup. Secret.

231. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 29, 1962—3:04 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Confidential, Priority. Drafted by Cottrell, cleared with Fowler (AID), Peterson, Wood, Little (State), Diehl (Treasury), Bundy (DOD), Kaysen and Bundy (White House), and approved by Ball. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

232. Memorandum From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (Timmes) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Saigon, June 30, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SGN (62) 19-GVN. Top Secret. Attached to the source text was a copy of a memorandum from Nolting to Timmes, June 30, thanking Timmes for his report.

171. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 171. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, April 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

Anspacher and South Viet-Nam

1. I discussed with Mr. Anspacher his detailed views on the situation in South Viet-Nam and the role the US should play at an advisory level to control future events.

2. Mr. Anspacher has prepared an informal paper,2 predicated on the premise that the US is committed to success in SVN, which cites the primary need as a projection of GVN influence into the provinces and villages to motivate the people and develop a viable national entity. In developing his thesis, he understandably lays particular stress on the requirements for better public information, public relations, and general identification of the GVN with the populace. He carefully notes, however, the related economic, political, and security measures which must go hand in hand. This is of course a generally accepted idea; I attempted, first, to draw out the details which he foresaw for implementation and; second, to determine the role the US should assume to make the effort successful.

3. In the first instance, he has developed general conceptual support which involves “citizens committees,” Army civic action, GVN reforms, and discreet propaganda. He has not prepared a detailed plan and indicates that sort of approach, with specific objectives, is not yet being followed by our Embassy in Saigon. As I understand it, the Embassy is concentrating on “plugging holes in the dike” rather than trying to build an administrative framework to do a clearly defined job. In summary, Anspacher feels there is a need for such a plan of action on the US side which can then be translated into an acceptable form for discussion with the GVN. (Two recent examples of minimum response from Saigon involved a civic action plan and a proposal for rural medical teams. In the former, the Saigon reply to Washington said no plan could be formulated because the GVN had not decided on the relative priority of areas; if the Embassy had their own concept and plan a little push, this sort of problem could be solved quickly. In the case of the medical teams, no reply has been received. Both actions were suggested from Washington over 4 weeks ago.)

4. On the second point, Anspacher is convinced the GVN will not gain requisite identity with the rural populace unless there is an enlightenment which cannot now be foreseen. He feels, without specifying a time limit, that we will have to present to Diem certain minimum actions which must be taken to win the war. He stresses that the growing military capability will, in the last analysis, be unable to do the job regardless of the numbers of Viet Cong who are killed. He is not wholly pessimistic on the results of an approach to Diem, but recognizes that Diemʼs concern with his power position and Nhuʼs negative influence offer little encouragement unless our proposals are made in a concise, clear, and forceful way. Because of the possibility that Diem could not be swayed to the extent required, Anspacher advocates preparation now for the alternative of a unilateral US effort to gain rural loyalty for the GVN. (The province surveys which, aside from the information value, put the GVN in the villages, is [sic] dormant because the GVN is not making personnel available and desire to phase the surveys with the pacification strategy. The Embassy concurs with this approach and sees no advantage in pushing the issue. Again, without a plan of action of their own, the Embassy sees no value in getting into a maximum number of provinces quickly so that follow-up measures can be formulated and a campaign to reach the people can be pursued vigorously.)

5. He has not developed this alternative in any detail. He foresees exploitation of American influence and presence in the countryside through US provincial military advisors, US military advisors in ARVN down to battalion level, proposed USIS substations in the countryside, the capability of the United States to build up a specially configured group of aircraft to improve GVN official contact in the countryside, . … He thinks that Diem would be powerless to stop, and perhaps would not desire to stop, such a program. (Anspacher strongly supports the idea of an airlift for civil purposes; he concurs that it would be very useful. The Embassy has not requested such action; and the suggestion made in the Special Group (CI) weeks ago on this subject has produced no State reaction.)

6. Mr. Anspacherʼs recommendations suggest that a judgment must be made soon as to whether there is a need for greater GVN responsiveness to US advice and whether such receptivity will be achieved if the present situation and relations continue. There is increasing attention to this matter, but on the whole, we continue to be hopeful that the wide range of supporting actions being taken on our side will ultimately have some effect. While the two situations are not exactly parallel, this is the same mode of thinking which characterized the French effort in the early 1950ʼs.

7. It seems to me there continues to be a need for harder thinking on the various actions we would like to see taken in South Viet-Nam including those designed to gain the loyalty of the people. It is not sufficient to point to the Thompson Pacification Strategy as the solution of all ills, particularly since Diem has not yet defined the strategy as he sees it in terms of detailed implementing action. As we reach a consensus here (or in Saigon) as to what is required in detail, we can then assess the GVN position and capabilities relative to it. Until such a plan is developed, it will be impossible to gauge progress until very late in the game.

The Embassy has just forwarded an outline plan for counterinsurgency operations3 which is used as a guide on the US side in Saigon. It is a sound paper stressing concept, but falls short of providing a means by which action required can be determined and pursued. The plan is attached and two sections (concept and Political/Economic/Psychological Operations) are marked; if you scan these parts you will have a sense of what is contained in the overall plan.

8. You may desire to suggest to the Special Group (CI) that the TF be asked to use this Plan as a take-off point in developing specific courses of action required to support it and any enlargement of the concept that looks desirable here. The results could ultimately be sent to Saigon for comment leading to a paper that could be used for discussion with the GVN in whole or detail.

WHB

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret.

2 Not found.

3 Document 11.

172. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 172. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, April 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

Third Country Military Assistance to Viet-Nam

1. On April 3 you requested me to “take a new hard look and come up with recommendations” on how we might obtain military assistance to Viet-Nam from other governments.2

2. Since April 3 I have submitted this problem to the Task Force/Viet-Nam, visited Viet-Nam with General LeMay, consulted with Admiral Felt, Chargé d'Affaires Trueheart, and Secretary of State Thuan. I have also discussed the problem in very general terms with R.G.K. Thompson and First Secretary Denson of the British Embassy. Following is my report:

General Considerations

1. As Dr. Rostow has said, psychologically it would be of benefit in our international relations if other nations in the area were cooperating with us militarily in Viet-Nam as a visible demonstration of solidarity against Communist attack.

2. Secretary of State Thuan said he favored the idea if it were worked out on a “token” basis (Diemʼs approval would be needed at some point).

3. It should be anticipated that: a) The ICC would probably be most unhappy. The Canadians and Indians would probably complain to us. The ICC would probably cite the GVN.

b) Those nations favoring a “Geneva type” conference or UN cognizance of the problem would be likely to clamor that the war was broadening, getting out of hand, and should be settled immediately by conference.

c) As an initial reaction, the British would very likely disapprove broadening the participation. They would require a “hard sell”. They believe Viet-Nam should fight its war with the minimum necessary outside help supplied as unobtrusively as possible to avoid “foreign flavor”. This eases their problem as Co-Chairman of the Geneva Accords.)

d) Certain problems would be created for USMACV in integrating foreign training units or specialists into the present military effort.

e) There is an outside chance that this “token” concept might later be broadened to involve larger third country military contributions but probably not to the extent of any substantial substitution of U.S. personnel support.

f) There is no present planning that I am aware of to reduce the number of U.S. military personnel in Viet-Nam. The course of the fight will probably be the determining factor.

g) The disadvantages of having “foreigners” scattered through the Viet-Nam forces at all fevers, plus the attendant risks of direct confrontation with the Viet Cong are balanced by the demonstrated military advantages of producing strikingly more efficient and effective results from the RVNAF in all branches.

Possible Military Contributions

Pakistan—Unlikely.

India—Very unlikely since India is Chairman of ICC.

Burma—Very unlikely because of Burmaʼs neutral political stance.

Thailand—Very possible that Sarit could be induced to make a good public statement and send a token group of specialists. Educating the Thais should be a worthwhile by-product.

Malaya—The Prime Minister has stated his willingness to make another visit to Viet-Nam, statement of support, train Vietnamese and supply any requested material even if he has to go out and buy it. However, he is unlikely to send men since it may create an internal political problem. Could be requested to supply a group. May or may not agree. Considers “Thompson Mission” a Malayan contribution.

Indonesia—Very unlikely.

Australia—Almost certain to be willing to send experienced “jungle bashers” to help train border patrol rangers or any other desirable personnel

New Zealand—Possible that we could induce them to join the Australians since they both fought in Malaya in the Commonwealth Brigade. New Zealand would be heavily influenced by British opinion of the general idea.

Philippines—Would likely be willing provided the US picks up the tab, even for a token group. Experience with the Huks, resettlement, and Navy coastal anti-smuggling are likely talents.

China—Would be delighted. Now eager to expand their present small covert contribution. I believe they should be limited to non-military and covert military contributions to avoid waving red flag at ChiComs, even though a small ChiNat overt presence in a large grouping of other nations might not be quite so objectionable.

Japan—No chance. The Japanese have even boggled at supplying certain economic aid which is closely related to the counterinsurgency effort.

Korea—Already talking to the GVN about military assistance. Certain to agree.

Britain—As Co-Chairman of Geneva Accords, very circumspect about supplying military aid. Not good prospects for reasons stated above.

France—No interest in military assistance.

Other nations—I recommend we confine our explorations to the prospects listed above. Later, if successful, we could explore the interest of other countries.3

Recommendations

If it is determined, despite the anticipated disadvantages, to go forward and seek a broad third country military participation, I recommend we do it in the following sequence: 1. Consult the British, and possibly the French. A “hard sell” is likely to be needed at a high level.

2. Have Ambassador Nolting discuss the concept with President Diem and obtain concurrence.

3. After a meeting of the minds with the British and French, or a determination to go forward anyway, then DOD/JCS could be directed to ascertain (through CINCPAC and COMACV to dovetail the outside participation with the least inconvenience) what local indigenous military units or military specialists from each prospective country could best be employed. A half dozen should be the minimum.

4. After receipt of the JCS survey, the Department of State could then instruct each Embassy to make the appropriate exploration, seeking not only a military contingent but also a strong political statement as well.

5. After informal agreement, the GVN would make a formal request of each government for indicated support. The replies could be widely advertised to the world, as in the case of the Diem-Kennedy letters.4

6. The above recommendations in no way detract from the present extensive efforts now in progress to obtain third country economic, and social aid, and civilian technical assistance.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 2-B.4, GVN 1962. Secret.

2 See Document 138.

3 At the end of this list of countries was written “Turkey?”

4 Next to this sentence were written the words: “They make public offer first & Diem accepts?”

173. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs (Heavner) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 173. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs (Heavner) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Saigon, April 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

Observations in Five Provinces

I recently spent two days in Dinh Tuong Province, three days in Kien Tuong Province, and one day each in Long An, Kien Hoa and Binh Duong Provinces. Most of the time was spent in the Province capitals talking with officials and assorted folk, but I was also able to visit five strategic hamlets and travel by road across the Plaine des Joncs from My Tho to Moc Hoa (Kien Tuong).

Based on these visits, my estimate is that the war effort in the provinces is often confused, but that the energy now being applied by ourselves and the GVN can result in substantial improvement in the security situation within a year or two. Success will depend in large measure on continued emphasis on the strategic hamlet concept. If the steam goes out of this effort after a few months, much momentum will be lost and I doubt that a better concept can be developed in any event.

Success also depends on the DRVʼs reaction. If they step up infiltration sharply to meet the strategic hamlet program, progress may be much slower. Fortunately there is a limit to which they can reinforce the VC without opening themselves up to conventional attacks. Their great advantage now is the guerrilla character of the war, and this would likely be changed by an infusion of large numbers of infiltrators

1. Vietnamese-American Relations

American advisors have not been accepted with open arms by all provincial officials by any means. In particular the sector advisors (advisors to the Chiefs of Province) have been met with considerable reserve. In only one of the provinces visited did the sector advisor have his office physically located in the same building with the Chief of Province. The Chief of Dinh Tuong Province refused such an arrangement by telling his advisor that the President would not want him to have an American physically in his office building.

This reserve, which in some cases seems to amount to pretty deep suspicion, is not unnatural. Rather large groups of MAAG officers—usually at least two or three and often nine or ten—have suddenly appeared in all the province capitals. According to the Chief of Kien Hoa Province, many if not most provincial officials feel insecure in their jobs and cannot help fearing that the American advisor will in some fashion or other cause them to be replaced. Judging from some reporting I am aware of (which is also known to the Vietnamese authorities), this is not always an unreasonable fear.

This problem was expressed most frankly by Nguyen Thien Ke, the Surete Chief in Dinh Tuong Province. Ke told me that suspicion of our motives extends from the top down. According to Ke, the GVN at all levels believes we may decide at any time to unseat Diem, and many Province Chiefs are afraid of removal as a result of American pressures.

. . . . . . .

Ke went on to say that suspicion is not limited to the Americans. He painted a rather grim picture of the in-fighting which he alleged goes on within the GVN bureaucracy. He summed it up by two gestures, the traditional kowtow with palms pressed together and head bent, and a motion as if firing a submachine gun at the VC. “I spend more time doing this”, he said, making the kowtow gesture, “than this”,—he fired the invisible gun—“and so do all officials who want to keep their jobs”.

Ke also noted that the Director of Economics for Dinh Tuong had called him to tell him I was coming, and he had of course then felt obliged to call the Chief of Province for advice on how to handle me. The Chief of Province told him to be polite but reticent.

Colonel Thao expressed the same problem rather differently. According to Thao, it is impossible for the United States to help Viet-Nam without interfering in Vietnamese internal affairs. He insisted that our policy must necessarily be one of support for the Free World and the Vietnamese people, not support for any individual leader. Thao said coolly that if the time should come when it is clear that Diem is not the best leader available, then of course the U.S. will act to remove him, as we did in Korea. The result is natural and unavoidable suspicion of us by the GVN.

I replied simply that the U.S. is convinced Diem is the only leader who can save Viet-Nam, and that I could not conceive of the situation being altered so radically that we would feel another leader necessary. I added that we must remember who we are; if we adopt a policy of authoritarian interference that amounts to colonialism, we are little better than the Communists—in which case why fight them? Our true interest is always the genuine independence of our allies, not only vis-à-vis the Communists but vis-à-vis the U.S. itself. We cannot use puppet regimes to defend freedom. If the leadership of the GVN is changed, it must be changed by the Vietnamese people themselves.

In response to a question as to whether it would be useful to have a USOM advisor-contact in the province to expedite U.S. aid for the strategic hamlet program, the Assistant Chief of Kien Hoa Province was enthusiastically affirmative. But Thao said simply that the GVN would not permit it. It would be too direct an interference in Vietnamese affairs to be tolerated at this time, according to Thao. He added that the situation is not sufficiently desperate for such measures.

I believe time and patience will dissipate much of this suspicion. As the MAAGs settle in, they will find ways of approaching Vietnamese officials and gaining their confidence. And the Vietnamese will get used to them. I would recommend the following to minimize suspicion now and in the future: (a) Issue a general directive that all officers and men and all civilian personnel are to be informed regularly that they are not to criticize the GVN in front of Vietnamese at any time, particularly in terms of the familiar charges of dictatorship and family rule. I am convinced that many people are talking too loosely on these topics—other officers in the Embassy have also heard this—and this feeds GVN suspicions. All of our people must know that our effort here is weakened by such talk, that it is in short subversive.

(b) Make a greater effort to brief Americans headed for the Provinces on the importance of our stake here and on Vietnamese history and character. Ignorance of these things can and has hurt our effort. Our people must be motivated by the understanding that we are here to defend the U.S. They must be equipped to deal with the Vietnamese with at least a little knowledge of this strange land.

(c) Choose sector advisors with great care. I have met some very good ones who have the necessary diplomatic virtues as well as military competence. But their excellence is not universal.

(d) In the future make every effort to train people destined for duty in the Provinces in the Vietnamese language. (In the Provinces, French is of very little value, hardly better than English.) Real competence in Vietnamese comes only after a year of full-time study and some months of practice in the country, but some level of usefulness can be achieved in less time. If there is any doubt of the importance of this qualification, I suggest that the field be queried. I am sure that the response will be unanimously and forcefully in favor of language training. Time and again both Vietnamese and MAAG officers expressed frustration to me because they often could not communicate adequately with one another.

2. Self Defense Corps

The SDC is in many respects the key to the whole problem because the defense of the strategic hamlets and most of the posts in the countryside is in their hands. In the past they have been ill equipped, ill trained and ill paid. The MAAGs in each Province are rapidly doing something about the first two ills, and I think we may look for a good return on this investment.

Virtually all provincial officials and most MAAG officers seem to agree on the crucial importance and the needs of the SDC. Working together on this program is therefore perhaps a little easier than is the case in other areas. The chief complaint on the Vietnamese side seems to be that the program is not moving fast enough. While this may have been the case at one time, the program now seems very much on the rails. Large classes are now in training (up to several hundred in some Provinces). While MAAG officers on the spot are not always entirely happy with the quality of the training, there seems to be no doubt that this program will greatly improve the performance of the SDC.

(a) SDC Pay

The matter of SDC pay continues to worry Provincial officials. The Assistant Chief of Kien Hoa Province went so far as to point out that one of the reasons the SDC are not more successful against the Communists is that their low pay leads them to engage in petty theft—a chicken here, a pig there—and the population is thus estranged from their defenders.

This view was expressed differently but with equal force by the Chief of the Civil Guard for the 32nd Tactical Zone, a Captain Quan. Quan observed that the SDC get 30 piasters a day while a day laborer can make 60. Quan went on to say that although the SDC are theoretically only part-time soldiers and can thus supplement their income, the fact is that in a wartime, indeed a siege situation, the SDC is perforce a full-time occupation. Thus it isn't surprising according to Quan that it is not always possible to recruit good men for the SDC.

A missionary in My Tho with nineteen churches in a half-dozen provinces which he visits regularly by road in spite of the security situation remarked that the ARVN is beginning to behave itself pretty well vis-à-vis the local population (this was not always true), and that the big problem now will be to keep the SDC in hand. He agreed that an increase in pay might help. Officials in other provinces expressed similar views.

SDC fringe benefits are even less attractive than the pay. I was told that there are no survivor benefits, no disability benefits, and no retirement provisions. Perhaps more serious is the almost total lack of medical care for the wounded. One MAAG advisor told of visiting an isolated SDC post where he found a man who had been shot in a fire fight six months earlier. The wound had healed, but the slug was still in the man and was causing him considerable pain. The post had not been supplied for more than a month when the MAAG advisor visited it and no attempt had ever been made to treat the injured man.

I understand that ARVN medical facilities are open to the SDC only on a pay basis. Civilian facilities obviously cannot reach these isolated posts—at least as they are now organized—and the upshot is that the SDC are not getting much medical care. (These isolated posts are not rare. MAAG advisors tell me there are a great many small posts which are supplied by armed convoy once every month or so. The VC keep them in a constant state of sedge, usually making no attempt to storm the post, but simply seeking to wear down the SDC inside by steady harassment. Sometimes, but not often, all things considered, the SDC surrender their weapons and run away.)

Perhaps there is not much we can do about SDC pay, given the piaster shortage. But I think a hard look at priorities may be in order on the question. The SDC are pretty important by all accounts in the Provinces.

As for medical care, it looks as though something could be done to alleviate if not solve the problem. A “fire brigade” medical team or two might be organized from ARVN or civilian resources to fly to the scene of SDC actions, and ARVN medical facilities are probably not so overworked that they cannot handle some of the SDC casualties. And our own military might be able to run in some medical units for the purpose if all else fails.

(c) [sic] Use of SDC

There seems to be general agreement that the SDC should garrison the strategic hamlets, where they will serve as the backbone of the defense forces. Perhaps because of the rush to get on with the strategic hamlet program, the SDC seems often to be spread dangerously thin. The Civil Guard Chief for the 32nd Tactical Zone told me plans call for only six to twenty SDC in most of the strategic hamlets planned for the five provinces in his jurisdiction. Some of the so-called strategic hamlets I visited had only six to ten SDC to cover very large perimeters and populations ranging up to 3,000. These SDC were generally not yet supported by youth groups, and in any case I was told the youth groups are not going to be armed. If adequate Civil Guard or ARVN forces are within call, perhaps such small garrisons would be adequate, but this is not always the case by any means.

In the other direction, I understand that the famous Colonel Thao (who has and wants no ARVN in his Province—but does sometimes call for ARVN assistance) is in the habit of forming SDC into large units for province-wide operations. And in Long An, as a matter of policy, the SDC are often used in areas other than those in which they were recruited. (According to the Chief of Province,VC often volunteer for SDC duty. By shifting them to other areas the authorities prevent these VC volunteers from using their established contacts and so they are “neutralized”. The loyal SDC are of course also deprived of their local contacts, and their special knowledge of their home area and its people is lost.)

No doubt it is good to be flexible, but perhaps that is expecting too much for the SDC when the other, more elite fighting forces, are having some difficulty in adjusting to both conventional and guerrilla styles. If the SDCʼs role were defined very narrowly in terms of defense of the strategic hamlets from within, it might simplify training and improve performance. This would mean leaving ambushes, sweeps, night patrols outside the perimeter, population control and other more sophisticated actions to forces such as the Civil Guard, the Surete and the ARVN. And some rule-of-thumb for the number of SDC required to defend a given size perimeter against anticipated numbers of VC might also be useful to provincial officials.

3. Strategic Hamlet Program

This effort occupies the center of the provincial stage, and if it continues to be pursued energetically by both the GVN and us for a long period, I am convinced it will pay off. At the moment, there are a great many problems and misconceptions, and the short-range picture is not too rosy. But we are moving in the right direction.

(a) Chronic Shortages

The program suffers from shortages of all kinds. There are not enough SDC, not enough barbed wire, not enough cement, not enough weapons, not enough administrators, not enough cadre, not enough piasters. Some of these shortfalls we can and should remedy. I can think of no good reason why we cannot provide barbed wire, cement, water pumps, simple medicaments, generators, bulldozers and the like in adequate quantities if we decide that this program really must have top priority in our aid effort. (I think it should. Long-range economic development will be useless if our short-range effort fails.)

Of the strategic hamlets I visited, only one—Ben Tuong in Binh Duong Province—seemed to have plenty of material resources. Ben Tuong is dearly intended to be a model strategic hamlet, and resources there have been used lavishly. The perimeter was constructed by bulldozers, there is a good double barbed wire fence with metal posts, there are two Civil Guard companies inside the perimeter and two ARVN companies outside plus a Psy War company. The GVN has provided 18 tons of rice, 33 cadres from Saigon and the Binh Duong province seat, a medical team including a doctor, supplies of clothing and cloth, and reams of propaganda materials.

More typical perhaps is Binh Hoa, a village of some 60 families a few kilometers downstream from the Dinh Tuong provincial capital on the Vaico River. Unlike the folk in Ben Tuong, most of whom were moved from their old homes, the Binh Hoa villagers are staying right where they have always been. Behind their homes facing the desolate plains country, they are building a perimeter by hand labor. There will be no barrier on the river side; evidently the VC are not expected from that direction. They are short of barbed wire and they have only six SDC. All the labor and virtually all of the resources used are coming from the village itself. Binh Hoa is not going to be a model strategic hamlet.

The burden on the local populations is heavy. Every family in one area of Dinh Tuong is required to make two kilos—about two hundred—spike traps for their perimeter. This involves buying the nails required. In Kien Hoa, the Surete Chief informed me that the new plastic identity cards cost each citizen 50 piasters-ten piasters for the card and forty for the strategic hamlet program (this in spite of the fact that Colonel Thao is going slow, perhaps even dragging his feet on the program). I believe the villages are generally buying their own barbed wire. (I was told that in the 32nd Tactical Zone, all perimeter building is accomplished by Community Development, which judging from my previous experience I take to mean that all labor and all resources are provided by the villages involved.) In all the villages I visited, local taxes support local officials. The new hamlet administrators will be paid by hamlet taxes.

Even in model Ben Tuong, the economic problem is serious for the people. Several cadre working there told me that the most serious obstacle to the success of the hamlet is the shortage of rice land that can be cultivated with reasonable safety. So much of the arable land is subject to VC harassment that they fear the village cannot support itself. This was echoed by a peasant who had come to Ben Tuong voluntarily (a considerable number did not), who said he was afraid his family would be hungry after the GVN subsidy stopped. (It is only fair to add that the Chief of Province told me he expects to clear more land close to the hamlet for cultivation, and that in any event the people can support themselves by working on the nearby rubber plantation. These assurances have evidently not been conveyed to the GVN cadres in the hamlet.)

(b) Sector Economic Advisors

One of the keys to the success of the refugee resettlement program in this country was the use of American representatives of COMIGAL at province and even village level. These men knew the situation first hand, worked closely with local officials, and had authority to call for and dispense aid items such as cloth, roofing and rice (I have read some of their old records which the Consulate at Hue inherited at my request).

Later we got into the position of being able to dispense aid only through appropriate ministries, and USOM pulled all of its “field representatives” out of the provinces. Vietnamese officials at the province level have been complaining of the slowness—and sometimes the inappropriateness—of U.S. aid ever since. They mentioned it frequently to me on this trip when I asked what we could do to help.

It seems to me that if we mean business on the strategic hamlets, we should reestablish the old system of direct contact and direct aid as much as possible. If the GVN will not formally accept Sector Economic Advisors—and I think it is certainly worth a pitch in spite of what Thao says—perhaps we could somehow put an economic advisor on the provincial MAAG staffs. (One of the very best MAAG senior advisors complained because there is no such person on his staff or in his area.)

To be useful, a Sector Economic Advisor would have to have considerable discretion in the use of funds and American supplied equipment. He would have to be able to make sure that the strategic hamlets get the barbed wire, water pumps, generators, etc., that they need in time. The VC are reacting vigorously to the program (the Long An Province Chief told me he has “lost” three strategic hamlets already, Ben Tuong is being harassed continually according to officials there, and in Dinh Tuong the VC reportedly went so far as to dig a three kilometer long tunnel in an attempt to get through the perimeter defenses of a strategic hamlet there). I think there is real danger that too many strategic hamlets will be knocked over by the VC and the whole concept discredited in the eyes of the people and the GVN administrators because of a failure to provide adequate resources rapidly.

(c) Understanding of the Concept in the Provinces

As I noted in my previous memo, the Thompson concept of the strategic hamlet is often not completely understood in the provinces. The provincial effort now puts less stress on patrols outside the perimeter and communications with reserve forces than I would hope for. The provincial concept in fact often is really only an extension of the static defense approach which has dotted the countryside with Beau Geste towers. I think MAAG can do a lot to set this straight as time goes on.

In talks with provincial officials I stressed what I conceive to be the four major requirements for a strategic hamlet: (1) a perimeter and an SDC force adequate to meet the usual VC threat in that area; (2) communications with provincial and ARVN reserve forces in case of attack; (3) constant Civil Guard or ARVN patrols, particularly at night, outside the perimeters; (4) an adequate economic and social base for the village in terms of safe rice growing areas, social services such as schools and medicines, and better administration.

A rather notable heretic is Colonel Thao. He talks in terms of bases among the people, insists that perimeters are not only unnecessary but make the people feel they are in prison. He observed that Saigon has accused him of not implementing the program, but he claims this is not true; he is only going slow and sure. Judging from what he said and what his people showed me, he is mostly going Thao. In spite of his great abilities and his theory that the basic solution is GVN respect for the people, I think he is out in left field on this one. And it is a pretty crucial issue.

(d) Salaries

One of the thornier problems facing us is how to pay strategic hamlet officials and youth defenders. I noted above the problem with regard to the SDC. It applies with equal force to the new strategic hamlet administrations.

According to the Chief of Dinh Tuong Province, pay for hamlet chiefs will be the same as that for the SDC—900 piasters a month. His Civic Action Chief said, however, that most of the hamlets have no money to pay their officials, and consequently they have gone unpaid to date. He was more modest in his estimate of what they should get, feeling that 500 or 600 piasters per month would suffice. (According to this source, strategic hamlet administration will consist of a hamlet chief and a four-man council, including council members specifically charged with responsibility for youth, Surete, and finance. In Long An, the Civic Action Chief stated that the pattern now is to set up a temporary “building committee” composed of elders and other prestigeful types to lend their authority to the actual construction of the strategic hamlet. After the hamlet is set up, the people will select a hamlet chief and a hamlet council.)

The problem does not even stop with SDC and hamlet officials. Asked about his problems, the Chief of Binh Hiep village in Kien Tuong Province observed that it is difficult to motivate youth defenders for the strategic hamlets (not to be confused with the SDC, which is expected to lead the hamlet youth in case of attack). He suggested that pay of 400 or 500 piasters per month would create a much better situation. (He himself gets 1,500 piasters per month from the village budget.) His thought, of course, was that U.S. aid might provide this money. I did what I could to explain the complexities of piaster generation, but I donʼt have much confidence that he understood why it is so difficult for us to meet piaster costs.

One of the more difficult salary problems is that of village health workers. The head of the Dinh Tuong health service observed that he had trained 138 village health workers for six months in his hospital, but very few of them went to the villages when they finished their training. They went to work for private physicians, set up “practices” of their own or found unrelated work in the towns and cities because the villages could not offer them a decent living.

He believes these workers should get 1,500 piasters a month, but they are very lucky to get 900. He is now training health workers for the strategic hamlets; in order to commit them to serve in the villages, he will not give them a certificate until they set up shop in a strategic hamlet or a village in the countryside. (In Long An, the health service is training strategic hamlet health workers for fifteen days in the local hospital. I doubt that they are very useful.)

(e) Cadre to Set Up the Hamlets

One of the brighter aspects of the program at the moment appears to be the remarkable effort to send good cadre into the hamlets to get the program into motion. In Ben Tuong strategic hamlet there were 33 men, many of them from Saigon, all wearing black peasant garb, all evidently quite intelligent and well motivated, and all committed to living a peasant existence for an indefinite period. The fact that they had received no pay from Saigon for some time did not seem to dampen their enthusiasm. Even making allowances for the fact that Ben Tuong is frequently visited by Americans and is obviously a model strategic hamlet, this is pretty wonderful.

In Kien Tuong province, I attended the graduation ceremony for eighty cadre who took a six week course to prepare them for working in the strategic hamlets. These appeared to be Republican youths. I talked to several of them afterward and was again impressed by the dedication of these people. There is really a great deal of human material to work with in the provinces if these groups are any example. (I might also add in this connection the story of one man in an isolated post, three quarters of which was overrun by the VC, who determined that he would not be taken by the VC. He rallied the other men in the post and fought off the VC from midnight to dawn. His wife took over the weapon of one of the dead defenders and fought by his side in best frontier style. They killed 32 VC. He showed me the decoration which the Chief of Province gave him for this exploit.)

Virtually all of the Civic Action employees in the provinces are of course up to their ears in the program. All Civic Action Chiefs visited said they had organized courses for setting up strategic hamlets. (With the combined staffs of the youth, information and old civic action services, they command the largest group of cadre in the province, often more than 100 personnel.) Several of them are also putting out very commendable weekly and even daily provincial newspapers with circulations of several thousand.

The picture here is not entirely rosy, of course. In a strategic hamlet in Long An, I ran into a “delegation” of several cadre out of Saigon “inspecting” the hamlet. They were all more or less drunk and patronizing the villagers in a rather unhappy fashion. But I think this behavior is exceptional.

4. Problems With ARVN

On this trip as on the last one, MAAG advisors told me that ARVN troops sometimes show little enthusiasm for engaging the VC. This is often connected with the use of helicopters; the ARVN forces climb out of the helicopters and instead of immediately moving forward to engage the fleeing VC, wait for all units to arrive so that they can form themselves into battalions. The MAAG advisors are doing all they can to overcome these problems and feel they are making some headway, but the going is slow.

The Rangers are the bright spot here. They are always ready and more than willing to fight VC. One MAAG advisor suggested that Ranger and helicopter companies ought to be “married” so that they could get the helicopters quickly when they need them without the delay of Saigon red tape. (I was told Province Chiefs cannot use helicopters for their operations, so the Rangers do not often get helicopters. This is evidently a Vietnamese decision and reflects the continuing problem of coordination and jealousy between the regular military and the Province Chiefs with their direct lines to Diem.)

As I noted in the previous memo,2 I think the senior MAAG advisors should be of equal rank with their counterparts. MAAG advisors in the field agreed with me.

5. Provincial Councils

In several of the provinces visited on this trip, provincial Councils have now been set up. In fact, that in Dinh Tuong was opened a few days before my arrival there. All concerned seem to think they are a good idea, but their function is rather vague. I was unable to talk to any Council members, but would suggest that political officers on field trips try to do so in the future.

6. Temper of the People

Here in Saigon, as far as I can make out, morale has definitely improved as a direct result of our efforts. In the provinces, officials at least are bullish, feeling that the people are not only getting fed up with Red terror but see an “out” in the strategic hamlets. An American missionary in My Tho gave considerable support to this reading of popular feelings, added that the improved SDC, our helicopters, and greater delegation of authority to field commanders have pushed the VC out of many areas where they formerly worked openly. He now travels on many roads that were closed in December, and feels we are on the crest of a small wave that could grow rapidly if the strategic hamlet program is pushed hard and consistently for another year or two.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, TF(j), Taylor Program, Provincial Surveys, 1962. Secret; Limited Distribution. Sent to Nolting through Mendenhall and Trueheart.

2 Not further identified.

174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 30, 1962—6:27 p.m.

1266. Embtel 1311.2

1. Primary consideration of any crop destruction program is to be sure it will not result in US and GVN absorbing adverse propaganda criticism and adverse local reaction without achieving any commensurate military advantage.

2. This suggests first step should be careful evaluation of whether available chemicals and techniques will in fact produce satisfactory destruction of crop targets. Do not desire approve release of chemicals to GVN until this is determined. Results of the few crop destruction experiments reported to ARPA not conclusive. Therefore as first step COMUSMACV should review all Combat Test and Development Center results their experiments. Also suggest you obtain opinion of expert group headed by General Delmore which is now in Saigon to evaluate defoliation and crop desiccation. Request you report essence their findings. Task Force Saigon should then discuss and review results, reach decision as to employment, and advise Department.

3. If more experimentation is necessary then time should be allowed for this before further steps are taken towards crop destruction program. Appropriate measures should be taken so that unfavorable publicity does not result.

Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cottrell on April 26, cleared with Rice and Little of the Department of State, Williams of DOD, Riley of JCS, and Johnson of the White House; approved by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 160.

175. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin) 175. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Cottrell) to the Commander in Chief, Pacificʼs Political Adviser (Martin)1

Washington, undated.

Dear Ed: Sorry not to have answered your letter of April 172 earlier.

Your letter raises two questions: 1. What is our position on the reunification of Viet-Nam?

It remains as stated by Bedell Smith. Under present circumstances, however, with war in the country, our immediate objective is the restoration of peace and of the situation created by the Geneva Agreement of 1954.

2. What would be our aims in the event we became engaged in military operations against North Viet-Nam?

The political objective of any military plan involving North Viet-Nam would be the restoration of the situation created by the Geneva Agreement of 1954—the division of Viet-Nam at the 17th parallel guaranteed by the powers. There is no thought at present of a re-conquest of North Viet-Nam by military means, to effect a reunification.

The only thinking which comes close to your question which I have heard is the proposition (no official sanction yet) that if our present efforts in Viet-Nam fail, we should go to the source of the problem and apply graduated punishment on the DRV to cease and desist. This does not involve reunification, however.

So, my conclusion is that however meritorious it might be to seek reunification through military force, I know of no such policy. Consequently, if the Admiral wants to make his assumptions match present thinking rather than break new ground, I think he would be safer to use the “graduated punishment” idea.

If, however, he postulates overt Chicom intervention, with a scrap between us and the Chinese, then my own idea is that if we had to destroy both the Chinese and DRV war making capability it would be rather silly to return the DRV to Commie control.

This is the best I can do on Monday morning.

All the best,

Sincerely,

Sterling J. Cottrell3

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 20.1, GVN 1962, Secret; Official-Informal. The source text is undated, but since it indicates that the letter was written on a Monday, it may have been April 30.

2 Document 161.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

176. Draft Memorandum of Conversation, White House, Washington, May 1, 1962, 11 a.m. 176. Draft Memorandum of Conversation, White House, Washington, May 1, 1962, 11 a.m.1

White House, Washington, May 1, 1962, 11 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

R. Gilpatric

General Decker

General Max Taylor

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. Michael Forrestal

Governor A. Harriman

D. FitzGerald

Ray Cline

Roger Hilsman

SUBJECTS

1) Laos; 2) How are we doing in South Viet-Nam; 3) Is there any merit in J.K. Galbraithʼs suggestion of negotiating a neutralized coalition government for South Viet-Nam

[Here follows a paragraph on Laos.]

2. I was asked to report on how we were doing in South Viet-Nam, and spoke from the INR talking paper2 prepared for that purpose. At the end of it, the President raised the question of defoliants saying that he was inclined to think they were not very useful. I said that ambushes are better and more frequently laid under cover of terrain than foliage, but that our problem was going to be with President Diem who seemed to be enamored with the idea of using defoliants against crops.

General Taylor said that he thought there was a great deal of merit in the idea of using defoliants on crops. I argued that the use of defoliants against crops at the present stage of the war would not be very helpful since the Viet Cong still have access to non-communist villages until the strategic village plan had been implemented.

I also argued that there would be a stage in the war when the major rice growing areas were held by the government. At that time, the Viet Cong might have small paddy fields in remote mountain valleys and it might well be desirable to attack these fields. But I thought napalm would be just as efficient as defoliants, since only two or three fields would be involved in any one operation.

General Taylor argued that there was no difference between napalm and defoliants. I disputed this, saying that defoliants were open to germ warfare charges, and that the villagers were receptive because of the propaganda campaign during the Korean War. The President agreed with the latter argument.

It was then noted that an additional experiment with defoliants on 7 miles of road in South Viet-Nam had been approved Friday.3 I suggested that any experiments should be conducted in Thailand. The President approved this recommendation.

3. Ros Gilpatric brought up for discussion Ken Galbraithʼs recommendation4 that we negotiate a coalition-type, neutralized South Viet-Nam. Both Harriman and I vigorously opposed this recommendation and the President decided against it.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Laos, 5/1/62-5/10/62. Top Secret. Drafted by Hilsman. The meeting was held at the White House. At the top of the document was a notation by Hilsman that the memorandum of conversation was for INR use only and that it should be placed in his top secret file.

2 Not found.

3 April 27.

4 See Document 141.

177. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Johnson) to the Director (Rostow) 177. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Johnson) to the Director (Rostow)1

Washington, May 1, 1962.

SUBJECT

Third Country Military Assistance to Vietnam

I have just read Cottrellʼs report to Governor Harriman on the possibility of obtaining military assistance from other countries in Vietnam.2 I must say that the report is giving me some serious second thoughts about the concept.

What is the objective that we seek to achieve? Three can be identified: (a) a reduced need for U.S. forces in Vietnam; (b) a useful political effect in the U.S. through creation of an impression that we are not “fighting the war alone”; and (c) an increased awareness and understanding on the part of other countries in the area of the situation in Vietnam. I have never been sanguine about the possibility that we could really reduce the requirements for American forces. The Cottrell report confirms my doubts.

With respect to the third objective, the Cottrell report makes clear what was probably already evident-that we can expect help only from some of our SEATO allies plus Korea and Nationalist China. These countries are already convinced on the subject of Vietnam. Their participation will add little or nothing to their understanding and may even be somewhat discouraging as they come into contact with the defects of Diemʼs method of operation.

This leaves us with the second objective. It is possible that third country participation will have some useful political effects in the U.S. and I understand that this may be the principal reason why Governor Harriman is interested in pursuing the matter further.

This advantage must, however, be weighed against the international political disadvantages of third country participation. If such participation would, as the Cottrell paper suggests, really make the ICC more likely to cite the GVN for violation of the Geneva accords or if it significantly increased pressures for a Geneva-type conference on Vietnam, it would seem to me that the disadvantages would outweigh the advantage.

I have suggested to Cottrell that the U.S. political purpose might not be almost as well served and the international political disadvantages reduced if we sought military personnel exclusively for “constructive non-belligerent” functions. For example, we might make a request for military medical personnel. We also might seek military officers and non-commissioned officers who could assist in the organization of engineering projects and rural public works. Cottrell seemed to think well of this idea.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron. Secret.

2 Document 172.

178. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 178. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, May 2, 1962.

Briefing on Laos and Vietnam

At your briefing this morning on the above subject, State Department will be represented by Under Secretary Ball, Governor Harriman and Mr. Hilsman; Defense by Deputy Secretary Gilpatric and General Lansdale. Mr. McCone will also attend.

[Here follows briefing material on Laos.]

Vietnam

So far as I can discover, there is no significant change in the general situation in Vietnam. There is an immediate problem over the border incident with Cambodia,2 but the feeling of the State Department seems to be that the situation remains potentially hopeful.

There is some concern that Operation Sunrise may be running into difficulties which were anticipated, i.e. since it has been undertaken in one of the more difficult areas, the forced resettlement is causing some defections among the villagers to the Viet Cong. Other programs for strengthening village defenses and pacifying selected areas are, however, proceeding satisfactorily.

The dual questions of defoliation and crop destruction have come up again. Secretary McNamaraʼs research group has indicated that defoliation is technically feasible if greater quantities of defoliant are sprayed per acre. A roadside experiment of a 7-kilometre stretch is being conducted, not only to prove out technical effectiveness, but also to determine whether defoliation will deter roadside ambushes.3

On the question of crop destruction, your staff has indicated to the State and Defense Departments that they should not come up with a request for your approval to turn the chemicals over to the GVN until a thorough discussion of all of the factors can be assembled, including: (1) scientific assurance based upon extensive testing that the herbicides are completely effective:

(2) a selection of targets based upon sound intelligence, which would justify the conclusion that crop destruction will produce sufficiently valuable military results to justify the political cost.

In connection with (2) above, the question has arisen whether the destruction of crops would not simply cause the Viet Cong to attack loyal villages in order to gain a food supply at the time when these villages were not yet fully capable of defending themselves. There is also the problem of whether adequate arrangements can be made to assist friendly Montagnards who live in the hill country with the Viet Cong and whose crops would be affected.

No decision on crop destruction is required from you at this time.4

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-030-969. Secret.

2 Presumably a reference to an incident in which a band of armed Cambodians crossed the border into Vietnam and killed several civilians, reported in telegram 1336 from Saigon, April 23. (Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/4-2362)

3 In the margin next to this and the preceding paragraph the word “no” was written twice. Also in the margin was the statement: “I didnʼt mention this to Reynolds.” Reynolds has not been identified.

4 A memorandum for the record by Forrestal, May 2, supplies the only record of the meeting. With regard to Vietnam, three decisions were made: “3. The President asked that an effort be made to screen visitors to South Vietnam in order to limit any unnecessary trips there, especially by high ranking officers.

“4. The President directed that the recent authorization for an operational experiment with defoliation on 7 kilometers of road in Vietnam be rescinded. Such an experiment would better be conducted in Thailand.

“5. The President agreed that we should await the report of the ICC in Vietnam before considering indirect approaches to Hanoi on the Vietnam conflict.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NSC Staff memoranda, Michael Forrestal)

179. Minutes of Staff Meeting, United States Information Service, Saigon, May 2, 1962 179. Minutes of Staff Meeting, United States Information Service, Saigon, May 2, 19621

Saigon, May 2, 1962.

Mr. Baumgartner opened the meeting by welcoming Mr. Mecklin to USIS Saigon and said that Mr. Mecklin had met everyone the night before, so there was need for introductions. Then he turned the meeting over to Mr. Mecklin who said he would like to say a few words he had prepared on the flight to Saigon from Paris.

He began by asking each member of the staff to prepare a memo of not over two pages, based on the assumption that he, Mr. Mecklin, did not know Vietnam, nor USIS Saigon nor what the staff was doing. He asked that he be told exactly what each staff member does, what his problems are and what complaints he might have, and ideas of how we might do things differently. When all of the memos are in, Mr. Mecklin would have individual talks with the staff to go over specifics.

Mr. Mecklin said that in his three weeks in Washington he was much impressed with what we are doing here. Mr. Anspacherʼs debriefing, significantly, was attended by 85 people. Mr. Anspacher, he said, spoke decisively and fervently of Vietnam and its problems with particular reference to USISʼs role. Mr. Anspacher was a hard man to succeed because of his excellent performance here. Mr. Mecklin spoke briefly about his own background, noting that he had spent three years here during and after Dien Bien Phu. He said he had a high regard for President Diemʼs performance at that time in an extraordinarily difficult situation.

Mr. Mecklin has been with USIA for only eight months and he asked the staff for forbearance and patience. He said the USIS job here is particularly important because half the struggle in Vietnam is psychological and that, of course, is our field. There should be no doubt that the Communists in Vietnam are going to be defeated. What counts is to get done what needs to be done and it isn't important who does it. There must be no back-biting among elements of the U.S. Mission.

Mr. Mecklin said he would welcome advice and that there is urgent need to generate ideas. He said that one of our most important targets is the illiterate peasant in the bush, for example. We need every available bit of information on whether our product is reaching these people and every available idea on how to improve the effort. We need to be sure somebody is listening.

While in Washington, Mr. Mecklin met Mr. Robert Thompson of the British Mission to Vietnam, who suggested that there should be a new name for the Viet Cong, eliminating the term “Viet”. Mr. Mecklin said he would initiate a contest among the USIS local staff, offering a prize of $50.00, to coin a new phrase which would describe the Communists as foreign puppets, or something of that sort, to make them lose face.

Re American policy in Vietnam: a Communist victory here is unacceptable. This is the determined, hard thinking of our government. The U.S. will give Vietnam all possible help short of combat troops. Our mission, in cooperation with other U.S. agencies, is to persuade the man who has been given a rifle to stand up and use it. Confidence, both ways, is thus of vital importance.

Mr. Mecklin then made what he termed a “pronouncement”: in this USIS post, there is complete freedom of speech. Comment and criticism are encouraged. Mr. Mecklinʼs door is open to any staff member at any time. But this kind of talk must be confined to the family. It is of paramount importance that Vietnamese confidence in the U.S. and in their own efforts be restored and expanded. “Doom-saying” outside the family is intolerable.

As for the foreign press: it is a difficult situation, especially in view of the “official” presence of only 685 Americans in all of Vietnam. Telegram 10062 is still our guidance and Mr. Mecklin thought we could live with it. This postʼs policy is: (1) what is said to the press is the responsibility of Ambassador Nolting; (2) USIS officers are free to talk with the press at any time, but as far as possible, within the framework of the Ambassadorʼs guidance relayed by Mr. Mecklin. We must try to avoid stories that attribute undesirable comment or embarrassing fact to “American sources”, since the GVN is sensitive to this sort of thing, (3) it is equally important to recognize that a free press is a part of the fundamental fabric of the American way of life, and the rule is therefore to level with American newsmen as far as possible, and never engage in deception. Mr. Mecklin added that deception doesn't pay, anyway.

Finally, Mr. Mecklin reminded every one that USIS has a supporting role to play. The less said about USIS-Saigon in the press or anywhere else, the better are the chances of success.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67A677, USIS 1962. Confidential. The meeting was held at the U.S. Information Service. No drafting information was found on the source text.

2 Document 75.

180. Memorandum for the Record 180. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, May 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Minutes of Meeting of Special Group (CI), 3 May 1962

PRESENT

General Taylor, The Attorney General, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Johnson, Mr. McCone, General Krulak vice General Lemnitzer, Mr. Coffin vice Mr. Hamilton

General Decker was present for the meeting.

Ambassador Bernbaum was present for discussion relative to Ecuador.

Mr. Cottrell was present for Item 1.

Mr. Carroll was present for Item 4.

1. South Viet-Nam Status Report

Mr. Cottrell stated that he has returned from his recent trip to South Viet-Nam with three general impressions: A. In the strategic hamlet concept, together with a quick military reaction, we have found the right formula.

B. More confusion exists in the inter-relationship between U.S. advisers and Viet-Nam opposite numbers in military units than he had previously thought. This applies to the reporting of aircraft, as well as the linking of communications.

C. The fiscal problem has again become serious. The South Viet-Nam budget exceeds the countryʼs income plus U.S. aid.

Mr. Cottrell summed up the situation by stating that in his opinion we have reached bottom in South Viet-Nam, and that he is not sure whether we have made the upturn yet. Evidence as to an upturn will include such things as the number of Viet Cong attacks, the number of Viet Cong personnel killed, and the South Viet-Nam military reaction time.

General Taylor expressed the Groupʼs interest in receiving the views of the Secretary of Defense following his return from South Viet-Nam. General Decker will disseminate to the Group a report prepared by General Rosson following the latterʼs recent trip to South Viet-Nam.2

[Here follow sections on subjects unrelated to Vietnam.]

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 1/1/62-7/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Davis. Attached to the source text were an agenda for the meeting of May 10, a memorandum on counterinsurgency terminology, and a transmittal memorandum from S/S.

2 Not further identified.

181. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 181. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, May 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Foreign Military Participation in South Viet-Nam

1. Mr. Cottrell advises me that the question of the desirability and extent of foreign military participation in the fight in South Viet-Nam has been carefully reviewed by State in the last few days. A decision has been made to pass on each case that comes up rather than attempt to organize any sort of multi-national contribution from the Washington end.

2. The first specific case is Korea. As you will see from the attached telegram,2 received during your absence, the Koreans have advised the United States officially of their plan to despatch a military mission to Saigon. This is the same project of which we had earlier word through intelligence channels.

3. State has worked up a draft reply to the Ambassador in Seoul which, in effect, indicates the US has no objection to the Korean mission but expresses the desirability of coordinating the Groupʼs work with General Harkins on arrival in Saigon.

The decision is subject to concurrence of our Ambassadors in Seoul and Saigon and the outgoing telegram is so worded.3 Though Saigon and CINCPAC both received the attached telegram, neither has indicated their views.

You will note in paragraph 2 of the Seoul telegram that the mission includes experts in intelligence organization and operations; otherwise, the functional composition of the Korean group appears to be useful, can probably be absorbed without military complications, and will achieve the political objectives.

4. State is consulting with Defense this afternoon to gain their clearance on the draft telegram. Barring complications, an answer should be sent by Saturday.

W.H.B.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret.

2 Reference is to telegram 1135 from Seoul, April 28, not found attached. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5811/4-2862)

3 Document 180.

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 3, 1962—6:03 p.m.

1281. Task Force Viet-Nam.

Seoulʼs 1135 to Department.2 Unless Task Force/Saigon, CINCPAC or Embassy Seoul has other view we believe a quiet covert Korean military experts survey mission to Viet-Nam outlined reftel should not be discouraged.

Request Embassy Seoul inform Koreans we appreciate fact their experience may be useful in Viet-Nam and would like to have them work closely with MACV informing it fully of recommendations they may formulate as result their survey. ROK ideas on intelligence management materiel and anti-aircraft might conceivably cross lines with MACV thinking so full discussion and clarification between MACV and ROK would be desirable prior to ROK submission any report to GVN.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5811/4-2862. Secret. Drafted by Cottrell, and cleared with Loftus, Harriman, and Rice. Also sent to Seoul and repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 See footnote 2, Document 181.

183. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 183. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State1

New Delhi, May 5, 1962—4 p.m.

3509. For Harriman.

Parthasarathi came in at my invitation for long and I think important talk about South Vietnam. He confirmed confidentially what we had heard from Canadians about the report, hopes to have it by first of June.2 It will condemn Hanoi for subversion, cite us for exceeding ceilings. …

I pressed Parthasarathi at length on his discussions in Hanoi. He stressed what we have heard before, to-wit, that there is a difference between moderates who would like to forestall Chinese intervention and a radical pro-Chinese fraction. He doubts that there is any fear of American attack on North Vietnam but there is a widespread conviction that we aim to entrench ourselves militarily in the South. He states also that the Russians have told Hanoi that we are not very comfortable in our situation in the South, that we do not see how we can win with Diem but equally do not see any alternatives.

Turning to the South, Parthasarathi believes Diemʼs political base is continuing to shrink, that the strategic villages plan, however plausible from a military point of view, is politically disastrous and based on false analogy by Thompson and others to Malayan situation. He does not, however, see any immediate alternative to Diem.

Turning to the prospects for settlement he shares your doubts about a general conference. He does note that it would focus world attention on area which would be a restraining factor. However he strongly hopes that since both moderates in the North and Americans in the South find the situation unsatisfactory, the way will be kept open for negotiation. The right time he thinks is following the initial explosion which will accompany the submission of the report to the co-chairman. When the latter dies down he hopes the Co-chairman will ask for bilateral talks on stabilization, compliance and peace. His suggestions are rather along the line of our recent discussions in Washington, to-wit, if North calls off the dogs for a stated period of months, we proclaim a standstill on military personnel and equipment with further understanding that if after say six months situation is stabilized we begin withdrawal.3 He urges that while reunification is not possible there is a strong and genuine desire both North and South for increased contact. Politically reunification is attractive on both sides.

I will repeat summary of conversation the first of the week to Saigon, London. etc.4

Galbraith

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-562. Secret; Limit Distribution.

2 See Document 208.

3 Next to this sentence the word “wrong” is written.

4 A sanitized copy of this telegram was sent as 3571 from New Delhi, May 10, and repeated to Saigon, London, Geneva, Paris, Ottawa, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for Polad. The sanitization involved deleting the last sentence of the second paragraph, all of the third paragraph, the first two sentences of the fourth paragraph, and the sixth sentence of the fourth paragraph. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-1062)

184. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 184. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, May 9, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam Task Force Meeting 9 May 1962

1. Task Force meeting today was mainly devoted to a verbal report from Mr. Stoneman, the USOM representative, on his observations in a three week visit in Viet-Nam.

2. He was impressed with the operation of the intermediate level US country team committee chartered to support, on the US side, GVN province pacification operations. This has served to focus US attention to the details of implementing action in South Viet-Nam to an extent not previously attempted. For the first time the country team is evaluating detailed supporting action that in the past has been left to the GVN. As a result, the US is more actively prodding the various ministries in Saigon for information and status of planning.

3. The initial results of this new US procedure has been a clearer realization of GVN disorganization and ineffectiveness. There is no detailed GVN long-range planning for province pacification to include logistic requirements and personnel needs. The requirements deficiency is important because AID has only enough in-country resources to support two more province operations. In order to generate necessary activities in the pipeline to avoid future logistic delays, the US committee in Saigon is now trying to work up their own estimates of material requirements based on what is understood to be the proposed schedule for future operations. From this AID and MAP resources will be tapped.

4. Mr. Stoneman was amazed at the lack of firm planning in Saigon. Though he characterizes the US side as energetic and willing, he stresses the limits of US influence due to the lack of GVN organization and Diemʼs resistance to any suggested streamlining. USOM recently asked Diem for authority to bypass the Saigon ministries and deal directly with the province authorities to support rural operations. Diem said no.

5. Mr. Cottrell got the inference from this presentation. He observed it is now obvious we are reaching a crucial point at which it may be necessary to make a firm approach to Diem to insist on administrative procedures that will get the job done. If action along these lines is not undertaken, it is possible the large US investment will be of no avail.

6. Mr. Stoneman also had a lengthy discussion with the Minister of Civic Action. You will recall this Ministry is also responsible for propaganda. Stoneman says it is obvious the Minister considers the civic action part of his task as of the lowest priority. He has no rational conception of how his personnel are to be used or what type of support they may need in the months ahead. He does not understand the objectives of civic action and is approaching it on a very narrow basis.

7. The importance of continuing GVN ineffectiveness to the war in SVN is now being comprehended on a wider basis in Washington. You may wish to raise this issue at the Special Group (CI) meeting of 17 May.2

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 No record of the May 17 meeting has been found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

185. Editorial Note 185. Editorial Note

On May 8-9, 1962, the ANZUS Council met in Canberra for the first time since October 1959. United States representative Secretary of State Rusk was joined by Admiral Felt and several others. The Australian representative was Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister of External Affairs; New Zealand was represented by Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs K.J. Holyoake. According to a summary of the conversation, transmitted in airgram A-24 from Canberra, May 10, the Council undertook a discussion of Laos and South Vietnam on the morning of May 9. The discussion consisted of a briefing by Admiral Felt and exchanges between Barwick and Rusk on the viability of the Diem regime, the extent of the United States commitment in Vietnam, and me possibility of aid to South Vietnam from Australia and New Zealand. Regarding the latter Admiral Felt offered to smooth the way for aid from Australia and New Zealand when he visited Vietnam after the ANZUS meeting. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 310 ANZUS) For text of the final communiqué issued at the conclusion of the conference, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 992-995.

186. Letter From the Ambassador in India (Galbraith) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 186. Letter From the Ambassador in India (Galbraith) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

New Delhi, May 10, 1962.

Dear Averell: When I was back a few weeks ago,2 the President asked me if it would be a good idea for me to tell the representative of Hanoi here that if they ever had any communications to you or to him to use me as a channel. I told him I was a bit reluctant. The representative here is a very low-level figure and it isn't at all easy for me to communicate with him. Nor do I know of his reliability. We left the matter at that but since no action was involved I never thought to mention it to you.

The President, as you know, is anxious to have lines of communication open against possible need. Yesterday when thinking about Parthasarathiʼs forthcoming visit, it occurred to me that he would be a good channel of communication. Accordingly, without making much of a point of it, I told him that if he ever felt Hanoi had anything to communicate to you or the President they should feel free to do so and could do it through me. I doubt that anything ever comes of this, but I thought you should know.

Yours faithfully,

John

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, EFGH. Confidential.

2 See footnote 1, Document 141.

187. Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense 187. Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense1

Washington, undated.

VISIT TO SOUTHEAST ASIA BY THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, 8-11 MAY, 1962

[Here follow sections I and II.]

III. South Vietnam

1. As in Thailand, the period in South Vietnam was spent largely in visits to military activities in the field. It included visits to the Corps headquarters, to the scene of Operation Sunrise, to three strategic hamlets, to the SVN training center for Civil Guard units, as well as interviews with US unit advisors in their areas of operations, and with all three of the ARVN Corps commanders. The field visits covered generally the length of South Vietnam, from the 17th parallel to the Delta, and measured some 1400 miles. Included also was a conference with Chief, MAAG Laos, a meeting with President Diem, and a final meeting with Commander, US Military Assistance Command, Commander in Chief, Pacific and their staffs. The detailed itinerary is shown in Appendix 5 and a map representation of the area covered is shown in Appendix 6.

2. Impressions gained during the visit included the following: a. Strategic villages (townships) and strategic hamlets (communities).—The program, in reality, is just beginning to gain momentum, and unqualified conclusions as to its efficiency cannot properly be drawn at this fume. It is plain, even at this early point, that in the resettlement process often involved in the strategic hamlet program, and in the attendant regimentation, the South Vietnamese authorities are obliged to use some of the same arbitrary techniques as the Communists themselves. It is to be hoped that the very real motivations of ultimate freedom from terror, a sense of national or local pride, and the prospect of a life of individual opportunity will be enough to make the regimented system work. There is good reason to believe that it will.

There are about 14,000 hamlets (small communities) in South Vietnam. As of this fume, 1579 have been organized as strategic hamlets, with an additional 1230 planned for this calendar year. Most of these actions did not involve resettlement and were created on the original site of the hamlets, in areas where the GVN already exercised a strong measure of control. They are thus serving mainly to solidify or to enhance the degree of GVN control. A few, such as Ben Tuong, which was visited in the Sunrise Project, and one seen near Ca Mao in Delta, were actually created in areas which were liberated from VC control. The Sunrise undertaking—a most ambitious effort to clear the VC from an area 40 miles northwest of Saigon—has proceeded satisfactorily to date, with a great reduction of VC influence in the area and the creation of a completely new strategic hamlet, into which families from the area have been concentrated. The project is portrayed and described in detail in Appendix 7.

The Strategic hamlet program undertaken near Ca Mao on the Delta presented an equally impressive picture but from an entirely different viewpoint. Here, the commander of the 31st Infantry Regiment had gone into an area 95% controlled by the VC, declared martial law, and resettled 11,000 people (some under duress) in 9 strategic hamlets, while fighting the VC wherever he found them. It is a bootstrap program, essentially without material aid from outside. Since inception of the program, none of his villages have been attacked, and the freedom from VC taxation (extortion) is proving most appealing to the people. It is the commanderʼs hope (doubtless optimistic) that he will be able to turn the whole area over to the Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps within 6 months.

It would appear, at this early moment, that the strategic hamlet program promises solid benefits, and may well be the vital key to success of the pacification program. Plainly, it: (1) Provides physical security for the villagers from the Communists.

(2) Precludes extortion of the peopleʼs limited means.

(3) Offers promise of a tranquil existence, and a substantially improved economic condition.

(4) Provides for better housing, more education and a higher order of health and sanitation.

(5) Impedes greatly the VC capability for surviving off the land, both in terms of food and information.

On the other hand, the program gives evidence of having weaknesses—all of which are probably susceptible of correction. They include: (1) A lack of adequate orientation for the people who must be resettled, to make plain all the reasons why they should be willing to leave their homes and fields and surrender some of their liberties.

(2) A shortage of competent GVN administrators to make the communities operate properly.

(3) Inefficient and unstandardized construction methods.

(4) A lack of warning communications.

(5) Insufficient training and equipment for local defense forces.

The first three of the above problems are on the way to solution now, through a National Academy for Strategic Hamlets which opens on 17 May, with an initial class of 500. The last two problems are most serious, and each is deserving of separate treatment here, by virtue of their magnitude and complexity.

b. The training of Vietnamese paramilitary forces.—The subversive technique adopted by the communists fixes the hamlet as the decisive battle ground. The hearts and minds of the villagers are the major objective of the Viet Cong. Thus the security, prosperity and tranquility of each hamlet needs, at all costs, to be preserved from terror, violence and extortion, and this can be done best by young people who (1) have a blood identity with the area and an interest in its welfare; (2) have adequate arms, equipment and training for the task; and (3) are properly organized and led. The program to accomplish these things is just beginning to gain momentum. It has three elements: (1) Training of the Civil Guard (provincial paramilitary forces).—A visit to the Song Mao Civil Guard Training Center disclosed an active and effective program, capable of handling 15 Civil Guard companies at a fume. During this calendar year it will give 12-week training courses to 188 of the existing 449 Civil Guard companies, or about 20,000 men. By the end of next year 372 companies will be trained. These units will be adequately armed and capable of small unit offensive action against the VC, in local security tasks. One problem in the program turns on what point in time the Civil Guard units should be given their US weapons. At present the companies are inspected at their home stations and, when found capable of handling them, are issued the weapons at that fume. On this basis, a total of 338 Civil Guard companies now have US weapons.

(2) Training of the Village Self Defense Corps.—This is a paramilitary program, formalized and like the Civil Guard, involving paid, full-time participation. It is less sophisticated than the Civil Guards. The SDC is identified with the village (township) in the same sense as the Civil Guard is identified with the province. The program for the Self Defense Corps training is not as far developed as Civil Guard training. It comprises a six-weeks basic course at seven SVN training centers. The SDC man is issued a US weapon on the day his unit reports to the training center, and is held responsible for the weapon thenceforward. Under the present program 65,000 SDC will have received training by 1 April 1963.

(3) Training of the Youth Corps.—This is an undertaking identified specifically with the hamlet, and completes the paramilitary spectrum from the province downward. The participants are unsaid volunteers, both male and female. Their training is not standard, being accomplished by various ARVN units, and their weapons are heterogeneous. Nevertheless, their importance is great, inasmuch as the volunteers are actually a part of the hamlet which they undertake to defend.

One Youth Corps group observed at the strategic hamlet of Luong Son near Song Mau in the central part of the country, was obviously highly motivated, but its weapons—ranging from shotguns to 1892 Mausers—gave little cause for confidence. There is no crystalline program for Youth Corps training, no detailed plan for its uniform armament, nor has a plan been prepared to equate the Youth Corps requirement with the number of strategic hamlets which will ultimately be created. COMUSMACV was directed to have such a plan developed, as a matter of urgency.

(4) The problem of warning communications.—The transmission of intelligence reports and the processing of urgent reports of VC activity in the hinterland parallels closely the paramilitary security force problem. Communications are planned, from the metropolitan level to the district, and from the district to the village (township), but the hamlet, where the issue of violent subversion is really joined, has not been firmly linked—even in planning—in the communications system.

At the present time, 220 of 242 districts are linked with Saigon by radio

At the next lower level, the plan contemplates 2400 village radios, of which 215 had been installed by 2 May, with a forecast of 2019 by October. In this connection, the need for completion of this project, expressed by US personnel interviewed the length of South Vietnam, is urgent.

At the lowest level, the hamlet, little has been done. It is acknowledged locally that a communication system from hamlet to village is essential, and a pilot group of 1000 very simple radio sets win be tested.

The Secretary of Defense, in view of the importance of this project, advised the Ambassador and COMUSMACV that DOD would support the hamlet communication project, and asked for an early and complete plan which relates the communication need to the number of strategic hamlets contemplated.

c. Visits to the I and II Corps Areas.—Both Corps Areas are vast, comprising terrain of extreme military difficulty, minimal road communications, a sensitive Laotian border and a wide assortment of VC activity. In this regard, probably the most significant tactical impression gained was that the ARVN forces—doubtless because of dynamic guidance by US advisers—are pressing aggressively to keep the VC off balance, and to make his existence as unfruitful as possible. There seems little question but that this vigor is paying off.

Small unit patrols, ambushes, attacks of company size, sweeps involving a battalion or more, imaginative employment of helicopters, air observation and heavier weapons—all must be having some effect on denying initiative to the VC Eight such recent operations are described, and critically analyzed, in Appendix 8.

A point of possible significance, in connection with the increased scale of helicopter-borne operations is the fact that the pilot area of the aircraft is suffering hits with increasing frequency, leading to the possible conclusion that the VC are learning to concentrate on the pilot. This, in turn, raises once again the matter of whether there should not be some form of suppressive weapon integral with a fraction of the assault helicopters.

Specific observations regarding visits to the Corps Areas include: (1) An imaginative utilization of education, civic action and psychological activity has resulted in the voluntary resettlement of 11,900 people in the Kontum area. It could well be done elsewhere, but success apparently demands the happy combination of a willing provincial authority, a vigorous ARVN commander and a dynamic US advisor.

(2) The primitive country is an ideal setting for exploitation of our superior mobility in the helicopter and our superior radio communication capability. In both Corps Areas a desire was expressed for more of this support, particularly helicopters. At the present fume, there are scarcely enough helicopters for operational purposes, leaving the logistic problems involved in supply and evacuation for remote patrols to be solved by slower and less effective means. It is most likely that more helicopters are needed.

(3) There is little infiltration by sea reported, attesting to the effectiveness of the maritime patrol. The same is hue with respect to the 17th parallel. Some increase in infiltration across the Laotian border was reported by the I Corps commander, following the growth of communist activity at Tchepone in Laos.

(4) US advisers in both Corps commented upon the great need for more junior officers and NCOs in both ARVN and Civil Guard units. In some organizations the number is as low as 15 to 25% of the authorized strength.

(5) Advisers in both Corps were enthusiastic about the value of civic action, and urge acceleration in training of Vietnamese administrators in community development. They express a need for medical supplies for civic action purposes.

(6) In contemplating the sum of the operations in I and II Corps, it was not possible to overlook the reality that these activities actually do relatively little to impede movement across the long and rugged Laotian border, a practical fact which assumes even greater importance in light of current developments in Laos.

d. Conference With Chief MAAG, Laos.—The Chief, MAAG Laos joined the party at Nha Trang during the visit to I and II Corps, and gave a late summary of events in Laos. His recital of the developing situation paralleled closely the official reports available in Washington from other sources. However, he added the following personal views, which are significant: (1) That he had earlier appealed to the Laotian military leadership to readjust their low-ground defenses at Nam Tha, without success.

(2) That the Laotian private soldier involved in the Nam Tha fighting gave a reasonably good account of himself, but that the officer and NCO leadership was gravely deficient, and that the pusillanimous example was set at the very top.

(3) That this weakness which, in his views, is widespread, gives rise to the conclusion that what is left of the Laotian Army cannot be expected to fight with any effectiveness.

(4) That there are grave doubts, in his mind, as to the real violence of the fighting, following the initial blow at Nam Tha, inasmuch as the field commander took pains to prevent direct US observation of the operation, and inasmuch as few casualties were noted.

(5) That there is a substantial logistic build-up along the whole of the former cease-fire line; that logistic activity in the Tchepone area is growing; and that an attack may well be expected in the general area

e. Conference at MACV Headquarters.—A conference at MACV Headquarters, attended also by representatives of CINCPAC and the US Embassy, Saigon, treated the following matters: (1) A review of major VC military activities.—Since 14 April there have been no VC operations as large as battalion size, the largest involving about 50 men. Present VC organized strength is estimated at 16,500. While this is a reduced estimate, the reduction was described as being more a matter of accurate reporting than of lesser numbers. There are estimated to be at least 100,000 active communist guerrillas. With regard to these facts, it is likely that we shall be getting better information in the future, inasmuch as there are now intelligence advisers down to the section level.

(2) Review of RVNAF operations.—Since 21 March there have been over 40 operations of battalion or larger size, along with 400 minor offensive efforts. The Air Force has flown over 400 sorties, of which 275 were in close support. COMUSMACV is now concerned about how to maintain the tempo of operations during the rainy season, and has a study in progress on this subject.

(3) The status of Clear and Hold operations.—Activities in Operation Sunrise and at Ca Mao have been discussed earlier. Additionally, it was reported that, while there is no time schedule set for the approved Delta Plan, the Vietnamese seek to divide the clear-and-hold scheme into three phases, involving tasks of ascending difficulty, and each to be accomplished in three months.

(4) Progress in gaining GVN acceptance of issue of weapons to CG and SDC.—This has been discussed earlier, except for the single significant point that, in the case of the SDC, the reluctance to issue weapons at home stations is wholly a GVN decision. It is their view that issue of the weapons at the training center is a powerful lever to procure the participation of the SDC in training. Actually, a far graver problem lies in the absence of a sound program for arming the Youth Corps. (To be taken under study by MALV.)

(5) The relief of ARVN units by Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps in static tasks.—There has as yet been essentially no replacement of ARVN units by Civil Guard or SDC, nor is there likelihood of any until a greater number of these para-military units are properly trained. This is so because the trained CG and SDF units are now used to replace untrained similar units which, in turn, go to the training centers. At the same time it is significant to note that probably 85% of the ARVN forces, while technically addressed to “static” duties, are actually engaged in pure operational functions of defensive nature—protection of vital installations, airfields, supply depots, etc.

(6) Establishment of the Intelligence Net.—At the present time 92% of the people and 98% of the equipment for the intelligence net are in place, and substantially operational. While there is stik some requirement for US personnel to depend on Vietnamese resources for information, the need is steadily decreasing. There is now a joint US/VN intelligence element existent from section through division, corps, and field command to general staff. There should be a visible improvement in intelligence quality and timeliness in the immediate future.

(7) Communications in Provinces, Districts, Villages and Hamlets.—This has been discussed above.

(8) Infiltration.—Infiltration, which has been at a low level for the past few months, is estimated to be on the increase, using routes through Laos.

(9) Current Desertion Rate in RVNAF.—The Army rate has dropped from 6/1000/month to about 4/100/month. There is no desertion problem in the Air Force or Navy.

(10) Defoliation.—A detailed and generally favorable report was submitted on defoliation, as a result of a comprehensive survey by chemical warfare, agricultural and botanical technicians. The defoliation technique was characterized as potentially most effective, and its operational resumption, under specialist technical advice, was recommended. Its usefulness, in terms of selective crop destruction, was also emphasized. MACV was directed by the Secretary of Defense to submit a specific recommendation covering both defoliation and selective crop destruction.

(11) A progress report on whether we are winning or losing.—MACV offered one practical index for appraising the problem, acknowledging always the multitude of imponderables involved. It has to do with the control—geographic and by population—exercised over the country by the GVN and by the VC. The geographic picture is presented in Appendix 9, with a detailed rationalization. In essence, it says that: The GVN controls 14.7% of the country.

The GVN is in the ascendancy in 24% of the country.

Neither the GVN nor VC controls 18.3% of the country.

The VC is in the ascendancy in 24.8% of the country.

The VC controls 17.4% of the country.

In terms of population, the picture is brighter, in that: The GVN controls 18.1% of the country.

The GVN is in the ascendancy in 37.8% of the country.

The VC is in the ascendancy m 11.4% of the country.

The VC controls 15.6% of the country.

The above population figures, moreover, are developed without considering the 1.7 million people in the cities, essentially, all of whom are under GVN control.

Another interesting index to the trend of affairs is portrayed in Appendix 10, which shows, for a 5 month period, the trend of GVN combat losses in killed, wounded, deserted and defected, as well as weapons lost, contrasted to the same figures for the VC. The trend is plainly a favorable one.

3. Vietnam Summary a. US military forces in South Vietnam are acquitting themselves well, exhibiting much energy, great initiative and imagination in dealing with their Vietnamese counterparts.

b. There are skill some material needs in S. Vietnam—helicopters, hamlet communications, and suitable arms for paramilitary forces. MACV is aware of each problem and has been directed to submit specific proposals.

c. There remain urgent training and organizational problems related to hamlet security. These too, are recognized by MACV.

d. Beyond this, and in a broader sense, there was an atmosphere of restrained optimism evident in every area visited, on the part of both US and GVN personnel. All the way from the intensely proud attitude of the administrator of a strategic hamlet to the military and civil leadership at the top, the Vietnamese exhibit confidence and resolution. The US participants in the battle are likewise solid in their determination that the future holds genuine promise. At the same time, there seems to be universal comprehension of the inevitable reality that for fifteen prior years the war in Vietnam was in the process of being lost—progressively and day by day—and that there is no alchemy or magic that can convert that sort of loss into a dramatic victory overnight. Put otherwise, there is evident a general conviction—first, that victory is clearly attainable through the mechanisms that are now in motion and, second, that hopefully, it will not take fifteen years fully to consummate it.

1 Source: JCS Files. Top secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but declassification markings indicate that it was prepared in the Department of Defense. In addition to the summary of the trip to Vietnam, May 8-11, printed here, the report, which is 71 pages in length, includes an introduction stating that McNamara was accompanied by Lemnitzer and Sylvester, a summary of the Thailand portion of the trip, May 8-9, and 10 appendixes, including itineraries, maps, force strengths charts, descriptions of some ARVN operations, and a summary of Operation Sunrise.

188. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 188. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Hong Kong, May 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

The Communists and South Viet Nam

In making future assessments of the effect which our military/diplomatic role in Viet Nam has on the Communists I believe we should keep the following elements in mind. The list is not exhaustive. I have discussed the following with Consul General Green and key members of his staff in Hong Kong. They have made sound contributions and agree generally.

1. The ChiCom-Russian split. The Russians think Communism can make gains without local wars. They will back wars of “National Liberation” provided the risks are controllable. The ChiComs think local wars are the best way to spread Communism and will accept higher risks. (Moral: if we prove the Russians right, we are lost.)

2. For all their toughness the ChiComs are realists. Given their economic plight and because they will not have an effective way of delivering the bomb in the foreseeable future, they donʼt want a major war. Proviso: If they thought they were being attacked, they would stop at nothing. (We can communicate our limited intentions to the ChiComs by our acts.)

3. If the ChiComs took over all SEA, it would not solve their immediate rice problem. Later they would quadruple the rice production of SEA, but this would not permanently solve their rice problems. They probably know this and we can assume that they will not move into SEA because of their food problem.

4. The North Vietnamese have committed their prestige to the conquest of South Vietnam, but they will not voluntarily accept massive ChiCom assistance. They know that to gain South Viet Nam by this method would lead, in turn, to being swallowed by the ChiComs. They have an abiding, neighborly hatred dating back 1500 years.

5. The North Vietnamese react badly to internal, covert dangers. As orientals they do not naturally band together to face a common danger. This tendency to look out for themselves is accentuated by Communist training to act as separate cells and cadres and to spy on each other. There are already indications that the North Vietnamese are afraid of sabotage, that there is an atmosphere of distrust which can no longer be papered over by warring revolutionary zeal (these tensions should be discreetly exploited).

6. The South Vietnamese peasants fear the Communists more than their own Government. If convinced they have the means to resist the VC, they will. If convinced they donʼt have the means, they will, through fear, give the Viet Cong more than they will the GVN.

7. The GVN wants to win its own war. It now realizes the importance of Civic Action as a means of helping the peasant. The confusions in this program are not insuperable. The GVN has not yet fully faced the other side of the coin—to really root out the VC it will be necessary for ARVN units to stay out in the field longer and with less support than is now the case (experience will help them gain the confidence to do this, but we must also help through joint planning and by supplying the right kind of light equipment. We must not let them become so dependent on daily US provisions that they canʼt be weaned and hardened off into the jungles).

8. International Conference—At present the Communists (Russia, the ChiComs and North Viet Nam) would only come out for a conference if they felt they could gain two objectives: i. a neutralized SVN really ripe for the takeover (they were fooled on this one in 1954 and would want to be satisfied); ii. paint an “aggression” label clearly on the U.S. without any rubbing off on themselves (that is why we must work so hard to get the ICC to pin “subversion” on them).

In the future when the war goes badly for the Communists, they will want a conference (this will test our nerve. We should remember the Communists understand our actions. If we agree to a conference, they will assume it to be an act of weakness. We must assume that a conference will not lead to an agreement which will bind them. By the thrust and parry of diplomatic and military action we can reach a de facto understanding, but we should only do so when the GVN has the ability to exercise sovereign control over South Viet Nam. Finally the publicity of a conference on Viet Nam is apt to make it a poor form of diplomacy, particularly since our friends and allies are apt to get into a greater degree of public disarray than the Communists).

Conclusions

1. Maintain our present program in SVN.

2. More discreet sabotage in NVN.

3. Play down US role.

4. Try to get subversion finding from ICC, if possible with showing that this is cause of increased U.S. assistance.

5. Communicate our intentions clearly and without conferences.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, Official-Informal Letters, GVN 1962. Secret. Transmitted from Hong Kong under a letter from Wood to Cottrell, May 11. Signed for Wood by Marshall Green, the Consul General in Hong Kong, who appended a note stating that he agreed with the conclusions but would have phrased Woodʼs points differently.

189. Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 189. Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Policy Implications of General Harkins' Appointment

In order to provide a command structure for the US forces being moved to Thailand and the Southeast Asian area in connection with the situation in Laos, the Joint Chiefs propose ordering the establishment of the US Military Assistance Command, Thailand (USMACTHAI). General Paul Harkins, who heads the US Military Command, Vietnam (USMACV) will additionally assume command of USMACTHAI. As head of USMACTHAI, General Harkins will command Joint Task Force 116 (headed by Lt. Gen. Richardson), MAAG Thailand, and such other US forces as may be in Thailand now or subsequently.

There are undoubtedly sound military organizational reasons for establishing this command structure. This we do not question. However, from a somewhat less specialized point of view, we can see a number of undesirable implications in the action taken (or about to be taken).

1. Communist Reactions:

The limited purpose of our military buildup in Southeast Asia may have been made abundantly clear publicly and in private approaches to the Soviets. Moscow is, in our view, likely to give credence to the limitations we assert. Peiping and Hanoi, however, are more directly concerned than Moscow, and we think they are apt to view our assertions with a jaundiced eye; they will be quick to draw conclusions from any of our actions which do not, in their view, square with our limited objective. Thus, we believe both Peiping and Hanoi likely at a minimum to regard the establishment of USMACTHAI under General Harkins (with all his other responsibilities) as an indicator of US intent to draw a line in a permanent fashion from Thailand through Laos to South Vietnam. They will believe this not only threatens their position in southern Laos, but their support of the Viet Cong in South Vietnam as well. As long as we are not compelled to move US/Thai troops into Laos itself, this conception on their part is of no great significance. If we move into Laos, however, it is almost certain to make them more likely to initiate hostile action against US and Thai troops than we have previously estimated. They would have great difficulty, as we crossed the Mekong into southern Laos, in not concluding that this was the beginning of an effort to pinch off the whole southern panhandle.

2. In US Policy Terms:

In South Vietnam we are assisting a national government in a divided country to check and beat back an insurgency. We are going to great pains to make clear that it is not our war but that of the GVN. With respect to Laos we are mounting a deterrent to further communist territorial encroachment so as to create the conditions in which a new government of national union can be formed and the area neutralized. Only if neutralization proves impossible would we consider armed intercession to effect a de facto partition. US policy is differentiated for the two areas. A central regional military command does not reflect this policy differentiation, and indeed it cuts across the concept. When the new command structure becomes public, the question will be not whether the policy and command problems are different, but whether the policy has changed.

3. In Terms of US Governmental Operations:

In his memorandum of May 29, 19612 the President made it clear that the Ambassador is to “oversee and coordinate all the activities of the US Government” in the country to which he is accredited. An exception was made in the case of “US forces operating in the field where such forces are under the command of a US area military commander.” It is not clear whether General Harkins becomes a “US area military commander” responsible to another US area military commander (Admiral Felt). If so, some confusion arises as to the responsibility of the Ambassadors in Thailand and South Vietnam (and perhaps eventually in Laos); more importantly this could lead to a greater confusion in policy recommendations from the area, with the JCS claiming a direct line to the President. If not, General Harkins is put in a difficult position of being overseen and coordinated by two (or potentially three) US Ambassadors.

4. In Laos:

Announcement of the command is likely to make it more difficult to persuade Phoumi that US military moves are directed toward making a political solution possible. Equally important, it would tend to reinforce his personal position within the RLG at a time when the US is preparing to reduce his political stature and even to seek his replacement. To Phoumi and others in the RLG the implied linking of US military operations in South Vietnam and Laos would bolster hopes of securing southern Laos. There is recent evidence that Phoumi has this thought the more in mind since the loss of northwestern Laos. It would also strengthen the force of his appeal (“we are fighting the same battle”) for support from South Vietnam and South Korea.

5. In South Vietnam:

Diem is not likely to feel overly sensitive to the broadening of General Harkins' authority beyond the borders of South Vietnam, and whatever deflation of Saigonʼs stature may be implied will be compensated by the vision it opens for Diem (as for Phoumi) of pinching off southern Laos.

At the popular level, making the senior American military officer in South Vietnam the commander of Southeast Asia plays directly into Communist hands. The war in South Vietnam is a villagers' war. They are nationalistic and sensitive to the possible reimposition of a colonial regime—this time American. The Viet Cong works hard on this theme, and will now have additional rationale.

6. In Thailand:

The Thais have little interest in the South Vietnamese situation but great interest in protecting their entire border with Laos. Phoumi may well seek to enlist their support in interesting the new USMACTHAI in pinching off southern Laos, but to the extent that they support this thought it will be without prejudice to their interest in protecting their northern borders. The end result could be an expansion of Thai expectations of US actions in their security interest.

7. In Cambodia, Burma, Malaya, Japan, India:

At a minimum there is likely to be immediate and public questioning of US intentions. The bloc will do its best to manipulate the propaganda effects in these countries as adversely to US interest as possible. Sihanouk in particular is likely to be most upset by what to him will appear a hedging in of his country.

Recommendation:

In view of the non-military policy disadvantages we see to the present conception of a command structure in Southeast Asia, we suggest that a more appropriate structure (if military considerations are not overriding) might be based on the following principles: 1. There should be no connection apparent directly between USMACV and our command in Thailand or Joint Task Force 116.

2. The command in Thailand should not be a Military Assistance Command (which obviously parallels our set-up in a totally different situation in South Vietnam).

3. The deterrent buildup should be susceptible to ready dismantling once its purpose has been achieved. It will undoubtedly be difficult vis-à-vis the Thai Government, for example, to retrogress (as they will see it) from USMACTHAI to MAAG once the Southeast Asian buildup has served its hoped-for purpose with respect to Laos. If we really intend to create a long-term USMACTHAI, it should not be done by the back door.

4. Since there is no immediate threat to Thailand, the US forces sent to Southeast Asia in connection with Laos (even if introduced into Thailand) should be under command of (for example) JTF 116. This will tend to dramatize the temporary and limited purpose of their presence in the area.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Laos, Top Secret. Drafted by Neubert (INR/RSB) and Coolidge (INR/RFE).

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 271, footnote 5.

190. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 190. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Laos, South Vietnam, and North Vietnam

I believe the time has come to force a confrontation on the role of Hanoi in Southeast Asia and thus bring our Laos and South Vietnam policies clearly into line.

The common stand has been, of course, that we are trying to force the return of North Vietnamese forces to their own borders; but this fact has been obscured in our diplomacy, our military posture towards Laos, and in the public consciousness.

The fact is that the Nam Tha operation and the whole Communist operation in Laos has depended on North Vietnamese forces which are operating extra-legally.

They evidently hope that we either fail to react now or react in such a way as to permit a de facto split which would have the effect of permitting North Vietnam (and probably Communist China) to take over Northern Laos, continue to chew away at a demoralized Southern Laos, and hold the corridor to South Vietnam. This is a bad and unstable outcome which, I would predict, will force us to put U.S. troops into Southeast Asia at a later and more disadvantageous time to protect vital U.S. interests.

I would propose, therefore, that our next moves be designed to put the heat directly on Hanoi—in the context of both Laos and South Vietnam.

Specifically— 1. We should inform Moscow that we are counting on continued Soviet support for the Laos solution agreed between us at the highest level; i.e., a neutral, independent Laos. We have moved the politics of the RLG in this direction and are prepared to move them further. But the role of North Vietnam in Laos, in the context of the Nam Tha engagement, is unacceptable to us, as is the North Vietnam role in South Vietnam.

2. We should inform Hanoi by some reliable route that their role in both Northern Laos and South Vietnam is unacceptable to us; that we are prepared for a neutral and independent Laos and for a return to the Geneva Accords in South Vietnam; but that we shall have to take direct retaliatory action if they continue on their present path.

3. We should move carrier forces into the South China Sea south of the 17th parallel.

4. In addition to the possible movement of the U.S. battalion to the Laos border in Thailand and of naval forces into the Gulf of Siam, we should signal our seriousness of intent by: (i) a Jungle Jim attack on Tchepone:

(ii) a small but overt Jungle Jim attack on a North Vietnamese rail line. (They have been systematically harassing the South Vietnamese railroads.)

5. We should ask the Australians to inform the Chinese Communists that if the situation in Laos deteriorates they will have to hold up their grain shipments.

6. This line of action is not only based on an assessment of vital U.S. interests but also on an estimate of Soviet, Chinese Communist, and North Vietnamese intentions and capabilities.

Moscow. Soviet behavior suggests that they have agreed to let Hanoi and Peiping experiment with extended aggression in Laos; but there is no indication that they are prepared to let their prestige become involved or their freedom of action be determined by others in a U.S.-Hanoi or U.S.-Peiping military engagement. On the other hand, they have permitted to happen precisely what they promised they would not permit to happen; i.e., a Communist exploitation of our pressure on Phoumi. And this we should not take.

Hanoi. Ho perceives that it may be possible that the U.S. will not react and thus permit a Communist takeover in Laos; but, in any case, he is clear a split would be better than a unified government involving North Vietnamese withdrawal and loss or degradation of the Tchepone corridor. He is persuaded by our actions thus far that he can pursue this game and the game in South Vietnam without endangering his North Vietnam base, since we have reacted to his extra-legal actions only inside Laos and inside the 17th parallel. But his domestic base is weak-weakened by another bad harvest.

Peiping. By reason of its abiding ambitions in Southeast Asia and its desire to lead the Asian Communist movements, Peiping is backing Ho. Basically, however, the Chinese Communist domestic situation has never been so weak. By every indicator, popular morale is bad, people are hungry, industrial production is radically down, and they calculate that for the next years their dependence on Western grain will increase. We have, in fact, within the week two separate indications that we shall soon have a direct indication of Chinese Communist desire to buy U.S. wheat. It seems outlandish, but a first-class Christian Science Monitor correspondent in Hong Kong wrote a piece (which you should read) entitled “Peace for Food.” It suggests that the Chinese Communists have encouraged Nam Tha in order to gain bargaining leverage with the U.S. for a Laos settlement versus a food deal. This is, of course, a long shot; but it is essential to look at the incredible state of the Chinese Communist domestic scene in making our assessment of the proper U.S. course of action.

7. The course I propose is based on the defense of vital U.S. interests, not on pious hopes. We should not undertake it unless we are prepared to back our play. But I believe that if we are bold enough, lucid enough in our communications, and make it clear that Hanoi cannot any longer safely be used as a Communist cats-paw without paying a direct price, we have a fair chance that we can foreshorten both the Laos and Vietnam crises. But down the line, quite conceivably, could be a China grain deal.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Laos. Top Secret. Transmitted to the Secretary of State through the Executive Secretariat.

191. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 191. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 15, 1962.

According to a notation at the bottom of Cutlerʼs note, the memorandum was never sent to the President.

SUBJECT

Suggested Presidential Response to President Diemʼs Letter of March 31 to 92 Heads of State2

At our suggestion, President Diem on March 31 addressed a letter to the Pope and to 92 heads of Free World states, including the United States, calling attention to the Communist attack on his country and requesting Free World moral support. This action is intended to reinforce the impact on world opinion of the Jorden report, “A Threat to the Peace”,3 and the US-GVN Joint Communiqué of January 4.4

The effect of Diemʼs letter will be further strengthened if President Kennedy makes an appropriate response. (A good US response is also important for US-GVN relations because the Diem letter was sent at our suggestion.) It is recommended that the President send the attached suggested letter to President Diem (Tab B), and that he call attention to it at his next press conference. The President might also wish to take the opportunity to restate briefly at his press conference US determination to help the brave Vietnamese people defend themselves and our hope that other nations will do likewise.

I recommend that you send the attached memorandum to the President. (Tab A)

[Attachment]

Draft Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President

SUBJECT

Suggested Response to President Diemʼs Letter of March 31

On March 31 President Diem, at our suggestion, sent a letter to the Pope and to 92 heads of Free World states calling attention to the Communist assault on his country and requesting Free World moral support. This action is intended to reinforce the impact on world opinion of our report and the U.S.-GVN Joint Communiqué of January 4. The effect of the letter would be strengthened by a public response from you. It is not intended to prompt a continuing dialogue between you and President Diem.

We think it would be desirable for several replies from other heads of state to be received before yours. The United Kingdom and Cambodia have already replied. The Koreans have issued a formal statement of support. The Filipinos say they intend to reply soon, and we have urged the Thais to reply quickly.

A suggested text for your reply to Diem is enclosed as a proposed telegram to Saigon.

You may wish to call attention to Diemʼs letter and your response at your next press conference. You might also take this opportunity to observe that the Diem letter is a good statement of the threat not only to Viet-Nam, but to all Free Nations, that the U.S. remains determined to help the brave Vietnamese people defend themselves, and that we hope all Free World nations will contribute what they can to the defense of Viet-Nam.

I recommend that you approve the enclosed telegram to Saigon and that you refer to the exchange of letters at your next press conference along the lines indicated above.

[Attachment]

Draft Message From President Kennedy to President Diem5

Your letter of March 31 places before the world the picture of a brave and determined people fighting to maintain their independence. You have again exposed Communist responsibility for the continued bloodshed and destruction in Viet-Nam by pointing to new and blatant evidence that it is directed from Hanoi. And you have asked that the nations of the Free World raise their voices in condemnation of this brutal attack.

Your letter, addressed to chiefs of state and government, will serve the cause of freedom throughout the world by again alerting free men to the menace of Communist aggression. The world must mark well the daily heroism and sacrifices of your people—and the reasons for them.

For our own part, we cannot express too strongly the indignation we feel when we consider the nature of the war against your people. Unable to compete in peace with your thriving nation, unable indeed even to feed adequately their own hungry people, yet determined to destroy what they cannot equal, the Communists in Hanoi have employed systematic terror against your whole population. The conscience of the world is deeply troubled by this savage and unnecessary war.

The United States condemns in the strongest terms the authors of the violence in Viet-Nam. We hope that our voice, added to that of other Free Nations, may cause the Communists to pause. In the past we have repeatedly urged them to give up their designs for conquest in favor of peaceful plans for the betterment of all mankind. In particular, we have asked that they abandon their effort to conquer the Vietnamese nation. We again call upon them to cease their attacks on your people and on the Free World.

But we cannot be content to appeal by words alone to the Communist authorities in Hanoi. Meanwhile, we have already increased our economic and military assistance to your nation, and we will continue that support in order that your courageous people may both build and protect what they are building. The Communists label as aggression the extraordinary efforts we are making to assist you and your own efforts of self-defense. If they want us to cease these extraordinary efforts they need only call off their own attacks upon you.

The United States is not alone in its support, both moral and material, of your embattled country. Many other friendly countries are already contributing to your defense. It is our hope that additional Free World nations will also assist you in every way possible, realizing that to help another country preserve its independence is a way of protecting oneʼs own independence—and the best way.

We are confident of your ultimate success. The strength and the courage of your nation will prevail. Peace will be restored in Viet-Nam, and your people will again be free to build their own future in peace, in their own way and in their own great traditions.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 16-E.I, GVN 1962, Presidential Letters. Secret. Drafted by Heavner on May 14 and cleared with Cottrell, Manell, Rice, and Greenfield. Sent to Secretary Rusk through S/S and Under Secretary Johnson. On May 19, Walter Cutler of the Secretaryʼs staff returned the package to Johnson with the following note:

“Upon reviewing the attached memorandum the Secretary expressed strong doubt as to the advisability of sending the letter to Diem at this late date and having the President refer to it at a press conference. The Secretary would appreciate your reconsidering this matter in the light of his reservation.”

2 Document 137.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 315.

4 See Document 4.

5 Drafted as a telegram to the Embassy in Vietnam.

192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India1

Washington, May 16, 1962—9:44 a.m.

3842. Eyes only Ambassador Galbraith from Harriman. President interested in your conversation with Parthasarathi reported in Embtel 3571.2 You are authorized to continue informal discussions with him and/or Desai regarding manner in which they suggest Co-Chairmen could institute informal talks on stabilization, compliance and peace. Reunification obviously unrealistic under present conditions, but increased trade and contact might be encouraged.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-1062. Secret. Drafted by Harriman and cleared with Forrestal and Little.

2 See footnote 4, Document 183.

193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 193. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 16, 1962—7 p.m.

1467. Deptel 1329 and Embtel 1444.2 Following his return from Bangkok, General Harkins and I have considered response to last paragraph reftel, which we read to mean whether we have additional measures to recommend in South Viet-Nam in light U.S. deployments to Thailand.3 As we see situation at this stage, we have no such additional measures to recommend. This, of course, is subject to change should later developments warrant.

GVN is not pressing for additional measures. President Diem, in talks we have had with him, indicated full agreement in strengthening U.S. forces in Thailand, but gave no indication that he desires similar action here.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-1662. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Moscow, and CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Neither printed. (Ibid., 751K.00/5-1262 and 751K.00/5-1362, respectively)

3 For text of a statement by President Kennedy on May 15 regarding U.S. deployment of military forces to Thailand, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 1094.

194. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 194. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 17, 1962—2 p.m.

1471. We are forwarding by separate cable2 paper based on contention that introduction additional US military personnel and equipment into Viet Nam is legal under Geneva Agreement. Would envisage if Dept and GVN concur that paper might be presented to Indians informally in context that this is one means of dealing with recent US-GVN activities in military field, and that we think it holds considerable merit and would like informal Indian reaction before making any decision whether to use it officially and formally with ICC.3

Re Deptʼs comments on replacement approach we recognize validity colonial point. However, Commies already charge us with colonialism and we inclined to doubt that they can get much propaganda mileage out of our essentially legal argument.4

Re legal soundness this approach, seems to us that legally it is same approach that we used in 1960 with ICC in increasing MAAG from 342 to 685 and would appear just as sound now as then. As for 888 ceiling on US forces we stated in 1960 that this was number of US-French military training personnel in Viet Nam, but we are now shifting to wider category of military personnel for obvious reasons in view change of military situation in South Viet Nam.5

We believe this approach would probably take care of most equipment but cannot state this definitely until comparative study now in progress of credits, “justifications of title” and actual equipment introduction has been completed. To extent this approach would not take care of equipment it would be handled either clandestinely or by claim that it covered by outshipments for which ICC has lost records.

We share Deptʼs uncertainty re Indian acceptance replacement argument but believe it is worth trying out on them unless Delhi believes mere broaching of idea would increase Indian suspicions US motives in manner which cannot be dispelled.

. . . . . . .

We quite apprehensive however that …recurring requests to Co-Chairmen for instructions which will not be forthcoming will generate growing pressures for international conference on Viet Nam. This would be particularly the case if, as is likely, war activities on both sides in SVN intensify in future and fear of development of South Vietnamese war into major conflagration begins to spread over world.6 We do not see how we can rely on apparent current Russian reluctance about international conference as Russian position can quickly change when Russians see advantage to be gained from conference. Moreover we not certain we can rely on British to continue oppose conference in view pressures in some circles in UK on this issue and current domestic political picture there.

Re notification we doubt any decision this issue should be made until some means—…has been worked out for substantive handling of introduction military personnel and equipment under Geneva Agreement. Otherwise notification becomes self-conviction.7

. . . . . . .

GVN like US is primary party to this issue and whatever approach adopted could be implemented only through its agency.

. . . . . . .

We shall await Deptʼs instructions re approach to GVN on above.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-1762. Secret. Repeated to New Delhi and CINCPAC for Polad and pouched to London and Ottawa.

2 Document 195.

3 In the margin next to this paragraph was written: “Not until after ICC decision on subversion.” This and the other marginal notations are not initialed.

4 In the margin next to this sentence was written: “disagree.”

5 In the margin next to this paragraph was written: “ICC never really accepted it. Thus—only took note.”

6 In the margin next to this sentence was written: “This will likely happen anyway.”

7 Next to this paragraph was written: “Right”

195. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 195. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 17, 1962, noon.

1472. Task Force VN. Following is text paper referred to first para our 1471.2 1. We consider introduction of additional US military personnel and military equipment into South Viet-Nam over past six months as fully justified by self-defense requirements of Republic of Viet-Nam to meet guerrilla war directed and supported by Communist authorities in Hanoi.

2. We believe these additional military measures are also reconcilable with purpose and provisions of Geneva Agreement on Viet-Nam as outlined below.

3. A basic purpose of Geneva Agreement on Viet-Nam was to establish balance of military power between two zones of Viet-Nam. In case of military personnel, this is implicit in Article 16 of agreement, which states “with effect from date of entry into force of present agreement, introduction into Viet-Nam of any troop ‘reinforcements’ and ‘additional’ military personnel is prohibited”.

4. In this context agreement makes no reference to nationality, or function foreign military personnel. Therefore, Article 16 seems solely concerned with preserving military status quo in terms foreign military personnel, regardless of origin or function those personnel.

5. Withdrawal of French Union Forces subsequent to signing of agreement in effect altered the balance between two military forces which prevailed at time agreement put into effect.

6. To meet the increasing threat of subversion and aggression directed against it by Hanoi authorities, Government of Republic of Viet-Nam requested introduction of additional American military personnel to assist its forces in training, advisory, and support activities. Since number these American personnel totals only very small proportion of total number personnel in French Union Forces in Viet-Nam at time agreement signed, and since agreement itself establishes no limitations on nationality or function such personnel, it is clear that introduction of present American military personnel into Viet-Nam does not violate the balance of military power established by agreement between two zones of Viet-Nam.

7. In regard to question of war material, basic purpose of agreement similarly implied in article 1 7(A) which states “ …3 introduction into Viet-Nam of any ‘reinforcements’ in form of all types of arms, munitions, and other war material … is prohibited”. Article 17(B) further states “it is understood, however, that war material, arms and munitions which have been destroyed, damaged, or worn out or used up after cessation of hostilities may be replaced on basis of piece-for-piece of same type and with similar characteristics”.

8. Again, withdrawal of French Union Forces and export from Viet-Nam of most their arms, equipment, and material contributed to altering the prevailing balance of military power between two zones, since this material has also never been replaced entirely.

9. In 1958 the International Control Commission itself recognized that this principle of replacement of French Union Forces' war material was justified under agreement. The Commission thereupon devised system of crediting Government of Republic of Viet-Nam with amounts of material the disposal of which Commission had controlled. However, these amounts have comprised only a part of material which French Union Forces actually possessed at time agreement went into effect and which they subsequently exported. Obviously, any effort to reinstate 1954 military status quo should take into consideration all equipment out-shipped by French Union Forces after 1954.

10. Equity also indicates that certain items present in 1954 which have become obsolete or unavailable can be justifiably replaced by items of generally same type and similar characteristics, allowing for changes in supply and warfare methods.

11. It is by no means purpose of either Government of Republic of Viet-Nam or American authorities to restore entirely and in every respect capability of French Union Forces at time of signing of Geneva Agreement; on contrary, only aim is to take those minimum additional measures absolutely necessary to meet the growing guerrilla war threat by the Hanoi authorities to security and integrity of Republic of Viet-Nam. These temporary additional measures will be terminated when that threat is eliminated.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-1762. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to New Delhi and CINCPAC for Polad and pouched to London and Ottawa.

2 Supra.

3 Ellipses in this paragraph are in the source text.

196. Memorandum for the Record 196. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, May 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

Minutes of Meeting of Special Group (CI), 17 May 1962

PRESENT

General Taylor, the Attorney General (Items 1, 2, and 3), Mr. Johnson, Mr. McCone, General Lemnitzer, Mr. William Bundy vice Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Coffin vice Mr. Hamilton

1. South Viet-Nam

General Lemnitzer made the following points in connection with the South Viet-Nam Status Report of 16 May:2

a. Neither General Harkins nor he agrees with the concept of diverting four special battalions to a program of research and experimentation. General Lemnitzer is going to take this up with Secretary McNamara

b. The paragraph in the Status Report on defoliation is not accurate. The facts are that a report is expected momentarily from Viet-Nam giving the results of further tests; based on this, a decision might well be requested to continue with such operations. He pointed out that it has been determined that failures to date were due to incorrect strength of the defoliant and to improper use of the nozzles used in dispensing it. It is believed that these factors can be corrected.

c. The matter of crop destruction is being looked at further. (Mr. McCone cautioned that care must be taken in embarking on any such program in Montagnard areas.)

General Lemnitzer then gave the Group some highlights of his recent trip to Southeast Asia. Points mentioned were: a. The South Vietnamese have a very good training center for Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps companies.

b. The build-up of defended areas is going well. (In answer to the Attorney Generalʼs question, General Lemnitzer said he was unable to reconcile Homer Bigartʼs article of today3 with these observations. Mr. Kennedy suggested that General Lemnitzer might wish to send a note to the President, pointing out Bigartʼs inaccuracy, if this proves to be the case.)

c. The Border Patrol Force is working well.

d. Efforts are underway to produce maps which will indicate more dearly than heretofore the areas controlled by each side.

e. The village radio system is good. However, there is still a gap to be filled in communications between the central village and its component hamlets.

f. Relations between the Embassy and the Harkins command are excellent

g. It would be useful to arm additional numbers of Montagnards.

Mr. Coffin reported that certain projects, notably those involving the police and radios, are being held up because of a reluctance on the part of the Vietnamese Government to commit local funds. It was agreed that this is a problem that will have to be worked out on the spot.

General Taylor pointed to the necessity of finding a strong replacement for the present USOM Chief as soon as possible.

[Here follow sections on unrelated matters.]

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (C.I.), 1/1/62-7/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Parrott, Executive Secretary of the Special Group (Counterinsurgency).

2 Dated May 16, it was one of a series of status reports on progress made under instructions issued to Ambassador Nolting required by NSAM 111, November 22, 1961. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Status Reports 11)

3 See The New York Times, May 17. 1962.

197. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Deputy Public Affairs Officer (Baumgartner) 197. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Deputy Public Affairs Officer (Baumgartner)1

Saigon, May 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

PsyOps Committee Meeting of May 18

As you know, I had planned to propose to the Committee at tomorrowʼs meeting that we react to the coming on stream of the GVNʼs new radio transmitters with a hard look at the content of counter-insurgency information activities. Since I cannot attend the meeting, perhaps you could propose the idea and see what happens? If there is adequate encouragement, my thought is that perhaps each agency could put together a report within, say, a week which you and I would undertake to wrap up in a sort of working paper for discussion at the next meeting. I realize, of course, that this is something less than a new idea, and that a good many people have already sweated at length over this problem. But Iʼm told that there has not been an effort to look at it collectively in this fashion.

In any case, it seems to me we should try to sort out four questions: 1) How effective, vis-à-vis the insurgency problem, is the propaganda now being directed at the VC and the Vietnamese people?

Replies to my superficial enquiries have been unanimous that the content of GVN propaganda is poor. The most common complaint was that it is too negative, with heavy-handed emphasis on what the regime is against, instead of what itʼs for. At yesterdayʼs ceremonies opening the new Saigon transmitter, for example, Minister Hieu talked first about the sins of the VC and then about “the three enemies”: Communism, disunity, and backwardness. The sense of his remarks was that the new radio facilities would be devoted more or less exclusively to the battle against those things. Just about the only positive thought in his speech was a relatively secondary reference to personalism, which he elaborated in only one or two sentences.

One of the most helpful errors of Communist propaganda worldwide is that it is monumentally long-winded and boring. Is the GVN pitch committing the same mistake? Minister Hieu remarked to me the other night that GVN propaganda at the boondocks level was now avoiding all mention of President Diem and talking instead about specific boondocks problems. Apart from the controversy about the Diem regime, can you reach the Vietnamese peasant without offering him a leader? Is the suppression of Diemʼs name a surrender to VC propaganda, or to stateside press criticism, or perhaps inescapable in the present circumstances? Is it true that GVN propaganda (as well as our own supporting efforts) uniformly depicts the VC as baby-murdering, arsonist monsters? Is this a true picture of the VC as it is known to the majority of the peasants in the red and pink areas whom we are trying to reach? In short is the present pitch credible?

Does anyone have a really hard reading on how well GVN propaganda is working in the rural areas? Among town dwellers who probably have not had first-hand contact with the VC? Is adequate consideration being given to the probability that the pitch to town dwellers should be different from the pitch to peasants?

(Of course there is also the equally basic question of whether existing propaganda programs are really arriving in the target areas, regardless of the quality of the content. Should the heavy emphasis be on radio, or village newspapers, or airdropped leaflets, or what? But this perhaps should be the subject of a separate study.)

2) Is it possible to establish broad guidelines on ways to improve GVN propaganda?

Is it possible, for example, to laugh at the VC, to make them look ridiculous and thus lose face? For village level consumption, can a more subtle approach be used, with less emphasis on terror and more on Communist techniques for capturing and destroying a manʼs mind? How should the American presence be treated? Ignored on the theory that the villagers dislike foreigners? Or perhaps brought out in carefully controlled ways to show the presence of American power to help defend the people against the VC? How about more emphasis on economic improvements bestowed by the Saigon Government, along lines of Ben Woodʼs paper on USOMʼs achievements?2 In any case, can policy lines be established to put more emphasis on the positive, in the sense perhaps of a sort of frame of reference for testing new projects?

3) To what extent do the various U.S. agencies now influence the content of GVN propaganda and in what specific ways is this done?

In the case of USIS, there is close to total U.S. control (except for a GVN veto) in such operations as the weekly newsreel, some 50 hours of weekly radio programming, the Operation Sunrise newspaper, plus various other areas which you can elaborate. My idea is that it would be useful for the Committee to collect specifics on what all the U.S. agencies in Vietnam are doing along these lines, and then to try to assess effectiveness and target areas that are not being adequately covered.

4) Finally, where and how can the U.S. increase its influence over the content of GVN propaganda, assuming this is desirable?

As I see it, this would be a study primarily concerned with specific situations and personalities within the GVN and with specific U.S. GVN relationships where there are possibilities for negotiating a greater U.S. voice, e.g. the proposed USOM effort to get the GVN to accept a stateside task force to advise on a program of rural education (the Winfield fetter),3 or your suggestion for a VOA advisor. My thought is that this kind of a go-round should ultimately produce agreement on which agency should try to promote what specific objectives vis-à-vis improvement of the GVN propaganda effort.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677. USIS 1962. Secret.

2 Not found.

3 Not further identified.

198. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 198. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, May 18, 1962.

SUBJECT

Report on Visit of Defoliant Technical Team to SVN

1. Colonel Ewell and I attended a briefing on 11 May by members of the inter-departmental technical team of defoliant experts who just returned from SVN. The team head, Brigadier General Delmore (CG, USA Chemical Corps) remained in SVN. Dr. Shaw of the Department of Agriculture made the presentation, which summarized the groupʼs formal report. Also present were Mr. Forrestal, Dr. MacRae from Dr. Wiesnerʼs office, and a representative of Mr. Hilsman.

2. The key conclusion of the group is that the chemicals will do the job if properly applied. The C-123 aircraft is suitable, but the spraying equipment is not. Better equipment, some alteration of technique, particularly the use of a larger size droplet for better control and spraying during the wet season where possible, is required.

3. All 21 areas covered by defoliant in SVN were examined. On the basis of five physical and operational criteria, the group report 70 per cent overall effectiveness (ranging from 30-95 per cent) despite technical spraying deficiencies and the fact the vegetation was sprayed during the adverse dormant period. Previous reports of lower effectiveness are due to inspections having been made too soon after spraying.

4. There was a lengthy discussion of the differing characteristics of vegetation and the resulting interaction with chemicals. Major points made: a. Plants differ in their tolerance to herbicides and these differences must be taken into account in planning vegetation control and evaluating effects of chemicals. (The teamʼs observation of chemical results was much more optimistic than that received previously from the field. This is due to a later look which, under the weather conditions prevailing at the time of spraying, permitted fairer evaluation.)

b. The optimum combination of chemicals, spraying equipment, and vegetation must be proved on the ground; there is need for more research in tropical regions.

5. The team did not see or examine areas where food plants had been treated with chemicals. Based on extensive research in the US, however, the feasibility of killing all crops in SVN with chemicals now available, at any time during the plantʼs life cycle prior to the production of edible portions, is well established. Commercial chemicals are available with which crops in selected areas can be killed without damage to crops of the same kind in nearby areas. Operational research to join the chemical to a halo for spraying is necessary, particularly on the basis of experience in the defoliation exercise.

6. In mid-April, prior to this briefing, Mr. Forrestal received an interim evaluation of results from Defense. It indicated a need for further technical evaluation before resuming operational tests. Based on this, he recommended to the President that experiments be conducted outside SVN and further operational use should be predicated on their prior success. The President apparently concurred; the relevant papers are attached.2

7. The Expertʼs report (described above) has indicated, since that time, that there are only minor technical improvements required. Defense is proceeding with tests to accomplish this in the US. ARPA estimates completion in the next week to 10 days. The next step will be to obtain target recommendations from Saigon and for Defense and State to come forward to the President with new recommendations. The optimum spraying season will occur during the June-September period.

You may wish to determine Secretary McNamaraʼs intentions on this subject. The expertʼs report suggests this could be a lucrative R&D item, both for defoliation and crop destruction.

W.H.B.3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-132-69. Secret.

2 Not found attached, but see Documents 160 and 178.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

199. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 199. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Saigon, May 18, 1962.

SUBJECT

Lunch With President Diem, Cap St. Jacques, May 17, 1962

The invitation to lunch was issued only 24 hours in advance and presumably was a result of my remark to Minister Nguyen Dinh Thuan a few days earlier that I hoped to renew my 1953-55 acquaintance with Diem. I was taken to Cap St. Jacques in an ARVN helicopter, accompanied by Truong Buu Khanh, director of Vietnam Presse, who was the only other person present during the interview and lunch. Diem told me he had come to Cap St. Jacques earlier that morning for an inspection tour. He said it was the third time he had been there in seven years.

Altogether I spent 4-1/2 hours with the President. As compared with my recollection of seven years ago, I found him remarkably unchanged physically, but distinctly more confident (or uninformed?), relaxed and sophisticated. He remembered me well (asked about Henry Luceʼs health) and immediately promised to make arrangements when I said I hoped to call on Brother Nhu. Khanh told me afterward that he had seldom seen Diem talk to a foreigner so candidly.

The conversation (in French) ranged over everything from corn on the cob (“one of the best things they have in America”) to the personality of Ho Chi Minh (“he looks over your head when you're with him and does all the talking; if you try to say something, he doesn't hear you”). The President also talked knowingly for five minutes about Andre Malraux after I presented him with a fancy, two-volume edition of Malraux' “History of the American People” (in French) in the name of the U.S. Mission to Vietnam.

My intention at the outset was to let the President guide the conversation, to try to establish a rapport at this meeting, and to leave any pitches until another occasion. Diem soon made it clear, however, that he was in a mood for more give and take than that. The substantive results:

Diemʼs personal image. During a discursive recital by Diem on the importance of the President keeping in touch with the people, I remarked that Vietnamʼs new radio facilities now made it possible for him to reach millions of his people at once, as against a few hundred at each personal appearance. He said the new transmitters were tremendously important but that a chief of state should not use the radio too often because the people become bored. “Look what happened to Bao Dai,” he said. I said Bao Dai was no leader and, in any case, had nothing to say. I then suggested that he, Diem, was personally a valuable weapon because the VC have no well-known leader and also because he has a strong following among the villagers of Vietnam. Diem: “Thatʼs the same thing Mr. Nolting says.” He went on to complain that on the occasions when he has made radio speeches—citing his recent May Day message specifically—the foreign press has taken no notice. “Itʼs only when people like Sihanouk spit in their faces that they write about it,” he said.

I said that what counts is reaching his own people, much more than the foreign press, that this is a time of deep crisis for his country and the people needed reassurance. I told him about President Rooseveltʼs fireside chats during World War II, how he so successfully appeared to take the people into his confidence at a moment when their sons and husbands were fighting and dying overseas, just as Vietnamese sons and husbands are fighting and dying today. I said Roosevelt was a great politician who understood how badly the people wanted to know what was happening, what their government was doing, what the problems were, and thus to feel part of the team. I said that in this time of deep crisis in the cold war Presidents Eisenhower and now Kennedy were both using the same technique.

Diem listened attentively to all this, then half shook his head, as though to be rid of an indigestible thought. I said that USIS had a 10minute film of President Kennedy making one of his recent TV/radio talks to the people and asked if he would like to see it. Without hesitation, Diem said yes. Then he added that the palace projector had broken down. I said we would bring one of our projectors. Diem said fine—and confirmed this again later as I was leaving.

(We will, of course, follow through on this as quickly as possible. Would you like to join the act, perhaps by a formal query on when it would be convenient for the President to see the film? Maybe we could combine this with a showing of one or two of the newly completed task force films for village audiences?)

My feeling was that Diem agreed to see the film out of curiosity whether there just might be something to this fireside chat business, not because he had been convinced. In any case, he now returned to his apparent preoccupation with the indifference of the foreign press to his speeches. He said he thought this was the fault of his translators. He said he had long been trying unsuccessfully to find competent Vietnamese-to-English and French-to-English translators. (He added rather cryptically that “the British” had found him a good English-to-Vietnamese translator.) I suggested perhaps USIS could help and the President said fine.

(We will also, of course, pursue this forthwith. My immediate thought is that perhaps we should try to place somebody who would remain—officially and openly—on the USIS payroll and thus possibly provide a channel for exercising some editorial influence on content.)

At this point I felt that Diem was so considerably interested in the problem of communicating that I could risk an adventure. I asked if he had a good speech writer. He said he had none at all, almost as though such a thing had never occurred to him. I expressed surprise and said it was commonplace for chiefs of state and many other top people all over the world to employ professional writers, men who would listen to the bossʼs ideas and then put them down in eloquent language. Diem said this was a good idea. I said perhaps we could help find somebody. Diem said fine. I said of course it should be a Vietnamese? Diem: “I donʼt know a man in Vietnam who could do this.” I said: “You mean you would consider an American?” Diem: “Yes.” Then after a momentʼs thought: “But of course it must be a man we know, with a good background.” I said I would begin a search for the right man immediately, including a query to Washington. He nodded, apparently undisturbed. I asked how to pursue the matter and Diem said that Thaun would handle it. He also reconfirmed all this as I was leaving.

At the Colby cocktail party a few hours later, I ran into Thuan and said I had discussed a number of projects with the President, who had referred me to him to implement, and that I would like to call on him within the next day or so. Thuan said Diem had already told him about “the good conversation he had with you” and that we could get together next week.

(Obviously thereʼs a good possibility that Diemʼs advisors will talk him out of all this, but we do have an asset in the fact that Khanh, a relatively secondary figure, was present.) My feeling is that we should follow through with all possible speed and try to come up with a candidate by the middle of next week. You will know best about the mechanics of the cable to Washington, but I can think of several people who might be invited to make suggestions: USIS Deputy Director Don Wilson, who worked with me here in 1954-55; … Bob Manning, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, also a Time-Life alumnus and my good friend.

One candidate who occurs to me immediately is Howie Simpson, presently Assistant Press Attaché in Paris, who served several years (circa 1953-55) in Vietnam with USIS, who subsequently wrote a good novel about Dienbienphu, “To a Quiet Valley,” and who happens to be unhappy in his present position. Heʼs an unpolished type but intelligent, a fine writer, adequate in French, thoroughly likeable. Iʼm sure some of Diemʼs people would remember him and I think favorably. Heʼs an FSR-3 or 4.

(Assuming anything ever comes of this, there is the obvious problem of the manʼs official position once he gets to Saigon. From our viewpoint, I think it would be most effective for him to be attached to USIS or the embassy where he could keep in close touch with policy considerations, with some kind of cover assignment. But I suppose itʼs at least possible that Diem would resist any kind of direct official tie with the U.S. and perhaps would even insist on our assurance that the man would work wholly independently of officialdom. This, I think, is a question we should consider at some length, and then play by ear.)

The foreign press. Following Diemʼs several unhappy references to the foreign press, I invited him to discuss the problem. Iʼm sure you have heard most of what he said: Sully is a French spy; displeasure at the frequent reference to “American officials” as the source of unfavorable stories; the correspondents' irresponsible dredging of what Diem calls “Radio Catinat” (meaning the Rue Catinat bars) for information. My impression was that he is no longer angry about his treatment in the foreign press, but resigned to it, perplexed by it, and most reluctant to do anything about it. He volunteered that most of his ministers had “failed” to deal effectively with the correspondents, and that Mme. Nhu had shown a “mauvaise charactere” in her bitter vindictiveness toward the correspondents who have attacked her. He said he had tried to persuade her to forget it, but unsuccessfully.

I told the President about my talk with Thuan earlier this week2 and my commitment to Thuan to make a study of the correspondents' complaints and then to submit a paper to him about it. I said I had not completed the paper but that it would particularly emphasize one point: that a good many of the correspondents' complaints would vanish if the GVN would make more of an effort to provide information on military news. I said the correspondents were primarily interested in progress of the war because of the U.S. involvement, and suggested that they would probably pay less attention to political affairs if military news were more easily available. I said I thought the GVN should draw a sharp distinction between political and military news and set up new facilities exclusively for the latter, specifically: 1) A joint Vietnamese-American center, staffed by an officer from each country, where newsmen could go for assistance on mechanical problems, e.g., promoting transportation to operational areas. I said this would eliminate the present practice of correspondents playing both parties independently for favors, prevent inequities, and hopefully, tend to damp down everything because there would at least be an official place to register gripes. (I didnʼt say so, but my hope is that if we could just achieve this degree of cooperation, the center might eventually become a source of news as well as mechanical assistance.)

2) A daily ARVN briefing on military events, and establishment of a permanent PIO office with round-the-clock duty officers in the GVN Defense Ministry. I said the present lack of an easily accessible official source, for checking rumors if nothing else, was the main reason why the newsmen listened so attentively to “Radio Catinat”. I said we on the official U.S. side were as much interested in this as the correspondents because it was our policy not to provide briefings and otherwise to refer queries to the GVN, with the result that American newsmen were sore at us, too. I cited the case of last weekendʼs wildly inaccurate UPI story about a battle with 300 VC dead as a horrible example of what happens when there is no easy way to check rumors.

Diem was negative on both pitches. He said the GVN was already doing all it could to provide things like transport to newsmen and complained that he couldn't always be sure of a helicopter for himself because of military demands. He said a daily briefing was impractical because publication of such fresh news would help the VC and that he had already appointed Dang Duc Khoi to handle press queries. I said that the newsmen had to write stories every day regardless of whether there was an official briefing and that Khoi was a first-class officer, but sometimes unavailable. Diem shrugged and clearly didnʼt want to pursue the subject, so I dropped it. He did agree, however, that my forthcoming paper for Thuan might be useful.

Altogether my feeling was that Diem realizes that his troubles with the press are partly the GVNʼs fault, but that heʼs profoundly suspicious of newsmen, and burned enough so he canʼt bring himself to experiment.

Vietnamese-American Relations. Diem volunteered a long recital of past American errors here which Iʼm sure you have heard (details on request), but he had no complaints about our performance at the moment. He spoke highly of you. He ducked comment on U.S. policy in Laos, but praised our reinforcements for Thailand, which he described as badly infiltrated by Communists. He said he saw no need for expansion of the present U.S. effort in Vietnam, except that he would like more helicopter squadrons. I told him that Education Minister Trinh had said Vietnam could use some 40 high school English teachers and asked if that meant he was thinking about a Peace Corps operation. Diemʼs facial expression showed a trace of alarm as he said no, he didnʼt think the Peace Corps would be suitable.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 a 677, USIS 1962. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 22, 1962—1:47 p.m.

1367. UK Counselor Embassy Ledward informed Department May 21 that Ambassador Hohler postponing leave because of “difficulties over Delta Plan” and imminent arrival Australian Foreign Minister. According Ledward Colonel Lac now working on “static defense plan.” Delta Plan shelved in favor strategic hamlet program which is to have first priority under direction Ngo Dinh Nhu. Hohler asked Thuan about these difficulties, was told Thuan had raised relation between Delta Plan and strategic hamlet program at National Security Council meeting and decision was taken to incorporate Delta Plan into strategic hamlet program. Hohler also concerned because little contact between Thompson mission and Colonel Y of CIO.

If Delta Plan in fact shelved Department shares British concern. Believe here that success in guerrilla conflict depends on rational plan applied steadily over long haul. Believe you should very strongly encourage GVN stick with Delta Plan if they wavering, second Hohlerʼs efforts keep GVN on track.

From here it appears strategic hamlets essential part victory over VC but concept of doubtful value if abstracted from whole fabric Delta Plan. Particularly concerned that Nhu may try set up too many strategic hamlets too fast. See grave danger VC may knock over number inadequately equipped and defended strategic hamlets, with result good basic concept discredited in eyes Vietnamese people, GVN, and US public opinion.

Would appreciate report status Delta Plan, strategic hamlet program soonest. Especially interested relation between two programs, number of strategic hamlets now planned and adequacy resources available for their construction.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-2262. Secret. Drafted by Heavner. Repeated to London, Bangkok. and CINCPAC for Polad.

201. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 201. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State1

New Delhi, May 22, 1962—6 p.m.

3728. Saigonʼs 1471 and 1472 to Department.2

1. Obviously highly desirable find soonest some legal ground from which USG could argue that introduction military personnel and equipment not in violation Geneva Accords. As Embassy Saigon observes, in absence some means of substantively handling this question notification becomes self-conviction; equally, in absence US legal case, Indian attitude toward US cause-and-effect argument tends be that two wrongs do not add up to right. Gundevia has already said once or twice that cause-and-effect argument is admission of US violations.

2. Re fifth paragraph Saigonʼs 1471, from standpoint politico-military considerations GOI would undoubtedly be seriously alarmed by results that could flow from acceptance replacement argument, i.e., explicit sanction for virtually unlimited inflow of US military personnel and equipment. Even a formal US unilateral declaration of GOI that if replacement argument accepted we would use great restraint, as far as further build-up concerned, might well not satisfy Indians as it would not impair our legal right; in addition to which Embassy can appreciate need for maintaining our freedom of action against future contingencies requiring heavier build-up. GOI would undoubtedly consider that its acceptance of replacement argument would radically change balance of political forces in ICC context, with consequent serious results. Embassy Saigon in better position than we to estimate practical dangers involved; GOI officials have in past mentioned risks of expulsion of Commission from DRV or Polish withdrawal. End point of process, as probably viewed by Indians, would be complete breakdown of Geneva Accords and irresistible demand for new international conference.

3. Further immediate factor that would weigh on minds GOI would be that having just found US and GVN in violation of Articles 16 and 17, reversal of this finding as result acceptance replacement argument would lay GOI open to Communist charge of capitulation under US pressure, a subject on which GOI more than usually sensitive at present juncture.

4. Appears therefore that GOI would not accept replacement argument if put to them in its present form. We further assume USG would not wish broach replacement argument to GOI unless some reasonable chance its being accepted.3

5. Foregoing represents Embassyʼs immediate reaction to reference telegram and we will wish give further thought to matter. Meanwhile, would welcome Departmentʼs and Saigonʼs comments on foregoing.

Timmons

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/5-2262. Secret. Repeated to Saigon, London, Ottawa, and CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Documents 194 and 195.

3 Next to this paragraph the word “Right” was written.

202. National Security Action Memorandum No. 155 202. National Security Action Memorandum No. 1551

Washington, May 22, 1962.

TO

The Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare

SUBJECT

Emergency Medical Program for Vietnam

1. The Vietnam Task Force has developed an Emergency Medical Program for Vietnam, the successful implementation of which is a matter of great importance to the United States.

2. The Program calls for the building and equipping of surgeries, by USOM/Vietnam to be staffed with foreign medical teams. The United States is to supply 4 to 6 teams each composed of 3 to 6 medical personnel. The Agency for International Development will need assistance in the recruitment of from 4 to 12 doctors, 4 to 12 nurses, 4 to 6 medical technicians, and 4 to 6 anesthetists in the Program.

3. In order to discharge its responsibilities in implementing the program, the Agency for International Development will need the assistance of the Public Health Service in recruiting outside personnel and in commissioning or assigning Public Health Service as required by the Program.

4. The President directs the Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare to assist the Agency for International Development in every way possible to implement the Emergency Medical Program for Vietnam, and specifically to assist in staffing the medical teams required, either by assigning Public Health Service personnel, or by assisting in recruiting the necessary personnel.

5. The Public Health Service is requested to commission Public Health Service officers for service in the Program, where necessary.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that copies were sent to the Secretary of State and the Director of the Agency for International Development.

203. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 203. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 23, 1962—3 p.m.

1503. SecDef and other recent Washington visitors have expressed need for additional information about progress of war in Viet Nam.2 Embassy, USOM and USIS therefore initiating new joint weekly report on political, economic and psychological aspects of Vietnamese situation.MACV continuing separate weekly cables on military aspects. This is first such joint cable. Future reports will be much shorter and will seek insofar as possible draw conclusions as to progress or lack of it in overall counterinsurgency effort from base reflected herein. Washington suggestions for improvement format and content welcomed.

Political: 1. Delta Plan: Plan Commissioner Colonel Lac awaiting presidential approval of his proposed concept of counterinsurgency operations based essentially on coordination and planning. Lac to act as central coordinator with representatives of his coordinating organizations at various lower levels. Planning to be done essentially at division tactical zone level with plans to be submitted Saigon for technical review only. Until concept approved unlikely any specific operational plans will be developed. Operation Sunrise in Binh Duong Province (part of Delta Plan area) is already under execution and appears to be progressing satisfactorily. However, operation commenced before approval of Delta Plan and further operations in Delta area may be organized differently. We pressing GVN for prompt decision and action.

2. Operation Hai Yen II: This is coordinated clear-and-hold plan for Phu Yen Province in central Viet Nam under control of regimental commander in area with province chief as his deputy. Military phase began May 8, and seven battalion-sized operations have taken place since then. Strategic hamlet construction (84 hamlets) has been initiated in most secure areas of province, especially around provincial seat of Tuy Hoa. Certain initial difficulties re personnel, piaster and material requirements have been resolved or are on way to solution by US and GVN.

Latest reports by US observers in area give encouraging picture of progress and high morale those responsible for this operation.

3. Strategic hamlets program is in progress in every province and has highest priority. Min Interior reports 1,600 strategic hamlets built to date. Effectiveness and degree of planning and coordination varies widely from province to province. At this juncture perhaps fairest conclusion is that there is considerable momentum behind promising idea. US objective is to encourage increased planning and coordination with eye to defensibility and effectiveness. To this end specific US assistance has been concentrated on operations meeting these objectives and falling within areas of economic or strategic importance.

4. Montagnard Program: Recent months have seen greatly increased flow of Montagnards from mountain areas seeking GVN protection and support. Some 47,000 have been resettled in Kontum, Pleiku, Darlac, and Quang Duc Provinces. Flow continues, however, and possibly as many more are in great need of assistance. As flight of Montagnards probably deprives VC of important source of support in highlands, it is most encouraging sign. To prevent their return to highlands, it is essential they be given assistance in terms food, tools, etc., and establishment new villages. GVN agrees on opportunity this represents and urgency attacking resettlement problems and we are working closely with them.

5. Cambodia: Believe tension has eased between RKG and GVN over Vinh Lac incident.3 GVN has decided not reply latest Cambodian note and press attacks on Cambodia have toned down both in number and nature.

6. Korea: Korean survey mission has arrived Saigon. Appropriate liaison being established.

. . . . . . .

8. Australian position toward Viet Nam: Australian FonMinʼs statement Australia prepared furnish few military trainers to assist GVN Armed Forces warmly received by GVN which already presented request for such aid.4

9. ICC: Indications from Chairmen both Indian and Canadian ICC Delegations that ICC moving toward early decision (perhaps within week or so) on DRV subversion South Viet Nam. Report also expected cite GVN-US for violations Geneva Accords since Dec 1961 through introduction additional American military personnel and equipment and establishment “factual” military alliance. Canadians preparing minority supplement pointing out cause-and-effect relationship between DRV activities and military build-up in south. This also expected be implicit in Indian report. Hanoi press and radio currently engaged in growing attack on ICC in hope of forestalling subversion decision, but there no indication this having any effect on ICC. ICC report will go to UK and USSR as Co-Chairmen. Poles expected submit minority report.

GVN recently furnished evidence to ICC on use ChiCom weapons, ammunition, compass and medicines by Viet Cong in SVN and captured document showing that “Peopleʼs Revolutionary Party” simply another name in SVN for Lac Dong Party (Communist Party of DRY). GVN also sent letter to ICC proposing detailed system of ICC controls along Laos-South Vietnamese frontier and in western part demilitarized zone to detect infiltration of Viet Cong. It offered helicopters and other cooperation in carrying out these controls.

We are working with GVN to obtain maximum publicity on recent letters to ICC. To enhance interest of correspondents in these letters GVN planning open to press May 24 exhibit at general staff headquarters of evidence VC infiltration and Communist supply of weapons to guerrillas in south.

10. DRV political activities: VC liberation broadcasting station and Hanoi Radio quick to exploit release two American Special Forces sergeants captured by VC in Danang area. Claimed release of prisoners part of SVN National Liberation Front policy of leniency toward POWʼs. Also alleged prisoners had repented their “aggressive activities” and requested “pardon” from “Liberation Front”. Both Americans denied making any such statements of repentance.

Hanoi Radio playing up open letter from sixteen Americans to President Kennedy attacking US policy re Viet Nam published mid-April in “New York Times”. Hanoi published responses to letter from “prominent Vietnamese personalities”, actually Communist and pro-Communist individuals. We believe there could be relationship between this letter and release two sergeants, as DRV may feel letter indicates considerable popular opposition to US Govt policy supporting South Viet Nam and that DRV clemency toward two American prisoners might increase that opposition.

Hanoi VNA reported March 9 that central committee of “Liberation Front” had protested McNamara visit to Saigon and stated it “will call on government and people of DRV” and others in world to give “active assistance by all means, including material assistance”. Previous “Front” threats to call for assistance have included preface “if necessary”. We believe Communist bloc will however continue try keep its assistance covert.

11. Economic and social: General: Fiscal and budget problems continue overshadow GVN and USOM programs, and account in part for delay in adoption of project counterpart program, special counterinsurgency, and military budgets. Deficit for 1962 now projected by USOM approximately 3.5 billion piasters, which “per se” no cause for alarm except GVN has made no decision how to cover.

GVN has requested US give cash dollar grants and liberalize aid regulations re limited world wide procurement and shipping on US flag vessels. May 10 Diem handed Ambassador memo arguing GVN has fulfilled commitments recommended by Thuc-Staley mission, that foreign exchange reserves have fallen far below general range $200 million agreed upon as fitting level at time of mission, and that as result fiscal reforms, higher prices American goods and freight rates, commercial demand for imports has declined to point where GVN ability meet essential military and civil budget requirements imperiled.5 Memo claims GVN has already engaged in deficit financing to extent of piasters 2.7 billion, recommends relaxation Buy American and American flag shipping rules and direct US Treasury purchase piasters from National Bank Viet Nam.

Article by Dean Thuc in Sunday “Times of Viet Nam” echoed points re inflexibility and burdens American aid regulations and alluded budget problem posed by low demand for imports.

USOM proposal to increase aid impact at village level by establishing special counterpart fund for direct financing by USOM of provincial activities was turned down by GVN. However, GVN has subsequently approved agreement between USOM and Chief Phu Yen Province for financing operation Hai Yen II (para 2 above) and there is reason to believe this type arrangement can be repeated elsewhere.

Total piaster-producing import licensing all funds in FY 62 approximately $183 million at May 10 indicating probably shortfall of $10 million below revised forecast $215 million FY 62.

Importers and bankers still rather gloomy over business conditions but no longer voice earlier exaggerated fears of bankruptcies. Sales of imports to interior still slack but steady. Inventories in customs warehouses are normal again, although imports inventories in private godowns above normal.

Domestic rice trade normal with prices reasonable for both farmers and consumers. GVN-controlled reserve rice stocks ample, and 44,000 tons PL-480 rice expected in June.

Specifications processing and organizational work on several pending industrial ventures evidence some return of confidence in industrial circles, but no large orders placed yet in 1962 for capital equipment.GVN announced plans for medium-term loans to cover new 5/7 tax on such capital goods but none granted yet.

Searching re-examination under way of social and economic programs in which US plays a part to determine what further changes of emphasis may be desirable to combat insurgency. Changes adapting USOM program more closely to such activities as military civic action, Montagnard rehabilitation, and strategic hamlets may be feasible. Success of such adaptation, however, will depend partly on degree to which overall govt policy and operations in nationwide counterinsurgency effort are clarified.

Otherwise, progress in economic and social programs is steady. For example, anti-malaria campaign continues go forward toward goal of total eradication despite serious disruption by VC. National communication facilities expanding, 50 kw transmitter at Quan Tre having opened May 15 under nearly full power for broadcasts covering nearly half the country. In field local govt, trained nucleus of district and provincial administrators returning to provinces as instructors other officials in new spirit and administrative techniques.

Review of situation in other key fields follows, together with some of more significant current developments.

12. Public Safety: Draft plan for basic reorganization police and security services completed and under final review GVN and USOM. Creation modern unified national police service should increase substantially counterinsurgency capability of govt in this sphere. One aspect of reorganization will be decentralization of operations. In this connection aid now recruiting 20 rural police advisors to serve in regional and provincial headquarters.

Other developments in public safety field: A. Village Radios: 426 of 2,500 installed to date; following provinces completed or nearly so: Gia Dinh, Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, Phooc Tuy, Kien Phong, Dinh Tuong, An Xuyen and Kien Giang. Installation rate now 300 per month with four teams operating simultaneously, each with USOM technician, two signal corpsmen and personnel of Vietnamese telecommunications service. Substantial assistance rendered by MACV helicopter lifts. Manufacturing in process or delivery to Saigon accomplished for 1,220 sets; procurement order for balance of 1,200 sets issued May 21. Technical examination of hamlet radio problem proceeding.

B. Identification card program has issued 2,750,000 cards in all provinces of target 7,000,000 (all adults over 18 years). Program coordinated with rehabilitation operations e.g., USOM specialist now in Phu Yen Province training special teams to accelerate card issuance in connection Hai Yen operation.

C. Training of police in firearms stepped up. May 17 2,000 carbines obtained on replacement basis from ARVN stocks for special training sessions to commence soon for Saigon police, three northern regional directorates, and for south and southwest regional directorates.

3. Public Health: Concern of health officials in recent months has been care large numbers civilian battle casualties, including Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps. Standard plans recently approved for new surgical suites for provincial hospitals (joint USOM-GVN project). Construction bids received and accepted for 25 provinces. Meanwhile dollar-funded orders for surgical and nursing equipment and supplies being placed for time phased deliveries. Mobile medical teams for which worldwide recruiting in process will fit into this program

Result before end year can be surgical facilities for all Viet Nam within 100 kilometers any point and major gain in social counterinsurgency sphere.

14. Public works: New jet runway at Tan Son Nhut now in use by all types aircraft including military; construction 85 percent complete. Despite continuing sabotage, US supplied dredges continuing dredge inland waterways and canals essential to transport of rice to urban markets and transport of military troops and equipment; in presidentʼs road program (directed at construction and rehabilitation of roads primarily in strategic rural areas) 13 separate road projects under way at 17 sites. An average of ten bridges being damaged weekly by enemy action are being repaired at the same rate with US assistance. Railroad sabotage recently increased. Repairs undertaken immediately with US assistance and minimum interruption of service. Well drilling proceeding in military installations, hospitals and strategic villages, including well being dug (now down to 400 feet) in Father Haoʼs village, An Xuyen Province.

15. Education. A. Summary of current action: 1. Vocational Education: 2 Major schools opening July 1962 which, with 3 in operation, will enroll 3,700 students.

2. Teacher training capacity will be expanded as result current negotiations to produce 350 secondary school teachers per year (against present capacity 250 teachers); annual rate production elementary teachers will be expanded by July 1962 to 1,400 per year.

3. Textbook production to date approximately 3,000,000; under new agreements establishment of 19 provincial centers for instructional materials will greatly help production.

4. Elementary, secondary classroom and science laboratory construction continues.

B. Perhaps only impediment to complete integration public education programs with other geographically phased counterinsurgency operations, e.g., construction of school in strategic hamlets, is lack of firm schedule of areas to be “cleansed”. Nevertheless, school construction in strategic hamlets completed in many cases, on basis last minute coordination plans, and priority being given where possible to Delta Plan provinces and other areas where rehabilitation operations under way.

16. Agriculture: Distribution rodenticides to farm families in six central provinces got under way last week and now moving top speed. One hundred gram plastic packages being delivered local family group leaders through province and district offices, which will in turn give to each of 100,000 families.

Meanwhile, new permanent organization for overall plant protection program being beefed up with transportation and other equipment, training, and construction of facilities. One shot rat poison program significant in immediate circumstances, but of less importance than institutional capacity combat all forms plant destruction year after year.

Agricultural credit distribution in doldrums during first quarter of 62. Loans issued through National Agricultural Credit Office in that period 50 percent less than during similar period 1961, which itself far below 1960 rate. Security conditions root of trouble, and efforts adapt to it through new methods augur well for coming quarter; heavy emphasis being placed on loans in kind, especially fertilizer, to central VN rice deficit areas; NACO moving toward decentralization of operations to district offices. In general production activity of agricultural population remarkably constant in face insurgency.

Psychological:

17. Appointment of new Director General Information: GVN May 21 announced appointment Phan Van Tao as Acting Director General Information to succeed Dr. Tran Van Tho, who expected return to National Assembly seat. Tho openly opposed activity foreign newsmen here, created roadblocks which source constant irritation correspondents. Also pursued policy heavy censorship, other controls local press. New Director, Tao, former deputy to Civic Action Minister Ngo Trong Hieu, expected take more moderate position both with respect foreign and local press.6

USIS also anticipates more favorable reception other on-going and proposed information projects. In recent conversation with USIS Deputy Pao, Tao profuse in expressions his desire cooperate fullest with US mission. He well and favorably known US reps.

18. Foreign press relations: still difficult. Exodus majority Western journalists to Thailand temporarily abated complaints of GVN cable delays, other official harassments. Newsmen remain in such suspicious mood that alleged VC order to Saigon-Cholon cadres directing them send appeals to resident Western press by name believed by some Western correspondents be GVN “plant” designed discredit their stories. AP correspondent Malcolm Browne expressed similar view origin two recent alleged VC grenade-throwings, believing them covert GVN effort convince Americans VC intends single them out for assassination despite current propaganda line to contrary. PAO Mecklin interview President Diem last week7 indicates President continues believe Western newsmen out to reflect discredit him and regime. Diem reluctant at this time consider improving press access to information on progress war against VC but indicated he willing listen to suggestions for improvement which post is preparing.8

19. In apparent breakthrough on long-standing problem, Civic Action Minister Hieu gave USIS go-ahead on nine sub-posts: Phan Thiet, Pleiku, Nhatrang, Quinhon, Danang, Quang Tri, Hoi An, Quang Ngai and Phu Yen province (town unspecified). Minister proposed and USIS accepted joint GVN-US field operations committee. Hieu predicted committee, sub-posts could start functioning in about two weeks.

Overall evaluation:

Compared to six months ago, I have no doubt that the GVN is stronger now, relative to the Viet Cong, within the confines of SVN. This judgment based on following factors: fighting capability of armed forces and para-military forces; morale of armed forces; morale of civilians; government planning and implementation; intelligence. During the same period, however, VC strength and determination appear also to have increased, and it now seems clear that the VC are not going to back down (or voluntarily retard their time schedule) as a result of increased American aid. We are thus faced with the probability of a struggle increasing in intensity. The GVN is aware of this and is trying to prepare for it (in the “clear and hold” operation). Coupled with the strategic hamlet program, the GVN has, in a sense, moved to take the offensive. This in itself has improved public morale. There are, however, many weaknesses in the GVN administration: delays in decisions at the top, vying for position and lack of cooperation among officials, some poor planning and more sloppy execution, poor public relations (both at home and abroad). I think these weaknesses are gradually being improved, but there is still a long way to go. On the whole, I think US counsel and advice are becoming increasingly acceptable and should produce further dividends.

Trueheart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/5-2362. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, Taipei, London, New Delhi, Singapore, Hong Kong, Hue, and Fuchu. The Department of State was requested to pass copies to various intelligence and military agencies in Washington, as well as to AID; CINCPAC was requested to pass copies to its subsidiary commands; and Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, and Manila were requested to pass copies to their respective military representatives. A handwritten notation at the top of the source text reads: “Hurrah!”

2 See Document 187.

3 Reference is to an incident on April 20 in which unidentified raiders from Cambodia attacked the border hamlet of Vinh Lac, murdering some of the inhabitants and pillaging the area. Telegram 1346 from Saigon, April 25, reported that the raiders were probably members of the Cambodian Civil Guard and the attack was most likely not politically motivated. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/4-2562)

4 Reference is apparently to an offer made through Admiral Felt, who visited South Vietnam and President Diem following the ANZUS meeting in Canberra as related in telegram 1469 from Saigon, May 17. (Telegram 1469 from Saigon, May 17; ibid., 751K.5/5-1762)

5 An English translation of the original memorandum in French, was sent as an attachment to despatch 476 from Saigon, May 16. (Ibid., 451K.116/5-1662)

6 In the margin of the source text next to this sentence was written: “Unlikely. Press policy comes from top.”

7 See Document 199.

8 In the margin of the source text next to this sentence appears the statement: “Diem is real block, not Tho or Tao. Win him over and Tao will be fine.”

204. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 204. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 23, 1962—2 p.m.

1504. Embassy officer saw Colonel Lac May 23 prior receipt Deptʼs 13672 in order determine status his concept of organization for counterinsurgency operations in Delta. Lac said concept has been presented President Diem but has not yet been approved. He said he had been informed by Secretariat in Presidency that concept had been referred to “group” for study but Lac professed ignorance as to who this group is.

At Embassy officerʼs request Lac provided copy organizational chart presented to Diem which will be pouched Department.3

Embassy officer asked Lac whether concept as presented to Diem included single commander at division tactical zone level for military and civilian operations. Lac said he had recommended to Diem that this authority be given division commander with proviso that central government (i.e. President) determine when military control in given area will shift to civilian control.

Embassy officer asked Lac whether any operational plans for Delta area had been developed as yet. He replied that until organizational concept approved by Diem orders cannot be issued for formation committees at various lower levels including division tactical zone and plans cannot be requested from division tactical zone until committees formed. He added that once concept approved orders for formation committees can go out within two or three days and plans should come up rapidly for approval. Embassy officer made it clear that we need specific operational plans in order to determine where we can bring our assistance to bear in counterinsurgency operations.

Lac said that meanwhile he has been made member of Inter-Ministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets (headed by Nhu). Meeting is to be held at My Tho under Nhuʼs chairmanship May 24 to deal with Delta provinces.

Lac said he plans recommend at this meeting that series of “defended hamlets” be constructed along edge Plaine des Joncs for resettlement inhabitants that area under VC pressures or control. If recommendation approved he said we would be requested to provide assistance. Embassy officer pointed out this would appear to be contrary to Delta Plan concept of restoring security gradually from more secure to less secure areas and asked particularly whether there would be adequate forces to defend series defended hamlets along edge Plaine des Joncs. Lac understood reasons for this question and indicated it would be raised at meeting in My Tho.

Lac said he would also have to present to this meeting proposals which had been made by province chiefs of Long An, Dinh Tuong and Vinh Long for erection additional small defense posts. Lac indicated however he did not think very much of this idea himself as there are already too many small posts to defend. Embassy officer likewise said that he did not particularly like this idea which had been presented about week ago to Country Team Committee on Province Rehabilitation.

Lac also said that he planned urge at My Tho meeting that province chiefs in area establish specific plan of area priorities for strategic hamlet construction. He said that Nhu supports concept of priorities based on Zones A, B and C—i.e. from more secure to less secure areas taking into consideration population and communications routes and centers—but province chiefs thus far building strategic hamlets helterskelter fashion. Embassy officer strongly supported idea of area priorities for strategic hamlets.

Lac agreed that there is essential difference between Thompson Plan approach to pacification which would give priorities to Delta provinces because security forces not adequate to permit simultaneous pacification efforts all over country and GVNʼs current approach involving strategic hamlet construction in every province in country.

Comment: Lack of approval thus far of Lacʼs organizational concept for counterinsurgency operations in Delta is discouraging but it did not appear from this conversation that Lac has given up hope of obtaining approval. We shall talk to Thuan to try determine just where Lacʼs concept stands. Shall reserve further comment on British information reported Deptʼs 1367 (which had come also to us directly from British here).

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/5-2362. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, London, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, and Manila.

2 Document 200.

3 Not found.

205. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan) and the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart), Gia Long Palace, Saigon, May 24, 1962 205. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan) and the Charge in Vietnam (Trueheart), Gia Long Palace, Saigon, May 24, 19621

Saigon, May 24, 1962.

SUBJECT

Delta Plan

I opened the conversation by asking Thuan whether he could bring me up to date on the status of the Delta Plan. We had heard, I said, that the Plan had been “shelved”.

Thuan said he would give me a “complete explanation”. He began by recalling that the Delta Plan had been worked out by the British Advisory Mission in coordination with the U.S. Mission. President Diem had approved the Plan and issued a decree appointing Colonel Hoang Van Lac as Commissioner for the Plan.2 At about the same time, the Interministerial Committee on Strategic Hamlets was formed.3 It thus became necessary to ascertain the relationship between the two programs (Strategic Hamlets and Delta Plan) and those administering them. Therefore, Thuan said, after the appointment of Lac, he asked the President, at a meeting (of the NISC?) at which Nhu was present, (a) to define precisely Colonel Lacʼs authority and (b) to make clear whether the Delta Plan would have first priority (presumably within the Strategic Hamlets scheme). In the discussion of these points with the President, it developed that, on the military side, Lac would not be able to give orders to Division Commanders or to General officers. (The implication was that this was because of his rank.) Moreover, he would not be able to give orders to Province Chiefs.

As to whether the Delta Plan would have first priority, Thuan said that the Presidentʼs decision was in effect that it would not. The Strategic Hamlet Program would go forward throughout the country. Thuan remarked wryly that the Program was to be completed in six months.

In this situation, Thuan said, it was decided that Lac should be made a member of the Strategic Hamlets Committee and given responsibility for the construction of strategic hamlets and defended hamlets in the Delta area. Thuan said that this was logical because the Delta Plan was a plan to establish such hamlets in the Delta area. In fact, he could see nothing inconsistent between the Delta Plan and the Strategic Hamlets Program. I remarked that strategic hamlets were a key feature of the Delta Plan but an equally or more important feature of the Plan was the closest coordination between civil and military authorities at every echelon. The latter did not appear to me to be spelled out in the Strategic Hamlets Program. Thuan did not dispute this. In this connection, I asked whether Lac was likely to get his organizational scheme (which provides for civil-military coordination) approved. Thuan was vague on this. He said that Lac had shown the President his chart but had not given him a “full briefing” on it. I asked whether the Strategic Hamlets Committee might be considering Lacʼs organizational plan. Thuan was vague on this also, but I gathered that this might be the case.

Turning next to Lacʼs “plan” for constructing defended hamlets in Long An, Binh Duong, and Vinh Long Provinces, roughly along the edge of the Plaine des Joncs, Thuan said that Ambassador Hohler had complained that this was a Maginot Line concept tying down the regular forces. Thuan said he had put this to Colonel Lac, whose reply was that it was proposed to defend the defended hamlets with Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps, not regulars. Regular forces would operate into the Plaine des Joncs.

I remarked that this scheme for a defense line along the Plaine des Joncs had been described to the U.S. Committee on Province Rehabilitation, but not as a plan of operation, rather as the views of individual Province Chiefs. I pressed Thuan as to whether the idea had been coordinated with the military authorities. Thuan said eventually that Lac had “discussed” it with the Commander of the 21st Division (who liked it) and the Commander of the 7th Division (who did not like it). In response to my question as to the views of III Corps, Thuan said that this was “just a headquarters.”

I thanked Thuan for the information he had given me, but said it disturbed me. In the first place, the absence of geographical priorities made it almost impossible for the U.S. to plan its support for counterinsurgency operations. Secondly, I was perhaps even more concerned at the apparent absence of close coordination between civil and military. To leave the military out of planning meant effectively to lose their support in execution. This, I said, was to fight with one hand tied behind your back. Thuan said that the military were represented on the Strategic Hamlets Committee, but made no attempt seriously to refute what I had said. (The Strategic Hamlets Committee, according to Minister Luong, does not review the plans of the Province Chief unless he makes a request for help from Saigon.)

After some further discussion of Operation Sunrise and Hai Yen II, Thuan asked if I did not think “things were going well.” I said I did, that there was real momentum behind the Strategic Hamlet Program which seemed to me a sound concept. I thought, however, that planning and coordination had to be imposed on the program for constructing strategic hamlets. Otherwise, I feared that many hamlets in exposed areas were going to be overrun. I was afraid that if this happened the Program might be discredited in Viet-Nam and in the U.S.A. Thuan did not comment. When I left, however, after discussing several other matters, Thuan reverted to the earlier discussion and said that he recognized the importance of priorities and coordination. He asked me not to despair. I said that I never despaired.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 6.1-C GVN 1962, Agrovilles. Secret. Drafted by Trueheart. Attached as COPROR/DOC/25 to the minutes of a meeting of the Committee on Province Rehabilitation of May 25, COPROR/SR/10. The meeting was held at Gia Long Palace.

2 March 16 and 23, respectively.

3 February 3.

206. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs National Security Adviser (Bundy) 206. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs National Security Adviser (Bundy)1

Washington, May 29, 1962.

SUBJECT

Times Article on South Vietnam, May 29, 19622

I have talked to Sterling Cottrell in the State Department about the Bigart article in this morningʼs Times.

Essentially the article discloses nothing new other than the fact that Bigart has discovered the dimensions of American effort with President Diem which has been going on for some time. For several months now we have been trying to persuade Diem to permit Americans (MAAG and USOM) to dispense economic and military assistance directly in certain of the most pressed provinces on an emergency basis.

Although Diem has refused to sanction this sort of operation generally because he feels it would undermine his political control, he has permitted some direct allocation of resources by Americans on a project-by-project basis in connection with Operation Sunrise and counter-insurgency activities in one of the provinces.

This is, however, only one of a number of programs suggested by us with which Diem has been slow to cooperate. He has not dug in his heels but is putting on the brakes. He has, for example, reluctantly permitted the assignment of American advisers to the province chiefs but has not in every case allowed them to occupy the same buildings. Cottrell feels that, at this point, Diemʼs resistance to most of our proposals is not so great as to require more forceful pressures from us; but he, Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins are watching the situation closely.

There is, however, one problem which may come up soon where we may have to take a tougher attitude toward Diem. This is the problem of generating sufficient local currency (piasters) to finance increased local cost of maintaining the para-military forces and other counter-insurgency operations.

The GVN has argued that it needs more gold or hard currency to back up any increase in piaster circulation. We have taken the position that the GVN should borrow from the central bank and to the extent that inflation became a problem, we would undertake an increased commodity import program.

Apparently last year we caved in on a similar request and provided the GVN with gold or dollar reserve. Both State and the Aid Agency do not favor a repetition of this approach.

My own very strong feeling is that cash grants to support the international convertibility of local currency is idiotic and dangerous. This is precisely what we have been doing in Laos with the painful results we know so well. I see absolutely no justification for subsidizing the convertibility of piasters, since without strict and effective exchange control, all this does is to increase the importation of nonessentials and does nothing to help get on with the problem of defeating the Viet Cong. If the money supply in Vietnam exceeds the supply of essential commodities, then we should provide the commodities to match the money supply, not free dollars. I sense from a few conversations with the President that he is inclined to agree with this position.

Mike

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series, Staff Memoranda, Michael Forrestal.

2 The article under reference, attached to the source text, was by Homer Bigart and was datelined Saigon, May 28.

207. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 207. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 31, 1962.

SUBJECT

Laos and North Viet-Nam

The possibility of putting US combat forces into Laos raises this question: Is our objective (a) a split Laos; or (b) a unified Laos from which the North Vietnamese are made to withdraw and from which the Chinese Communists are barred? The issue has been obscured because (a) has been regarded as a “tough” policy; (b), as a “soft” policy. I believe the opposite is the case.

If our objective is (a), it probably can be attained if we move sufficient US forces into the area and if we are prepared to have them stay there indefinitely. Our movement would face the Communists with a choice. They could either accept the split, de facto or de jure; consolidate on their side of the line, probably introducing Chinese Communists as well as North Vietnamese forces; and then look forward to a gradual extension of their power in Laos by indirect aggression which the long lines of demarcation and the nature of the terrain would make thoroughly possible. From their point of view the split would be a great advance over the situation in 1954 when the Communists were merely granted two Lao provinces in the north. Moreover, it would be very difficult for us under the new de facto situation to argue that it was inappropriate for the Vietminh and the Chinese Communists to come into the north if we remained in the south.

On the whole I believe this is the outcome Ho, Mao, and Souphanouvong want.

My hunch is that the Soviet Union has, on the whole, opposed a split because it raised the possibility of escalation in which their prestige would be involved and because it would push North Viet-Nam closer to Peiping. On the other hand, the attractive situation on the ground and the low costs we have imposed on the North Vietnamese for their aggression in northern Laos, have made it difficult for Moscow to persuade Ho and Souphanouvong honestly to back a neutral, independent Laos.

On the other hand, if we set as our objective a Laos from which both North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist troops are excluded, I suspect we shall have to raise the costs to the Communists beyond the point of present defensive planning. We should have to take the view that our policy in Southeast Asia is to get the North Vietnamese forces back to North Viet-Nam; and to keep the Chinese Communists from using the road into Laos they are now building; and we would have to be prepared to impose on North Viet-Nam sufficient costs to make a neutral, independent Laos the most attractive realistic alternative open to the Communists.

Specifically, therefore, if aggression is resumed in Laos by the Communists, I urge that we consider the following track: 1. We restate our objectives in both South Viet-Nam and Laos as, essentially, a return to the Geneva Accords of 1954 (including explicitly a neutral, independent Laos).

2. We surface the crucial role of the North Vietnamese forces in Laos, as well as in South Viet-Nam, stating publicly for the first time what is true; namely, that the aggression in Laos is essentially Hoʼs rather than Souphanouvongʼs.

3. We propose to inflict selective damage on North Viet-Nam for its aggression beyond its borders until that aggression ceases. I do not have in mind here massive bombing of Hanoi. I do have in mind highly selective attack on transport and power facilities, by precision methods, which are now within our capability, plus some mining of Haiphong harbor.

4. In this setting we would move vigorously into Laos and immediately take measures to close off the infiltration through Laos into South Viet-Nam.

It is my assessment that, unless we are prepared to raise the ante in this way, the Communists will judge—and judge correctly—that their present salami tactics in Southeast Asia will succeed. If, however, we are prepared to take the risks of this wholly legitimate act against North Viet-Nam—which has no right to have its soldiers south of the 1 7th parallel or in Laos—we have a fair chance of giving Khrushchev a legitimate argument for going forward on the track which Mr. Harriman and Mr. Pushkin discussed in Geneva.

There are, of course, risks in this as in any other action designed to stop aggression; and we should be prepared for any level of escalation that the Communists may choose in response. On the other hand, the internal situation in both North Viet-Nam and Communist China, plus the relatively favorable balance of nuclear strength between the US and the Soviet Union, and the Sino-Soviet split, make this as good a time to face this risk as any we are likely to confront in this decade.

Finally, I believe our relatively passive policy in both Viet-Nam and Laos has weakened the hand of those in Moscow—including Mr. Pushkin—who wish to see the situation in Southeast Asia defused.

In short, I believe a bolder policy than that now envisaged has a chance of fending off an outcome we have long sought to avoid; that is, an indefinitely prolonged US commitment to hold with US troops the Mekong Valley and southern Laos.

1 Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Chron. Top Secret.

208. Editorial Note 208. Editorial Note

On June 2, 1962, the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Vietnam (ICC), comprised of the representatives of Canada, Poland, and India (chair), issued its Special Report to the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China. The report was made public on June 25 and on July 2, the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, released it as a special publication. This publication included the report itself, two letters to the ICC liaison offices in Saigon and Hanoi protesting lack of cooperation with the ICC in its attempts to inspect for war material in North and South Vietnam (April 5 and 6), a statement of dissent from the Report by the Polish Delegation (June 2), and an Indian refutation of the Polish dissent (June 2).

209. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 209. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 4, 1962—4 p.m.

1550. Our 1503.2 Second Weekly Status Report (delayed by Dept Cirtel 2032, 2040, 2045).3

Political

1. Delta Plan and Strategic Hamlets Program. Organization for counterinsurgency operations in Delta presented by Delta Plan Commissioner, Colonel Lac, has not yet received Presidential approval, and indications are that Delta Plan has been merged into Strategic Hamlets Program under Ngo Dinh Nhu. Lac has been made member of Strategic Hamlets Inter-Ministerial Committee and given responsibility for construction of strategic and defended hamlets in Delta area. Meeting held May 24 at My Tho (Headquarters 7th Division south of Saigon) under Nhuʼs chairmanship at which Lac presented plan for series defended hamlets along edge Plaine des Joncs.4 Task Force Province Rehabilitation Committee subsequently met with Minister of Interior Bui Van Luong (representing GVN Strategic Hamlets Committee) on May 28 expected request for U.S. assistance to defended hamlets project was not presented.5

Comments: Original Delta Plan included strategic hamlets as one of key elements but evident GVN primary emphasis on strategic hamlets as demonstrated by above developments risks loss of coordination of civilian and military action which Delta Plan and Lacʼs organizational concept had envisaged. Building of strategic hamlets all over country abandons priority envisaged for Delta Area and risks discrediting strategic hamlet principle because of inadequate number of security forces to defend strategic hamlets everywhere at once, as well as inadequate civilian personnel and resources to carry out civic action, economic and social phases of program simultaneously all over country. This also leaves us without priorities as to where to bring our assistance to bear except in two clear-and-hold operations in progress in Binh Duong and Phu Yen Provinces. We working to get priorities established and adhered to.

2. Operation Sunrise (Binh Duong Province). Regional delegate, General Cao, is initiating establishment two more resettlement villages in addition to three already established under this operation. Also plans two later stages involving three and four additional resettlement villages respectively. Rate development these villages determined primarily by availability of troops for defense.

3. Operation Hai Yen II (Phu Yen Province). Operation continuing with good civil-military coordination but nothing significantly new to report.

4. Montagnard Developments. Various sources continue report flow of Montagnards from mountain area seeking GVN protection. We now attempting assemble complete report as to number involved (apparently about 100,000), just where they are and what their needs are. GVN this week requested air assistance in transporting 400 tons rice from Saigon to meet emergency Montagnard needs. MACV helping on this. GVN also desires additional U.S. help with respect rice, cornmeal, tools, etc. for Montagnards. Shall determine what we can further do on basis report now in preparation.

5. Social Purification Law. President promulgated this law which has now gone into effect. Contains provisions about smoking and drinking of minors, bans on dancing, superstitious acts, prostitution, contraceptives, etc. Like most laws changing social customs it has given rise to much sniping and has caused decline in governmentʼs popularity at least in cities. Also likely increase unemployment among taxi-girls, orchestras, waiters, etc.

6. Australia. Australian Government has announced that it will send group of up to 30 military instructors to Vietnam to provide instruction in jungle warfare, village defense and related activities. Dispatching military officer to Saigon to discuss just how Australian personnel can be used.

Foreign Minister Barwick in Saigon on two-day visit. Publicly indicated he wished get clearer picture of means by which Australia can aid Vietnam. Expressed strong support for Diem and GVN, and admiration of US efforts and stand here.

7. ICC. ICC expected meet June 1 to take majority decision (Indian and Canadian) on DRV subversion and GVN violations Articles 16, 17 and 19. Canadians have now decided not to file addendum making explicit cause-and-effect relationship, but are expected issue public statement in Ottawa along this line. Hanoi continuing pressure against ICC through mass meetings, petitions, veiled threats, etc. to prevent or delay decision.

GVN opened to press May 29 exhibit at General Staff Headquarters on DRV support of guerrilla war in SVN. Released communiqués on recent letters to ICC including proposal of detailed system of ICC controls along Laos-South Vietnam frontier and in western part Demilitarized Zone. ARVN Chief Staff General Khanh who gave briefing to press at exhibit also told press large GVN air operation May 27 may have succeeded in destroying headquarters VC Regional Command for Central Vietnam. Comments: Attendance foreign press corps disappointingly meager, apparently because of repeated postponement of dates for press conference and lack proper coordination and cooperation among GVN officials.

8. DRV. According Liberation Radio, Central Committee of National Liberation Front has issued communiqué stating that U.S. has invaded South Vietnam and will be resisted. Warns Western nationals that since Americans cannot be distinguished physically from other Westerners latter should restrict movements and carry identity cards for their own protection. Implication is clear that Americans are to be considered targets.

Hanoi propaganda media also attempting exploit GVN trial, conviction and death or hard labor sentences on May 23 of 11 students and 1 teacher including those accused participation in grenade attack on Ambassador in July 19616 and attacks on MAAG personnel. Hanoi press lauds students' “struggle against American aggression.” Hanoi Radio reported demonstrations by “tens of thousands,” including one of 40,000, in Hanoi to protest sentences.

Economic

9. General. Failure SVN economy to absorb estimated level of US-financed revenue-producing imports, and estimated higher GVN expenditures, particularly military and para-military, have led GVN to revise budget estimates for CY 1962. Revised estimates show deficit of 4.8 billion piasters. GVN is of opinion that failure maintain import levels is mainly due to procurement restrictions imposed by U.S. aid policy. Consequently, GVN has requested cash grant of U.S. $25 million to enable “worldwide” procurement of variety of imports, including machinery and fertilizers and, thus, not only help economic development but result in sizeable increase revenues through import taxes.

[Here follow sections on rural affairs, public works projects, and internal public affairs activities.]

Summary Evaluation. In terms revival strength GVN versus Viet Cong during week since last report, I see no significant internal factors indicating any substantial change. International recognition of importance Vietnamʼs struggle against Communist subversion continues to increase (Australian ForMinʼs forthright support and upcoming ICC action), and has beneficial effect on morale here. GVN planning, organization and execution of plans continues to be spotty. Despite some delays and setbacks, I think improvement can be noted. It goes without saying that outcome in Laos will have very great effect on chances of ultimate success here.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/6-462. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC, Clark Air Force Base, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Vientiane, Manila, Paris, Taipei, New Delhi, Singapore, Hong Kong, Hue, and Fuchu.

2 Document 203.

3 Dated May 31 and June 1 and 2, respectively, they imposed a restriction on the transmission of telegrams to the Department of State until 1 p.m. on June 4. The paper copies of the telegrams have been destroyed. (Department of State, Central Files, Microfilm Cassettes)

4 See Document 205.

5 According to the minutes of the June 1 meeting of the Committee on Province Rehabilitation (COPROR/SR/11), Luong requested, and the Committee approved, 100 tons of barbed wire for three provinces in the I Corps area. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 6.1-c GVN, 1962, Agrovilles)

6 See the editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 86.

210. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 210. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 6, 1962—10 a.m.

1564. Task Force Viet Nam. Reference: Aidto 999, May 24.2

This message represents Task Forceʼs considered views on memorandum handed US reps by President Diem at Dalat (despatch 476)3 and a communication received May 28 from Secretary Thuan. The latter communication (pouched)4 provides additional data in support of GVN memorandum. In brief, it predicts a deficit in central government budget for CY 1962 of 4.8 billion piasters which attributed as follows: 1.7 billion to military budget; 3.17 billion to civil and paramilitary forces budget. Argument is made that deficit arises primarily because of failure to dispose of US economic aid and difficulties of importers to use such aid because of price factors resulting from limited world wide procurement requirements under USAID. Memorandum suggests a $25 million cash grant (presumption is that such a cash grant would have no limited procurement strings attached to it). Of this $25 million (to be disposed of within this calendar year) 5 million dollars would be spent for freight payments on foreign flag vessels, 12 million dollars for industrial machinery imports, and 8 million dollars for a variety of raw materials of which major item is fertilizer.

Two GVN written communications, plus several informal discussions, point to another serious negotiation with GVN on financial matters. We have given much thought to position we should take. Before describing effect of present economic and financial situation SVN on counter insurgency effort and making recommendations thereon, several factual errors in GVN memorandum of May 9 need correction: 1. GVNʼs balance of gold and dollar reserves as of March 31, 1962 was 164,450,000 dollars (figures given in GVNʼs memorandum failed to include about 20 million dollars in gold).

2. Average yield on US-financed imports is approximately 74 piasters per dollar rather than 82.

3. The contention that GVN has carried out all financial measures recommended in Staley-Thuc Report5 is exaggerated. While the 5/7 tax on foreign exchange (25 piasters per dollar) and revised scale of customs duties have been beneficial steps, there still remains much that can and should be done by GVN to increase its revenues. Revenues from taxes on real estate and income, for example, are up 16 per cent over last year, but should be considerably higher. (While rate of 60 piasters per dollar, plus customs duties, is not as high as it should be: we do not think time is right to press for another increase in foreign exchange taxes. While this should be long range objective, present business, political, and psychological conditions here make it inadvisable to press for it now.) GVN has this year, for first time, been confronted with necessity of major deficit financing. GVN estimates a deficit of approximately 4.8 billion piasters (on a total budget of 23.7) for this year. (Only earlier estimate was in the order of 3.5 billion piasters.)

Two issues are presented: (1) concerning the level of GVN foreign exchange holdings, and (2) the necessity to finance the piaster budget to wage a successful campaign on all fronts.

With regard to question of maintaining about $200 million level of foreign exchange reserves, GVNʼs position is that, in adopting Staley-Thuc Report, US and GVN both agreed that such level should be maintained by mutual measures. We have already explained to GVN that such factors as increase in list of US-financed imports (petroleum, sugar, cotton yarn—23 million dollars), dollar expenditures by US forces for military construction (15-20 million dollars), probable revival of GVN rice exports during second half of 1962 (5 million dollars) will reverse recent trend and probably restore GVNʼs reserves to region of 200 million dollars by mid-1963. This assumes that GVN will not repeat its unusually high drawings on foreign exchange reserves as during last half of 1961. GVN foreign exchange position is not, then, an acute economic or financial problem.

It is, however, a real psychological and political factor on GVN side.

With respect to piaster shortage, there will doubtless be a requirement for major deficit financing this year. Our original US-GVN calculations were that GVN budget of 23.4 billion piasters could be financed by: GVNʼs own revenues of 11 billion piasters; US imports amounting to 165 million dollars, including PL 480 (11 billion piasters); bank borrowing of 1.5 billion piasters. However, failure GVN economy to absorb more than approximately 135 million dollars US imports has resulted in shortfall govt income. Several factors are responsible for this situation, chief of which are sharp rise in prices resulting from monetary reform, on top of price increases resulting from limited world wide procurement policy, and insecurity in countryside.

We are not certain whether GVNʼs conclusions that removal of limited world wide procurement restrictions on aid dollars would in fact result in sales of an additional 25 million dollars of foreign exchange. It would be helpful if Washington could give exemptions on certain selected commodities this year to test GVN assumption. This, we think, could be done without creating a precedent for other countries, in light of SVNʼs emergency situation.

We recognize that in purely economic and financial terms, GVN can and probably should proceed to solve their piaster shortage through central bank financing of the budget deficit, which could probably be done without major price dislocations because of current slow-down in business activity and reduction in velocity of currency in circulation.

We not unaware of GVN proclivity to pass the buck to Uncle Sam, but we do not believe that standing pat in present situation will be conducive to winning the struggle here, despite the lack of an airtight economic rationale on GVN side. The US has made a very large investment of resources, manpower and prestige in this struggle. We need now a negotiating position from which to gain the largest possible contribution by the GVN from its own resources which will be both sound and timely and will keep up the momentum. If we do not come up with such a proposal, believe result will be either a slowdown or an effort to “sweat it out of the peasants” (e.g., failure to pay for labor, supplies, care for Montagnard population, civic action, etc.).

In addition to regularly budgeted items, there constantly arise in this fluid situation special requirements and special opportunities, requiring program changes or additional funds. For example, unforeseen requirements for strategic hamlets, “clear and hold” operations, relief and resettlement of many thousands of Montagnards who have flocked to government for protection, military civic action programs, etc., all present additional piaster requirements. They are tremendously important in counter-insurgency effort. US policy aims at speed-up in getting necessary supplies and incentives to Vietnamese peasants in order to enable them to defend themselves. We have sought a method to apply counterpart funds directly to rural rehabilitation projects. In the overall shortage of piasters for budgeted requirements, however, this has been difficult to achieve as it involves robbing Peter to pay Paul, although we have succeeded in getting one such agreement implemented.

Our considered recommendations for meeting current problem are as follows: 1. A waiver of limited worldwide procurement for industrial machinery. This is a category in which GVN claims that imports have fallen because of price factors stemming from limited worldwide procurement, particularly for small orders which are typical here. It is a fact that licensing activity for industrial machinery has dropped from an average annual rate of about 20 million dollars a year to an annual rate of 6 million during 1962. GVN estimates that an additional 12 million dollars of industrial machinery would be imported this year under conditions of unlimited worldwide US-financed procurement. While we are not certain that this would in fact result, we believe it desirable to test the GVNʼs assumption, and we believe this could be done without setting a precedent in view of the situation of active insurgency prevailing here.

2. Purchase from Viet Namʼs National Bank approximately 730 million piasters for US direct use (as agreed with GVN) for counterinsurgency operations where timely action is vital. This would produce a piaster fund enabling US to take direct action, where necessary, in order to apply prompt aid measures in US interests, and would, of course, additionally contribute 10 million dollars to GVNʼs foreign exchange reserves. These funds would be from allotments currently available to USOM in Saigon—i.e., this would not be additional aid to that already made availa61e by Washington. We consider this a justified extraordinary action for this year. En the first instance, when we formulated the current yearʼs budget, the full measure of the cost of the counterinsurgency effort was not foreseen; thus adequate provision was not made for screening out other items of expense. Secondly, the fall-off in demand for imports has served to blunt the anticipated increase in revenues deriving from import duties. If this proposal is approved, we will make a strong point of the fact that the GVN cannot count on this kind of action being repeated in future years.

3. In return, we would require an understanding from the GVN to finance from their own resources the remainder of the central government budgetary funds. We would urge measures to increase internal taxes, both assessments and collections, particularly on real estate and income. (The GVN record in this respect is improving—by increase of 16 per cent during this year—and we have reason to believe that the GVN intends to press forward in this field.) Deficit financing would obviously be the way to make up the difference, and we would require a firm undertaking from GVN to do so.

Request Washington reaction as soon as possible.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-662. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Aidto 999 reported that AID declined to deviate from the recommendations of the Staley-Thuc report of August 1961 on aid levels. (Ibid., 811.0051K/5-2462)

3 See footnote 5, Document 203.

4 Not found.

5 See the letter transmitting the report in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 93.

211. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 211. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 6, 1962—1 p.m.

1568. Task Force Vietnam. Embtel 15642 gives our considered recommendations for breaking local currency bottleneck which is beginning to impede total counter-insurgency effort in Viet-Nam.

In summary, position is as follows: 1. Original GVN budget for CY 1962 has been increased and will probably go higher if GVN is to do the things “we and they” think necessary to win counter-insurgency.

2. A shortfall in estimated absorptive capacity of SVN economy has developed, to extent of approximately $30 from original estimate of $165 million of US-financed imports for CY 1962.

3. As result of these and other factors, GVN is faced with budget deficit substantially greater than that anticipated at time adoption Staley-Thuc report. There is developing a shortage of piasters despite available US commercial aid.

4. In this situation, GVN is reluctant and slow to finance special counter-insurgency measures, including targets of opportunity, which are tremendously important (e.g. care and feeding of Montagnards who are coming over in increasing numbers, adequate provision for resettled people, pay for work on strategic hamlets, pay for newly elected village officials).

5. While a good economic argument can, and has, been made that deficit financing by GVN (borrowing from National Bank) is way to meet problem, plain fact is that this will probably not be done in sufficient amount—or done soon enough—to keep momentum in civic-social-economic actions in “clear and hold” operations, rural rehabilitation, and Strategic Hamlet Programs.

6. We propose to meet the problem by a combination of orthodox and unorthodox means—as set forth in last paragraphs Embtel 1564.

7. Proposals do not require an increase in the total amount of US economic aid already approved for Viet-Nam for FY 1962.

8. Would greatly appreciate your personal consideration of our proposals.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-662. Secret; Priority. Designated for AID Director Hamilton, Assistant Secretary Harriman, McNamara, and Taylor.

2 Document 210.

212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 8, 1962—7:22 p.m.

1425. Task Force Viet-Nam. Ref: Embtels 1564 and 1568.2

1. Department understands that this is a crucial time in Viet-Nam war, that it is of capital importance (a) to supply quickly the strategic hamlets being set up all over country and show villager GVN offers him more than VC, and (b) to show GVN can meet minimum needs approximately 100,000 Montagnards now seeking protect themselves from Viet Cong, that prompt action now will increase momentum these and other programs with good chance taking initiative from Viet Cong during next six months. Is this correct?

2. Commend reftelʼs basic approach of attempting convert GVN pressure for cash grants into a useful and constructive lever for more effective counter-insurgency support. Presume reftel proposals are part of integral package along with subject of counter-insurgency PA discussed Toaid 1077 and 1095.3 Recognize need promptest possible response reftels for your current negotiations with GVN. Final interagency action requires following information: a. Results June 10-11 Saigon discussion with Fowler reftels and points raised in this message.

b. Does urgency situation require FY 62 funds in June (which would require use MAP transfer funds) or could situation be met through AID FY 63 funds (which can be assured in July for approved requirements)? Also, as real extent of GVN CY 62 budget crisis probably not precisely known for several months, could final consideration of proposed piaster purchase be deferred on some basis of U.S. contingent assurances until September or October without serious effect?

c. Could a reduction in rate of counterpart deposit on limited number key U.S. source commodities effectively substitute for waiver of limited worldwide procurement by putting cost of U.S. source items to VN consumer on parity with procurement from presently excluded sources such as Japan? Reduction counterpart deposit is corollary measure envisaged for certain cases in U.S. policy on limited worldwide procurement. Would not wish press this if it would psychologically unduly undercut GVNʼs exchange rate reforms.

d. What is rationale for amount $10 million at this time to purchase piasters?

e. What will be relationship of piasters purchased with $10 million to proposed counter-insurgency stockpile to be created with $10 million PA proposed Toaid 1077 and 1095?

f. It would be helpful to know the composition, rate of return and location of Vietnamese reserves.

3. What would be best negotiable arrangement with GVN to give U.S. most desirable degree control over piaster counter-insurgency fund? How would release procedure differ from present counterpart procedure? How define “remainder” essential expenditures (last para your 1564) which GVN would finance from own resources? Would closer joint budgetary review on continuing basis be necessary to assure GVN not deferring expenditures which we regard as important?

4. While we sure you keenly aware factors in following paras, your comments would be helpful in meeting your requests.

5. We hopeful that reftel concessions, if made, would lead to increased GVN assumption its own financial responsibility. There is Washington concern lest extraordinary U.S. aid measures create substantial disincentives for GVN to pursue the social, economic and fiscal measures sought by the U.S. which also very much a part of counter-insurgency, the lack of which in longer run might create pressures or disorder counter to our counter-insurgency efforts. Illustrative concerns are: a. Understand war burden already falls most heavily on rural populace while richer urban groups contributing relatively little. Better tax administration could help shift burden.

b. Understand current piaster shortage not only result of shortfall of AID-financed imports below $165 million (which U.S. expected when that figure set as target), but also results from shortfall tax collection which appears be actually declining despite GVN pronouncements increased tax rates. Request comment on measures GVN might be induced undertake.

c. Feel budget gap probably even larger next year due limited absorptive capacity imports and counterpart generation which expanding domestic industry may reduce further. At same time, counterinsurgency budget costs likely increase sharply. What is outlook for more specific GVN action help fill gap?

6. As US making strong play get more aid to VN from other countries (see Circular Aidto X-5524 ), we concerned lest waiver of limited worldwide procurement undercut these efforts. Realistically, impact of any such other aid arrangements probably not realizable until next year. However, request refined estimate as to amount waiver actually usable during remainder CY 62. This estimate is not precondition to 730 million piaster purchase recommended para numbered 2 (Embtel 1564). For processing waiver request, need specific examples types machinery to be imported from now-excluded sources that not available from U.S. procurement, and rationale as to specific level of waivers requested.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-662. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Stoneman, Furst (AID), Wood, and Spurgin (State) and cleared in DOD, Treasury, and BOB. Forrestalʼs name had been typed in as clearing officer for the White House but was crossed out. Designated for the attention of James Fowler of AID, then in Vietnam. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Documents 210 and 211.

3 Neither found.

4 Dated June 5, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 851K.0000/6-562)

213. Special National Intelligence Estimate 213. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, June 12, 1962.

SNIE 58-5/1-62

COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO ADDITIONAL US COURSES OF ACTION IN LAOS AND NORTH VIETNAM2

The Problem

To estimate the likely Communist responses to certain courses of action by US and allied forces with respect to Laos which are in addition to those considered in SNIE 58-5-62, “Probable Communist Reactions to Certain Possible US Actions with Respect to Laos,” dated 31 May 1962.3 These courses of action were provided by the Departments of State and Defense.

The Estimate

A. US air attacks against Communist supply bases in Laos and against the Laotian parts of the main overland supply routes from North Vietnam. This course of action might be taken in connection with or subsequent to occupation of the major Mekong River areas of Laos by 8,000-10,000 US troops supported by Thai forces. 1. The Communists would almost certainly conclude that the US was preparing for extensive military operations in Laos, particularly if reinforcements and supplies were being built up in Thailand. They would attempt to cope with the US air attacks by both passive and active means and would maintain their forces in the areas of Laos they now control. Therefore, it seems likely that North Vietnamese antiaircraft units in Laos would be reinforced. In addition, small numbers of fighter aircraft, flown by Chinese Communist and possibly Soviet pilots, perhaps in the guise of North Vietnamese, probably would be introduced into North Vietnamese airfields. The Soviet airlift would almost certainly continue as feasible. To the extent of their limited capabilities, Communist aircraft would probably attempt some retaliatory action against US positions in Laos. However, as long as the US air attacks were confined to Laos, the Communists would almost certainly not extend their own air operations beyond the Laotian borders.

2. We believe that the Communist ground forces would probably intensify the actions we have already estimated they would take in response to the US occupation of the Mekong River valley areas: they would probably deploy to confine the areas under US control and harass US outposts, patrols, and lines of communications. North Vietnamese reinforcements would almost certainly be introduced. The Chinese Communists would reinforce their border garrisons and some forces might enter northern Laos. Moscow and Peiping would almost certainly increase their logistics support to North Vietnam.

3. At the same time the Communists would be concerned to keep the conflict from spreading beyond Laos, and would take vigorous political action, including intensified propaganda efforts, to obtain a cessation of hostilities and the resumption of negotiations.

B. US air attacks against North Vietnam. The US air attacks would be extended to include the North Vietnamese ends of the main supply routes into Laos, but not the principal population centers such as Hanoi. This course of action might be taken as part of a US offensive involving 45,000 US troops to occupy the panhandle area of Laos or might be undertaken in connection with the lesser action involving the occupation of the Mekong River valley only. 4. Attacks on North Vietnam territory would, in the Communist view, mark a major turning point in the situation. The Soviets and Chinese would declare their full support for Hanoi. In an immediate effort to obtain a cessation of the US attacks, they would orchestrate their political, diplomatic, and propaganda moves in the UN and elsewhere against what they would proclaim was an act of outright aggression.

5. Peiping and Moscow would almost certainly introduce air support to protect North Vietnamese territory. The chances of the introduction of Chinese Communist troops into Laos would increase significantly, but we do not believe that they would consider it necessary to introduce them into North Vietnam at this stage. The Communists would be concerned to keep hostilities from spreading and, initially, they would confine their action to the defense of North Vietnam. However, if the US attacks were intense and sustained, and particularly if they were associated with a US investment of the Laotian panhandle, the Communists would be likely to regard them as a forerunner of a general military offensive against North Vietnam. Under these circumstances, they would almost certainly attempt to extend their air attacks to include bases in Thailand and possibly in South Vietnam and US carriers. We do not believe that there would be significant differences between Moscow and Peiping insofar as the question of coming to the aid of Hanoi is concerned.

C. Amphibious Operations Against North Vietnam. This situation assumes a division-strength landing in the Vinh area followed by a drive west to the Laos border to link up with US forces in Laos. This course of action would be undertaken in connection with a US offensive involving 45,000 US troops to occupy the panhandle area of Laos. 6. Open invasion of North Vietnam would be considered by the Communist Bloc as a direct challenge to the integrity of the North Vietnamese regime and as a threat to the security of Communist China. Hanoi would take speedy and vigorous action to repel the invasion.4 Communist China would almost certainly provide additional ground forces if they were needed. The Bloc would launch a violent propaganda campaign, warning of the danger of nuclear war, in an effort to obtain US withdrawal under international pressure and condemnation. If the US was undeterred and the invasion made headway, US ground and naval units in the immediate area would almost certainly be attacked by Communist air elements, perhaps under the guise of a North Vietnamese air force. In addition, it is possible that Communist submarines would be brought to bear. Supply and operational bases in Laos, South Vietnam, and Thailand would probably be attacked by Communist air forces. The Communists would be highly unlikely to take the initiative to resort to nuclear weapons at this level of US action.

1 Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Top Secret.

2 According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Directors of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, of the Defense Intelligence Agency, of the National Security Agency, and of the Joint Staff (Intelligence), and the Assistant Chiefs of Staff for Intelligence of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, concurred in the estimate. The Atomic Energy Commission and FBI representatives to the USIB abstained on grounds that the subject was outside their areas of jurisdiction.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, INR-NIE Files)

4 The North Vietnamese Army consists of 280,000 regular troops supported by 100,000 militia. [Footnote in the source text.]

214. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the President 214. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the President1

Washington, June 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

The Need for a Definition of U.S. Political Objectives in Southeast Asia

In my memorandum to you of April 4th, “U.S. Policies in the Far East,”2 I urged that we clearly define and publicly state “a coherent over-all political objective” for our involvement in Southeast Asia. Last Friday3 I again discussed this question with Mac Bundy.

Since then, two developments have given the matter new urgency. The first is Mike Mansfieldʼs Michigan speech4 which has focused public and Congressional attention on our ultimate aims in Southeast Asia. The second is the apparent Laos settlement which now offers us an excellent opportunity for a positive clarification of our over-all political objectives.

The military decisions we have made thus far in Vietnam and Thailand and our contingency planning for Laos have been forced on us by events. Although the necessity for these decisions is to be regretted, the arguments for them at each juncture have been compelling.

However, our step-by-step military response has not been accompanied by a comparable effort to think through our ultimate political aims for Southeast Asia as a whole. As long as we lack a political “grand design” for Southeast Asia, the initiative will continue to rest with our adversaries and with our allies and camp followers, whose parochial views often ignore the global forces with which American policy must contend.

As matters now stand, we may find ourselves forced to choose between an escalating war or a humiliating retreat in an area where the strategic conditions are disadvantageous to us and where direct U.S. military participation would be roundly denounced by domestic critics as “another Democratic war.”

If in the meantime we have failed to go beyond Mr. Eisenhowerʼs famous “falling dominoes” analogy to explain our political objectives in Southeast Asia, we may find ourselves increasingly the captive of events with unpredictable results both at home and abroad.

The historical parallels are impressive and disturbing. Leaders of great nations have often found themselves pressed by a succession of events, each non-decisive in itself, into a position which they would not conceivably have chosen and from which there was no honorable avenue of retreat.

The Guns of August overflows with pertinent examples from World War I. In World War II, caught among the differing theories of Henry Morgenthau, Robert Taft, Henry Wallace, Stalin and Churchill, we found it impossible to agree on the kind of post-war Europe for which we were fighting. One by-product is the present ugly dilemma of Berlin.

In his discussion of the Korean War, Dick Neustadt has analyzed the process of “non-decision” which resulted in our crossing of the 38th Parallel, our march to the Yalu, and our catastrophic rout by the Chinese.

As Neustadt and others have pointed out, our inability to agree on our political objectives for Korea as a whole resulted in an unsatisfactory truce at the 38th Parallel two and one-half years—and many thousands of lives—after the Inchon landings when precisely the same settlement could have been achieved on our terms in an atmosphere of dignity and success.

During this period the French in Southeast Asia were also in the midst of a war with no clear definition of the broad political and economic aims which the fighting was designed to achieve.

For domestic political reasons, the French Government refused to spell out their willingness to grant freedom to the three nations of Indo-China once the struggle against the Communists had been won.

As a result, with nearly the entire population against them, the French Army suffered casualties that totaled more than 90,000, with money costs that exceeded all the aid we gave France under the Marshall Plan, to which we added $3 billion in U.S. equipment. Ten years later we are still paying for this debacle.

I believe that we may now stand at a comparable threshold of decision. In Southeast Asia U.S. forces are involved in operations of uncertain dimensions. This involvement is taking place in a political framework which is unclear to our allies, our adversaries, the people of Southeast Asia, the American public, and the Congress.

The greatest danger may lie in the profound confusion that exists among the 200 million Southeast Asians who are most directly concerned. Most young anti-Communist Vietnamese, Cambodians, Laos [Laotians], Burmese, Malayans and Indonesians now tend to think of the U.S. in terms of the massive military supplies which we sent the French “colonialists” in the early 1950ʼs, … and of our support for Sarit, Diem, Phoumi and Chiang Kai-shek, none of whom can be said to reflect the “New Frontier” in Asia.

It is essential that we present ourselves in a fresh and affirmative role. This requires a governmental decision, followed by a public statement understandable both at home and abroad, in which we spell out our objectives for Southeast Asia as a whole.

In June 1947 General Marshall dramatically outlined our economic and political aims for Europe. In 1961 you described through the Alliance for Progress what we are seeking to achieve in Latin America. In my opinion, the time is at hand for a similar statement in regard to Southeast Asia.

Here, as elsewhere in the world, what we want for the people of the region is almost precisely what the people want for themselves: guaranteed national independence, more rapid economic development, and maximum freedom of choice within their own cultures and religions.

These objectives not only coincide with our own interests; they are wholly compatible with our present undertakings. By spelling them out as American objectives in Southeast Asia, we can provide a compelling rationale for whatever future action—military, political or economic—we may be required to take in the region.

Such a clarification by you would be immediately reassuring to the politically sophisticated people in both neutral and aligned states of the region.

It would firmly identify the United States Government and people with peace, development, and the increasing regional unity which offers the most compelling alternative to Communist divisiveness and fragmentation.

It would give American military, political and economic operations in Southeast Asia the affirmative, understandable, appealing purpose which has been largely lacking since the days of Roosevelt.

It would also give us a clear initiative in dealing with our Communist adversaries, while encouraging whatever elements within the USSR may desire stabilization and neutralization of the region, and removing any valid excuse for Chinese Communist aggression based on a misunderstanding of our objectives.

I have outlined the kind of proposal that I have in mind in a rough draft of a speech, to be made by you, which I am attaching to this memorandum.5

In it I have sought to identify the United States with the forces of peaceful, democratic change throughout Southeast Asia, to picture the kind of future that the people there may achieve once the fighting has been ended, and to offer our assistance and support in this great effort.

It is important, of course, that the language of such a statement be sufficiently balanced to allow us room for maneuver while providing a firm commitment of U.S. support for a new start in this war-torn region, if the Communists will permit the establishment of peace.

As far as American public and Congressional opinion is concerned, I believe that such a declaration of American political objectives in Southeast Asia would be generally welcomed and applauded by members of both political parties.

I also believe that at the very least such a statement will restore confidence in the United States throughout Southeast Asia.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings & Memos, Staff Memos, Chester Bowles. Secret.

2 Document 142.

3 June 8.

4 Reference is to Senator Mansfieldʼs commencement address at Michigan State University on June 10. (Yale University, Bowles Papers, Box 285, Folder 0282 Mansfield 6/10 at MSU Commencement)

5 Not printed; 15 pages in length, it outlined a proposal for economic development of the Mekong River region.

215. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 215. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, June 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia Task Force

1. In talking with Mr. Cottrell yesterday afternoon, I gathered Alexis Johnson is moving ahead with plans to form a Southeast Asia Task Force. Cottrell indicated present thinking is to chair the Task Force with Mr. Koren, Director of Southeast Asian Affairs at State, maintaining the Viet-Nam Task Force as a separate entity. Cottrell and Koren will then effect necessary liaison and coordination between the two groups.

I sense State may be running with this ball too quickly and that there is a need to stop and look at the concept of Task Forces.

2. Based on past discussions within this office, on task force organization, the important issues can be isolated as follows: a. The scope and definition of responsibilities of the task force director.

b. The Department from which the director is selected.

c. The character of the task force membership.

And, as a separate issue, related to the regional approach, d. The organization in the field which can best respond to Washington task force direction.

3. The Task Force Director should be formally chartered and accorded specific responsibilities. He requires the tools to undertake an active role in implementing an agreed Program; if his authority is not spelled out, experience suggests the Task Force will become a passive forum. Since the Special Group (CI) has specific functions in Southeast Asia in accordance with NSAM 124,2 and is to rely on performing such functions upon country or regional interdepartmental task forces, the relationship of the Task Force to the Special Group (CI) should be dearly delineated. As an example, I have attached a rough list of task force director responsibilities which seem to me to meet the several needs without intruding radically on sensitive departmental prerogatives.

4. NSAM 124 indicates a task force is normally to be chaired by a State Department Assistant Secretary. That level of rank is desirable if any degree of authority is to be plausible. In addition, Task Force operation would be smoother if the Director came from the Department of dominant interest. In the situation at hand, we are discussing South Viet-Nam with an active insurgency; Laos with a dormant, but advanced state of insurgency; Cambodia, whose internal security must depend in the immediate future on the Army rather than on the police; and Thailand, which has US armed forces present but whose immediate need is a build-up of non-military counter-insurgency assets. A good argument can be made that Defense should chair this task force but, at a minimum, the problem should be examined.

5. The character of the task force membership should be defined in the formal charter referred to in paragraph 3 above. The membership subordinate to the Director preferably should be at the regional level within each department or agency. Membership would then be held down numerically and, if the desk-level Viet-Nam Task Force continues separately, many of the same individuals will not attend two meetings. At the regional rank level, it will be easier to effect the broad coordination implicit in the establishment of a SEA Task Force.

6. There has been previous discussion as to the desirability of some sort of regional US administrator on-the-ground in Southeast Asia. You will recall Mr. Godelʼs recommendations of last fall on this point. Since the military currently has this arrangement, it is perhaps more desirable now that non-military functions be so organized. If we are to effect coordination in Washington through a regional Task Force, a parallel organization in the field would help to gain compatible approaches to priorities of effort, allocation and interchangeability of resources, coordination across country boundaries, and centralized capability to respond. It is largely a political problem, however, and in the past State has objected on the grounds that it is not diplomatically realistic among the diverse and contentious states of SEA.

7. While the State desire to keep the Viet-Nam Task Force separate from a SEA Task Force is understandable, for many of the reasons listed above this proposition should be reviewed before a new Task Force is formed. If separated, it means individual attendance to some extent at two Task Force meetings, the possible generation of requirements in South Viet-Nam not coordinated with those of the rest of Southeast Asia, and a split responsibility in Washington administration of programs in the region. In addition, since Cottrell does not have specific responsibilities and his operation is more passive than active, the Viet-Nam Task Force would not properly complement a Southeast Asia Task Force clearly chartered for active operation.

8. These observations are not intended to provide answers. They do, however, point up some of the considerations which we have been unable to attack directly in the past. Current formulation of a Southeast Asia Task Force affords an excellent opportunity to look at these matters now. I suggest that this sort of an examination would be appropriate within the responsibilities of the Special Group (CI) and you may desire to consider an approach on that basis.

WHB

[Attachment]

List of Task Force Directorʼs Responsibilities

The Task Force Director should be accorded specific responsibilities: a. Supervise and coordinate all activities in Washington related to the implementation of the Program.

b. Authorized to call for information and progress reports from all participating departments and agencies and to invite attention to any deficiencies or slippages in performance.

c. Review adequacy of resources to deal with the situation at which the program is directed.

d. Report to his Departmental Secretary and to the Special Group (CI) on any matter he is unable to resolve that detracts from the effectiveness of the Program.

e. Make recommendations to the Special Group (CI) on changes in Program policy or detail which are considered necessary.

f. Make recommendations to the Special Group (CI) on changes in US organization or relationships in the field required for proper implementation of the Program.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-185-69. Confidential.

2 Document 26.

216. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 216. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 14, 1962—8 p.m.

1605. TF/VN. Deptel 1425.2 Your statement of problem correct. Objective our proposals is to invigorate and accelerate counterinsurgency programs to maximum extent. Obstacles to this are varied. On one hand there is essentially psychological problem on Vietnamese side represented by prospective budget deficit and drop in foreign exchange holdings. On other hand there is practical problem of getting in hands US Mission sufficient dollar and piaster resources for application to counterinsurgency program in countryside. Our premise is that by bringing in “new money” and by making concessions on limited worldwide procurement to meet second problem we will obtain leverage to overcome psychological obstacles represented by former and, secondarily, to relieve to some degree the budgetary and foreign exchange problems themselves. It is important, however, to keep the two problems conceptually distinct, even though we must work on them together.

GVN (and Diem especially) is overwhelmed by size projected budget deficit this CY. As a result, it has been focusing most of its fiscal attention on ways of trimming ministerial budgets; rather than finding excess funds in those budgets for application to counterinsurgency. Of course, neither we nor GVN knows exactly what budget deficit will be at end CY. They now claim 4.8 billion piasters—it will probably be materially smaller. In any event important point in our proposal to buy piasters is not related to budget deficit except to extent GVN unable or unwilling fund counterinsurgency in face of potential deficit. Whether deficit is entirely manageable in financial terms without extraordinary aid is thus beside point; point is GVN doesn't believe it manageable.

PA procedure proposed in other telegrams should be viewed in similar light. We not addressing ourselves to balance of payments problem or GVN exchange reserve position. Rather, we are trying to develop system through which US can inject itself into counterinsurgency operations through procurement, stockpiling, distribution, etc. In the process, it is essential that we develop procedures which will sharply reduce GVN bureaucratic entanglements and procedural bottlenecks. We are not, however, going to bypass the Saigon Ministerial machine completely. This is simply not acceptable to GVN, and there should be no illusions that this is what we expect to obtain. We do believe that we can develop procedures for prompt and effective use of piaster and dollar resources made available to US.

To summarize, our basic argument for extraordinary actions at this time is not need for dollars to correct fall in reserves nor need for piasters to correct deficit problem as such. Our objectives are (a) to cope with Counterinsurgency Program, (b) to provide psychological carrot which will relieve GVN preoccupation with deficit and exchange position, and (c) to avoid situation in which US-generated local currency is bound into existing counterpart system which is not satisfactory for needs war situation. US strategic interests in SEA demand, in my opinion, that we find a way to achieve these objectives on an urgent basis.

As for amount needed initially to meet these objectives, our proposals call for $10 million on dollar side and $10 million for piaster generation. Basis for these figures is set out in next following telegram3 (together with answers other questions raised reftel). We would like authority to commit ourselves to expend full amount both categories in CY 1962. If fund availabilities do not permit these amounts in FY 62, it will be satisfactory to commit during this month whatever funds are available, if we can give firm assurances that balance can be committed July from FY 63 funds.

Fowler has not seen this message, although he and we have discussed the problem thoroughly. He agrees that extraordinary approach is justified on political/psychological grounds as experimental measure to break present impasse counterinsurgency program. He also agrees that type of extraordinary approach we have proposed is sound one. Believe, however, that he would prefer see smaller amounts committed initially, with expectation they could be augmented if device proved successful. While this approach is certainly understandable, in my judgment to go below the figures proposed would jeopardize chances of achieving psychological breakthrough on GVN side and hence would risk our chances of success.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-1462. Secret, Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 212.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 811.005K/6-1462)

217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 14, 1962—8:42 p.m.

1447. Embtel 1536. New Delhiʼs 3795.2 On balance after study pros and cons notification problem Dept concludes best continue present policy non-notification. Resumption notification would involve self-conviction, propaganda windfall for Commies, loss of advantage inherent in keeping Bloc in dark as to exact scope and direction our efforts, plus damage to military security.

At same time believe we must seek means avoiding mounting ICC citations of GVN without corresponding citations DRV. After ICC report out and impact observed we intend confer with GVN and GOC on approach to Indians in effort persuade Indians (1) cease citations altogether and pass buck to Co-Chairmen as outlined Deptels 1326 and 1361,3 or (2) agree that future citations GVN must be balanced by roughly equal number citations DRV.

Line with Indians should be based on cause and effect nature VN situation and stress our desire restore force Geneva Accords and authority ICC. Might begin by pointing out continued citation GVN for violations which in fact caused by DRV aggression manifestly unfair. Such citations only likely encourage DRV continue its attack and may discredit ICC itself. After indicating our desire maintain force GA, suggest to Indians that two alternatives occur to us which we would like them consider. First possibility is for ICC to view subsequent GVN actions of the same character as violations of a continuing nature and for ICC to inform Co-Chairman periodically e.g. annually under Article 43 of the Agreement that parties failing put into effect ICC recommendations, and that violations previously reported continue. In this regard point out that there nothing in the Agreement that requires ICC to make citations re each separate incident that occurs. Thus under Agreement ICC is free to decide not to cite GVN for each incident if it considers above procedure most appropriate in particular circumstances. Second possibility is to balance citations GVN by citations DRV. If citations DRV infiltration and subversion too few ICC could insist on controls at times places its choosing in NVN and cite DRV for non-cooperation if refused.

Do not agree we should attempt suggest to USSR that failure to call off DRV may result larger war. We have been careful to indicate we not threatening DRV and would not wish contradict this defensive stance at this time.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751G.00/5-3062. Secret. Drafled by Heavner on June 11; cleared with Cottrell, Wood, Rice, Horgan, Hubbard, Chayes, and Czyzak; and approved for transmission by Harriman. Repeated to New Delhi, Ottawa London, Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Dated May 30 and 26, neither printed. (Ibid., 751G.00/5-3062 and 7516.00/5-2662, respectively)

3 Neither printed. (Ibid., 751G.00/5-462 and 751G.00/5-1862, respectively)

218. Memorandum From Senator Mansfieldʼs Legislative Assistant (Valeo) to Senator Mansfield 218. Memorandum From Senator Mansfieldʼs Legislative Assistant (Valeo) to Senator Mansfield1

Washington, June 15, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Vietnamese Ambassador

I met with the Vietnamese Ambassador, Tran Van Chuong, from 9:00 p.m. until 12:30 a.m. on June 14, 1962. The conversation covered a great range of matters; much of it was confused and disjointed. However, there emerged from it several principal ideas which he apparently wanted to communicate to Senator Mansfield without doing so directly himself.

(1) That the Diem government is in very deep trouble and has little prospects for survival. The principal faults, as he saw it, are those which have been indicated in the press from time to time, such as the family control, Diemʼs obliviousness to the realities around him, his mandarin tendencies which discourage any but relatives and “secretaries” from working for him. He made no criticism of Diem as a man, of his patriotism and his dedication, but it was clear that he felt these were insufficient attributes to deal with the present situation. He did not say so in so many words, but there was implicit in his remarks, a belief that a coup was imminent.

(2) He was trying, I believe, to find out through me what Senator Mansfieldʼs position would be in the event of such a coup. He had a very clear recollection of what he believed to be a decisive statement at the time Diem first came to power. He made reference to the fact that Senator Mansfield had said at that time that it was either Diem or no foreign aid and he knew that this was what had persuaded both Bao Dai and the French to bow out. He was exploring to see what would happen at this time in the event that Diem was threatened with imminent overthrow. Would it mean that Senator Mansfield again would say, in effect, Diem or no foreign aid? I told him that I did not know what Senator Mansfield would say but that he would very likely support President Kennedy who had to make the critical decisions.

(3) As regards the speech,2 he understood the factors which had given rise to it, both those at home and those in Viet Nam and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. But he feared for its effect on foreign aid appropriations. I told him that Senator Mansfield was, as far as I could see, trying to deal only with the realities in the situation, recognizing the difficulties in Southeast Asia as well as our own limitations, but that Senator Mansfield had given and would undoubtedly continue to give full support to whatever the President decided.

(4) He apparently expects the coup to come from a combination of the military and the presently dispossessed intellectuals, including those whose political backgrounds, like his own, predate Diem. He does not expect this to be a democratic uprising. On the contrary, he was highly critical of the fact that Diem had established the forms of democracy in Viet Nam, forms which he felt were unsuited to the situation and which led to irresponsibility. In other words, what he anticipates and, I am quite certain that what he is inclined to support, is something on the Korean pattern in the hopes that such a regime can more effectively administer the nation and use aid more pointedly. He was, to some extent, also critical of the past administration of aid in Viet Nam. This he attributed both to the inadequacies of some of our people and to the type of Vietnamese administration which had evolved under Diem. The successor group which he anticipates, presumably, would be far more militant in its military policies than Diem. He spoke even of the possibilities of moving into Laos militarily if not into North Viet Nam by hit-and-run tactics.

(5) He is afraid of the Laotian solution for a somewhat ironic reason. He is afraid that the Communists will make it work. He believes they may do so as a preliminary for what would be a diplomatic offensive to bring about neutralism in South Viet Nam. These steps he believes are part of a plan for the conquest of Southeast Asia by the Communists without force. He expressed fears at the present tendencies in American policy. While understanding the political limitations on actions, he raised questions about where this course would eventually lead, insisting that if we continued in the Laotian pattern we might in time have no alternative but a nuclear war. He dated the development of this approach from the time MacArthur was prevented from bombing behind the Yalu. He obviously would like to see a much more militant policy. He mentioned the possible use of Chiang Kai-shek against the mainland, the use of Thai forces as well as the previously noted references to Vietnamese forces in Laos. He expressed the hope at the end of the conversation, once again, as he had done several times during the talk, that Senator Mansfield would not despair of the situation in Viet Nam and that he would recognize that there are good and able people and a considerable amount of leadership ability not now being used. This, again, I took to be a reference to the imminent possibilities of a coup against Diem.

1 Source: University of Montana Library, Mansfield Papers, Box 105, Folder 19. Unclassified.

2 Reference is presumably to the commencement speech that Mansfield presented at Michigan State University, June 10. See Document 214, footnote 4.

219. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, June 15, 1962, 11:30 a.m. 219. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, June 15, 1962, 11:30 a.m.1

Pentagon, Washington, June 15, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

[Here follows a list of participants including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, U. Alexis Johnson heading the Department of State delegation, Henry R. Rowen for the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and General Carter representing the CIA.]

I. Viet Nam

Admiral Anderson indicated that the JCS would appreciate Mr. Johnsonʼs thoughts on what course of action we would follow if Diem should pass from the scene. Mr. Johnson replied that last fall certain general guidance on the subject was passed to Ambassador Nolting.2 The thrust of this guidance is the provision of a high degree of flexibility and authority to the Ambassador as the man on the spot. He has a wide measure of discretion in determining who the most likely successor will and should be. His guidance, which has just been reviewed with him indicates that the most likely candidates for the present are Tho and Thuan. We recognize that the military would probably constitute the base of power for any successor regime. However, we have indicated that if at all possible a new regime should be given a civilian complexion with emphasis on the constitutional aspects. Diemʼs departure from the scene would place a great strain on our entire mission in Saigon and one man (the Ambassador) must be free to call the shots as he sees them.

Admiral Anderson asked if Tho would be the constitutional successor in the event of the death of Diem, and Mr. Johnson replied in the affirmative indicating that Tho was acceptable to us. Mr. Wood said that Tho and Thuan were in jail together under the French and are very close personally. We would have a satisfactory situation with Tho as the civilian head of government supported by big Minh heading the military element. We would like to use people presently in the government and avoid the use of local people who are not now active in the government. We do not wish to have the government taken over by politicians who are presently in exile because they are out of touch with the local situation and would compound the problems involved in a change of leadership. We would have to move rapidly if we are to avoid a Communist takeover, and we do not need a quarterback in Washington. The Ambassador has proper guidance and full authority to carry it out.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated matters.]

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Minutes. Top Secret. A notation on the source text indicates that this record was a Department of State draft, not cleared with the Department of Defense. The meeting was held in the Pentagon. A memorandum from Guthrie (S/S S) to Brubeck (S/S), June 15, indicates that the briefing material on U.S. policy in the event of loss of Diemʼs leadership was included only in Johnsonʼs briefing book (not found) in view of its “sensitivity.” (Ibid., State-JCS Meetings: Lot 70 D 328)

2 See the enclosure to the letter from McConaughy to Nolting in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 181.

220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 220. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 15, 1962—8:29 p.m.

1454. Task Force/VN. (a) Embtel 1605; (b) Toaid 1192.2

1. Following approvals of your requests are given herewith in view of political, psychological and security considerations outlined ref. (a), particularly urgency of security situation and undue GVN preoccupation with fiscal and foreign exchange problems to detriment Counter-Insurgency efforts: (a) Issuance of up to $10 million individually coded Counter-Insurgency procurement authorizations (PA/PRs) with elimination multi-code concept for FY 62. Multi-code concept permissible during FY 63.

(b) Approval in principle of $10 million purchase of piasters at mean rate of $73.50 (see para 2 below).

(c) Delegation to US AID Director of authority to waive limited worldwide procurement and certain AID Reg I requirements as they apply to up to $8 million Counter-Insurgency procurement authorizations.

(d) Delegation to US AID Director authority to waive limited worldwide procurement for up to $12 million commercial imports industrial machinery.

2. Piasters purchased in FY 62 for deposit US account must be committed for specific purposes in FY 62 or they will not be available for use in FY 63 without reappropriation due Sec. 1415 Supplemental Approp. Act. of 1953.3 Best course of action appears postponement actual obligation to FY 63. To extent a specific requirement exists for obligation of piasters in remainder FY 62, this amount can be purchased prior June 30. During negotiations you should make clear that above arrangements do not set precedent for any future cash grants to solve piaster budget problem.

3. You should make clear that waiver of limited worldwide procurement under paras. (c) and (d) are only possible because of present emergency and should in no sense be considered as precedent for future.

4. Details of conditions of waivers and certain negotiating and programming instructions follow in separate cable.4 Withhold negotiations until receipt.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-1462. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to CINCPAC for Polad. Drafted by Stoneman, and cleared with Peterson and with AID, DOD, Treasury, and BOB.

2 Telegram 1605 is printed as Document 216. Toaid 1192 has not been found.

3 P.L. 547, July 15, 1952 (66 Stat 637).

4 Document 225.

221. Letter From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 221. Letter From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, June 18, 1962.

Dear Fitz: At Cotʼs suggestion I spoke June 16th to the Counterinsurgency Group on my trip to Viet-Nam.2 The CIG is chaired by General Taylor and is usually attended at the Undersecretary level by the Departments concerned.

I stressed: 1. That the question of deciding whether the GVN was moving too fast in creating Strategic Hamlets was one which depended on many local variables and that the decisions should be made in Saigon. However, we could help the GVN move faster by supplying more piasters for locally obtainable products and services. The members of the Group appeared to agree.

2. That we would ask you to consider whether it would be feasible to make more bulldozers and dredges available (from those already in Viet-Nam) to speed the work of'6uilding ditches and walls around Strategic Hamlets.

3. I mentioned various items of military equipment which American and Vietnamese officers at the province level had particularly requested, emphasizing that I was not qualified to pass any judgments. The items were more grenade launchers (to lob grenades over the walls of rice paddies), more armalite rifles, more helicopters (requested by the Vietnamese), and more Caribou aircraft. General Taylor said that he believed more Caribou are available in Thailand and asked that the matter be explored.

. . . . . . .

Today, Joe Alsop gave a lunch for Colonel Thao which Cot, Mike Forrestal and I attended. Thao stressed the following points to Alsop and so I suppose more will be heard of these suggestions in Washington:

Thao is convinced that if the situation in Laos weakens further and the route through Attopeau into Kontum becomes more easily accessible to the Viet Cong, it must be expected that they will bring in increased numbers of mortars and recoilless artillery. Based on his own experiences in the Indochina War, he also felt that it was relatively easy for the Viet Cong to bring in a few hundred technicians to manufacture mortars, recoilless artillery, and projectiles in South Viet-Nam. Thao believes that the United States must therefore face the necessity of promptly making a further major increase in its efforts to assist the Vietnamese. He is convinced that this further effort should be concentrated on (a) artillery for the Vietnamese forces and more artillery training for Vietnamese officers in the United States; (b) a change in the employment of our helicopters, and an increase in their total numbers so that these would be available in larger numbers rather than used in small groups throughout the country; (c) a major increase in the Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps without a corresponding increase in ARVN.

After the lunch Thao told me that in his private opinion it would be very useful to invite Nhu to this country for a relatively quiet two weeks, primarily for informal, high-level consultations in Washington. He is concerned by Nhuʼs well-known anti-Americanism, by his thought processes which frequently parallel the Communists', and particularly by the fact that, in Thaoʼs opinion, Nhu thinks in terms of the type of tactics which the Communists employed a decade ago. He commented that Communist tactics had improved since then, but Nhuʼs had not. Thao emphasized frequently how much he, Thao, was impressed by the differences between the American and Vietnamese governments. He believes firmly that such a visit would be most useful in changing Nhuʼs views.3

If you think it would be useful to pursue any of the above, let us know by whatever channels seem best and we will get to work.

Yours very sincerely,

Ben

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350. Counterinsurgency Plan. Secret; Limit Distribution; Official-Informal.

2 No record of the June 16 meeting has been found.

3 In the margin next to this paragraph Nolting wrote: “I think Nhu should not go now (even if he wanted to) during present stage S.H. [Strategic Hamlet] program. FEN”.

222. Editorial Note 222. Editorial Note

On June 18, 1962, Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research Hilsman transmitted RFE-27 to Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Harriman. This was a progress report summarizing the major goals and accomplishments of the counter-insurgency program in South Vietnam. For text of this memorandum, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, pages 469-480.

223. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 223. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, June 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam: Dollar Aid to, and Waiver of “Buy American” Restrictions for South Vietnam (New York Times article, June 20, 1962)

Background

For the past month Ambassador Nolting, General Harkins, and the rest of the country team in South Vietnam have been pressing very hard for a rapid increase in the amount of local currency (piasters) available for counterinsurgency activities in South Vietnam. Diemʼs people have complained that, owing to a 4.8 billion piaster estimated budget deficit this year (U.S. estimate: 3 to 4 billion), decline in tax revenues, and the failure of the Vietnamese economy to absorb sufficient high cost American imports, there is a shortage of local currency. They also point out that their gold reserves have slipped from $200 million plus to $164 million.

Due to this situation the Diem regime asked for a $25-million cash grant and an across-the-board waiver of all “Buy American” restrictions.

The Defense Department and Secretary McNamara have argued strongly that local funds for counterinsurgency must be provided quickly, directly to the field and preferably under U.S. control. Secretary McNamara feels that this is of the highest importance, since it affects particularly those military programs which are vital at this time, i.e. aid to the Montagnards who defect from the Viet Cong and the strategic village and related programs.

The Aid Agency on purely economic grounds questioned the advisability of providing cash grants to Diem at this time, pointing out that the better way to generate local currency was to have the Diem Government borrow from the central bank, i.e. print money.

The State Department, while sympathetic to the Aid Agency position, came to the conclusion that the military urgency was so great and the political resistance of the Diem Government to deficit financing was so strong, that the following compromise on a one-shot basis offered the best solution: 1. An offer to Diem of a cash grant of $10 million in return for which Diem will deposit piasters at a rate of approximately 73 to the dollar in an account which will be available to the United States for counterinsurgency purposes in Vietnam. (This, I gather, would be a direct charge on our balance of payments.)

2. The waiver of the “Buy American” restrictions with respect to $8 million of funds already obligated but not yet used to finance the importation of items useful in the counterinsurgency campaign (i.e. fertilizers, barbed wire, etc.) which would generate an equivalent amount of local currency, also to be used by the U.S.

3. The waiver of “Buy American” restrictions on $12 million of industrial imports to bolster the general economy of South Vietnam. This is new money and together with the funds referred to in (2) above would also constitute a charge against our balance of payments to the extent that imports were made from countries other than the United States. The maximum potential gold drain is thus on the order of $30 million.

Action Taken So Far

There has been an exchange of cables with Nolting which has resulted in Noltingʼs having been given authority generally to negotiate within the above three actions. Negotiations are not to start, however, until the State Department has sent further details on certain technical points. I have asked that these negotiations be held up pending your review.

Comment

This problem boils down essentially to a political decision. I am told that the Diem regime is adamant in their refusal to finance the local currency requirements of counterinsurgency operation by increasing their budgetary deficit. This appears to be the only other quick way of generating the piasters without the United States simply purchasing them for dollars. If we refuse a cash grant and refuse to waive the “Buy American” restrictions, I am told that Diem would not finance the counterinsurgency programs. This is blackmail, and I am personally convinced that our objective should be to force Diem to increase his economyʼs contribution to the war effort by increased taxes and deficit financing if that is necessary. Not only are cash grants from us a charge on our balance of payments, but, perhaps even more importantly, they may encourage socially undesirable activities in war time, such as the importation of some luxuries and possibly the flight of capital. Despite feeling this way, I did approve the sending of a telegram to Nolting authorizing him to begin negotiations on the above described program.2 I was mainly moved by the need at this time for speed as expressed by the military. It seemed that this was perhaps not the best time to force the political issue. Since no steps have been taken, the decision can be modified or reversed; and even if you approve the currency proposal, you can and, I hope would direct the Departments and the country team to raise the whole issue of deficit financing with Diem in the strongest possible terms, so that the question of cash grants and waivers will not come up again. This should be done simultaneously with the current negotiations.

Specifically, I would recommend that you first discuss the general political and financial problems of South Vietnam with Secretary McNamara in order to ascertain how strongly he feels about the necessity of swallowing this bitter pill now. If you are convinced of the military and immediate political necessity to go ahead, then you might approve the program described above with an injunction to the Departments concerned and to the field to tell Diem that we are simply not prepared to continue our support of their war unless he does his share. The United States has been forced into deficit financing and a drain on its gold reserves in order to meet its commitments throughout the free world. The least we can expect is for those Governments whom we help to take their fair share of the burden.

One last point on the balance of payments and the waiver of “Buy American” restrictions. I have asked why it is not possible for the American commodities whose importation to South Vietnam we finance to be sold locally at lower prices, thus avoiding having to buy them from other countries. I have not got a satisfactory explanation of why this isn't possible, and would hope you would approve my telling State that this should be done unless Nolting can give a convincing explanation why not. This would save up to $12 million of the $30 million charge against the balance of payments. It would also be an additional cost to the U.S. internal budget.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret.

2 Presumably a reference to Document 212.

224. Editorial Note 224. Editorial Note

According to a letter of June 21, 1962, from Ball to McNamara, Lemnitzer, Taylor, McCone, Murrow, and Hamilton, Secretary of State Rusk on that day issued an Action directive establishing a Task Force on Southeast Asia. This group, chaired by Assistant Secretary Harriman, supplanted the Vietnam Task Force, which now became the Vietnam Working Group under C. Ben Wood as Executive Director. It was one of two components of the Southeast Asia Task Force. The other was a Cambodia-Thailand-Laos-Burma Working Group under H.L.T. Koren as Executive Director.

Besides Harriman, the Task Force included Sterling Cottrell as Deputy Chairman and representatives of the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Agency for International Development, and the United States Information Agency. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field: Far East (IAF), 1962)

According to a memorandum of June 21 from Brubeck to Harriman, the functions of the Southeast Asia Task Force were: 1. To plan programs for the area and for individual countries within the area;

2. To coordinate execution of the programs;

3. To develop policy recommendations for the area;

4. To keep the Special Group (CI) informed of all activities related to its sphere of jurisdiction. (Department of State, S/S Policy Briefing Books: Lot 66 D 219, Box 219)

225. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 225. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 21, 1962—4:46 p.m.

1474. Embtel 1626.2

1. Because blanket waivers of limited worldwide procurement policy represent serious departure from our basic policy to improve US balance of payments and because of internal political problems, now becomes necessary to withdraw authority to import on worldwide basis up to $12 million worth of industrial machinery (Deptel 1454).3 In addition waiver for industrial machinery would weaken our hand in arranging DAC countries assistance in program loans to Viet-Nam. Subject will be pressed by us in early meeting with participating countries. We hope to get European countries and Japan to finance many of these items.

2. We fully cognizant your efforts stimulate accelerated action counterinsurgency and assuage GVN preoccupation with dangers of deficit financing.

3. From US standpoint, our immediate objectives would be satisfied if agreement reached on (a) counterinsurgency PA procedure and (b) $10 million piastre purchase proposal. These two elements would take certain measure counterinsurgency funding out of competition other funding requirements and give it special status as to priority and normal procedures. It would also provide more effective mechanism.

4. GVN must face up to deficit problem; US not prepared grant waivers en bloc or make further cash grants in face pressing US and international considerations. $10 million piastre purchase plus US military purchases in VN will result in significant increase previously unanticipated free dollars.

5. Would not object proposals for shifting to commercial import program additional acceptable items. This would permit GVN financing of imports from Europe and Japan with GVN foreign exchange.

6. We prepared give sympathetic consideration other means you may deem useful in overcoming GVN concern its budgetary problem. Food for troops might offer possibility.

7. We are willing to maintain in force at reduced level the waiver granted for counterinsurgency imports on the understanding that the waiver will be utilized only in rare cases where the time factor does not allow timely delivery or when goods not available from an eligible source. Request prompt arrangements be made to plan requirements sufficiently in advance so that utilization this waiver authority will be extremely rare ($3 million maximum suggested).

8. If there is a priority requirement for commodities to be financed in commercial import program which cannot be obtained from a limited worldwide source, we would require more details concerning the type of commodities required and the extent to which alternate sources of financing have been explored to allow AID/W to consider waivers on a case by case basis. Note this connection that we have recently granted waiver for $4-1/2 million for spare parts but only for non-US machinery and for machinery which cannot be obtained in US.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-1962. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Furst, Silver, and Cottrell, and cleared with Peterson (State), Pelikan (Treasury), Furst (AID), Heinz (DOD), and Forrestal (White House). Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Dated June 19, it pointed out that a contradiction existed between the procurement policy waiver granted by telegram 1454 (Document 220) and a subsequent AID message that severely limited the waiver in practice and requested clarification before beginning negotiations with the Government of Vietnam.

3 Document 220.

226. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 226. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 25, 1962—7 p.m.

1659. Dr Gordon Smith, American medical missionary from Danang, visited me June 22. Dr. Smith has lived and worked in Viet Nam for some thirty years, mainly among the Montagnard population in central Viet Nam. In summary, main points which Dr Smith made were: 1. Military situation and aggressiveness of GVN military and paramilitary forces have greatly improved during past six months. He thought that without increased US assistance last winter, Viet Cong would by now have taken over SVN. He was especially complimentary of work of Special Forces Units.

2. Nevertheless, popular support for GVN continued to decrease alarmingly in central coastal provinces (Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Binh Dinh, Phu Yen) where Dr Smith has wide first-hand knowledge of conditions. He attributed this to belief by people of Communist allegations against Diem and his family and government; to lack of GVN contact with people; and to lack of efficiency in GVNʼs execution of plans for benefit of people. He said that most of his own converts. both Vietnamese and Montagnards, several now themselves Christian missionaries, were bitterly anti-government and thus inclined to believe promises of Viet Cong that liberation Front would be better than present government.

3. He then said that it was his strong impression that American military influence in central Viet Nam was pressing Vietnamese military in direction of a military coup d'etat against the GVN. I questioned him very closely on this. He said that many US military advisors of his own acquaintance, whose work in military field he greatly admired, had said repeatedly in presence Vietnamese officers that anti-guerrilla war was being waged in the teeth of a predominantly hostile population, made so by the inefficiency and ineffectiveness of the GVN; and that on this basis military campaigns were bound to be unsuccessful or ineffective. He said that this was almost the universal theme of American military officers in his area. He said that Vietnamese military officers, who generally inclined to this view themselves, took the American officers' remarks to mean US military advocacy of an ARVN military coup d'etat. Dr Smith said that he himself thought that military rule would be more effective and more popular than that of the present regime. I told Dr Smith, that if his observations were correct, this was a most serious matter. I explained to him US policy of support to SVN through the constitutionally elected government, and the reasons therefore. I also mentioned certain plans, agreements, programs, and some progress in improving the performance of the GV on the civil side. (Comment: Dr Smithʼs observations, which were sincerely given and apparently without any ulterior motive, may indeed account for some of the hesitancy and suspicion on part of GVN, more noticeable in recent weeks.)

Dr Smith also discussed at length the Montagnard problem. He believes that only through generous government measures to feed, house, clothe, and eventually resettle the mountain people who have come into GVN controlled territory, can others be induced to escape from Viet Cong control. He also expressed view that tribes people had very little, if any, political convictions and would go along with the side which seemed the stronger.

On the whole, Dr Smithʼs views on the situation in central coastal provinces were discouraging. Since he intends to continue his work in Viet Nam, and is even now seeking a grant of land from GVN to establish a leper hospital near Danang, it is very important that his views as summarized above be closely protected.

I have discussed para 3 above with Gen. Harkins who is planning a trip to area involved and will take appropriate measures.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/6-2562. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

227. Memorandum From the Special Consultant for Counterinsurgency, United States Operation Mission (Phillips) to the Acting Director of the Mission (Fippin) 227. Memorandum From the Special Consultant for Counterinsurgency, United States Operation Mission (Phillips) to the Acting Director of the Mission (Fippin)1

Saigon, June 25, 1962.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu on 22 June 1962

1. Mr. Nhu said that although he had originated the strategic hamlet program, it was only an idea, a “pipe-dream”, to him until the last four months. Since that time he has been making constant trips to the provinces, particularly to the south. During his more recent trips, all ceremonies were eliminated and he insisted on only single course meals. Most of his time was consumed by visits to hamlets and meetings with strategic hamlet teams, hamlet chiefs, province chiefs, district chiefs and committees. These discussions often lasted as long as five hours. He found the trips very tiring but at the same time exhilarating because he had been able to test out his theories about strategic hamlets through actual experience.

2. He viewed the strategic hamlets as a means to defeat communism while, at the same fume, overcoming the problems of an underdeveloped country. These problems, in addition to communism, were separatism among various groups of the population and inherited systems of privileges. He said the imposition of democracy at the top in an under-developed country brought anarchy which resulted in dictatorship. Democracy must be instituted at a level where the people can understand it and where it can be a revolution to eliminate the existing system of privileges and the defeatism and separatism which exists in the minds of the people.

3. In time of war people think you must suppress democracy to win. To the contrary, he said, we shall use the war against communism as a means to introduce democracy and we shall use democracy to win the war. This is the strategic concept.

4. Free elections of the hamlet chief and hamlet council are the key to success of the strategic hamlets. The first thing Nhu asks when he visits a hamlet and talks to the hamlet council is how were the elections conducted. He tells the district committees (for strategic hamlets) that hamlet governments elected by a show of hands are only provisional. If they are not sure of a hamlet, they may have an initial provisional electron through a show of hands. However, they must have an electron by secret ballot before the strategic hamlet (civic action) team goes on to another hamlet and before the hamlet can receive a charter (which Nhu describes as a social contract between the province and the hamlet). He tells the cadres working in the hamlet that they must not tell the people who to vote for; otherwise the election defeats its own purpose. If the cadres want a particular person to be elected, that person must prove himself to the people by working harder than the others. If he deserves to be elected, he will be elected.

5. In answer to a question whether he did not think the Government should attract the Viet Cong to surrender, he said that this was very necessary. He said he had indications that the strategic hamlets were demoralizing the Viet Cong. He felt that the Government should urge them to surrender and rejoin their families. Special fortified or combat hamlets might be established with these families as volunteers to fight the Viet Cong.

6. Mr. Nhu said he was not satisfied with the concept of the defended hamlet as it had been applied so far in Vietnam. He did not believe that uprooting people was the best answer—it resulted in too many problem and was too expensive. He had discussed a new idea with the strategic hamlet committee during its meeting Friday morning. He wants to induce young families to volunteer to establish defended hamlets; then attract people to these hamlets from the Viet Cong areas. These new hamlets would be similar to the Israeli Kibutzes. Each defended hamlet would have several commando groups similar to those in operation now on the high plateau, which would ensure security outside the fortified hamlet.

7. Mr. Nhu felt that the two major weapons which could be used to win the war were the strategic hamlets and the commandos. He wanted each hamlet or at least every village to have a commando team which would operate as guerrillas, in similar fashion to Viet Cong tactics. He was very impressed with the Montagnard teams he had seen on the high plateau recently. This, he felt, was the answer to carrying the offensive to the Communists. He believed that harassment by the commandos would force the Viet Cong to group for protection, and when this happened the Army could strike with its mobile forces carried by helicopters.

8. He said he had asked some of the men being trained by our Special Forces what they thought of the Americans and got back the reply that they weren't like the French at all but were their friends, ate their food and worked alongside them. Mr. Nhu felt there should be more Americans like this in the countryside.

9. Finally, he felt that placing the divisional commanders in charge of the strategic hamlet program in their tactical zones would be very helpful. The Army could thus give the additional support to the program to make it succeed.

Comment

From experience gained in other countries, particularly in the Philippines, the most urgent need in defeating a Communist guerrilla movement is a firm political base among the people. With most of the Vietnamese village people neutral in the present struggle, such a base does not yet exist in Vietnam.

The strategic hamlet program, as Mr. Nhu conceives of it, presents an excellent chance to build a political base of popular support at the hamlet level. The danger is that the hamlet elections, which are the key to the success of the program, may not be genuine. The central problem is that many Vietnamese lack experience and confidence in democratic procedures. It is easier for them to tell their people what to do. And they are fearful of making a mistake, particularly of ever electing a Viet Cong.

My superficial observation after inspection trips to Phu Yen and Tay Ninh provinces and considerable talk with local officials is that too many strategic hamlet teams are forcing these elections, even though they told me that all elections were now being held by secret ballot.

Without offending the Vietnamese, we can do much to lend them moral as well as material support in the strategic hamlet effort. My impression is that they are in an experimental frame of mind. Most of them know that they must in the final analysis, win the enthusiastic support of the villagers if the Communists are to be defeated. However, they tend to become preoccupied with the control or repressive aspects of the program. We must help them learn how to generate and keep alive the enthusiasm of their own people, knowing that without strong popular support no amount of men or material will win this war.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350.Counterinsurgency Plan. Secret. Copies were sent to the Ambassador; the Deputy Chief of Mission; Chief, MAAG; Chief, MACV; and Chief, OSA.

228. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Counselor for Political Affairs in Vietnam (Mendenhall) and the Chinese Ambassador in Vietnam (Yuen Tse Kien), Saigon, June 26, 1962 228. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Counselor for Political Affairs in Vietnam (Mendenhall) and the Chinese Ambassador in Vietnam (Yuen Tse Kien), Saigon, June 26, 19621

Saigon, June 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Current Situation in Viet-Nam

(Note: During a farewell call on the Chinese Ambassador he decided to engage in a very frank exchange on the situation in Viet-Nam. At the conclusion, he expressed the desire that his views not be repeated to others. Therefore, this memorandum should be regarded as containing very sensitive information and recipients are requested not to give it any further distribution.)

In an exchange assessing the strategic hamlets program the Chinese Ambassador expressed serious concern that GVN Minister of Interior, Bui Van Luong, in his recent speech on the program before the Lions Club, placed economic and social development of the hamlets in the fourth phase of the program. The Ambassador repeatedly emphasized that economic and social works to improve the lot of the peasants should be in the very first phase because they are essential for winning the people to the support of the Government. He said the Vietnamese are a good people, but they have been buffeted and forced to work for both sides in conflicts for 17 years since 1945. Now that they are being asked once again by the GVN to provide work and make other sacrifices in connection with the strategic hamlets program, they must be given some compensation for what they are being asked to do. If it is not demonstrated to them that they are going to get something in the way of concrete benefits out of this program, the risk is great that the strategic hamlets program will drive them over to the enemy.

The Ambassador then said that it did not actually take much to gain the loyalty of the Vietnamese peasants because they now have so little. He mentioned the usual type of benefit which we have been urging on the GVN, such as agricultural credits, schools, dispensaries and agricultural tools, and also mentioned that he thought a little cement to enable the peasants to pave the floors of their huts and thus keep them dry underneath would be an extremely useful means of attracting support.

He indicated that it is up to us Americans to find the means of inducing the GVN to undertake an adequate economic and social program. He suggested the advisability of avoiding any approach based on politics or principles, since either would ruffle GVN feathers, and thought perhaps the best means might be simply to go to the GVN and state that we have the money for such a program and letʼs get started with one in specific places.

The Ambassador stated that President Diem is a fine man but he thinks only in black and white without any shades or nuances. The Ambassador said he had talked with Vice President Tho about the reported number of around 25,000 Viet-Cong, and indicated that many of these are Hoa Hao and Cao Dai rather than Viet-Cong. He said the Vice President had agreed with this analysis as well as with the Ambassadorʼs view that it would be desirable to win over by compromise the non-VC fighting against the Government and thus reduce the proportions of the guerrilla problem to those who are actually Communists. Since President Diem, however, sees things only in black and white he refuses to make the compromise necessary for this purpose.

The Ambassador also indicated the, the President puts too much emphasis on the “moral side.” The President is stressing constantly what he expects the people to do on behalf of the nation, but he should be outlining to the peasants what the Government is going to do to better their condition. The Ambassador concluded sorrowfully, however, that President Diemʼs nature cannot be changed and therefore effort must be made to find other means to meet these problems. He reverted to his suggestion about the need for U.S. efforts to sponsor economic and social development in the hamlets. He indicated that he himself cannot influence the GVN directly because he is obliged to talk very circuitously with most GVN officials. (This may have been an oblique reference by the Ambassador to the pressures which can be placed by the GVN on the Chinese community in Viet-Nam unless the Chinese Ambassador treads carefully.)

The Chinese Ambassador emphasized that the war in Viet-Nam should not be permitted to drag on too long. Already, he said, some Vietnamese are beginning to think in terms of neutralization of Viet-Nam. They ask that if it can be done in Laos, why not in Viet-Nam? When I questioned him more closely on this, the Ambassador said he has heard this view particularly from representatives of the old scholar class and not thus far from those who are politically active. He indicated that in his view, however, these thoughts of neutralization would spread as people became weary of the continual killing.

I asked the Ambassador whether those who are talking about neutralization are thinking just in terms of the South or all of Viet-Nam. He said that most of them are thinking of neutralization initially of the South with the thought that Viet-Nam might eventually be reunified over the longer term. A few are thinking in terms of early neutralization of both parts of Viet-Nam.

Comment: I was struck that for the first time during my three years' service in Viet-Nam I had received serious indication that neutralization is beginning to be considered by some Vietnamese as a solution to the Vietnamese problem. It was even more striking that this indication came in two conversations, one immediately after the other on the same day, with Vice President Tho and the Chinese Ambassador.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret; Limited Distribution. This memorandum and Document 229 were transmitted to General Taylor in the White House by Rostow on July 31. Covering the two memoranda of conversation was an intra-office transmittal slip from Taylorʼs office with the following message: “These memoranda deserve special note. I have marked key parts, but suggest all are worth reading. Major point made is need to accelerate CI effort and more liberal social-economic actions are mandatory. Time is of essence because of growing sentiment for neutral solution. Perhaps latter point is means to press Diem?” Also sent to Nolting, Truehart, Richardson, Harkins, Weede, the Vietnam Working Group in Washington, INR, and the Embassy in Taipei.

229. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Counselor for Political Affairs in Vietnam (Mendenhall) and Vice President Tho, Saigon, June 26, 1962 229. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Counselor for Political Affairs in Vietnam (Mendenhall) and Vice President Tho, Saigon, June 26, 19621

Saigon, June 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Current Situation in Viet-Nam

(Note: During my farewell call on the Vice President he promptly suggested we drop our official capacities and frankly discuss the Vietnamese situation as man to man. It is therefore requested that the recipients of this memorandum regard it as containing very sensitive information and make no further distribution of it.)

After discussing the morale and the military situation at the Vice Presidentʼs request, I stated that I thought that the strategic hamlet concept represented a fine idea but I had rather deep reservations over the way in which it is being executed. The Vice President immediately expressed complete agreement and stressed the importance of executing this program in a manner which will not alienate the peasants. He stated several times that it is absolutely necessary that the peasants be paid for the work which they are doing on the strategic hamlets and took the position that this is indispensable if they are to be won over to the Government. He said they cannot be asked to make further sacrifices without payment. He noted that he is receiving many complaints, both oral and written, from people in the rural areas about the way the strategic hamlet program is being executed. He referred to the recent ambush attack on a military convoy 1-1/2 miles from Ben Cat in which two U.S. officer advisors were killed and pointed to this as an instance where the people in the area could have given the Government forces advance warning, but did not because they had not been won over.

I said it is important to establish priorities for the construction of strategic hamlets and indicated that we are emphasizing this constantly at the various layers of the GVN. The Vice President agreed stating that there are insufficient military forces, civilian cadres, money, etc., to try to do too many strategic hamlets at once. It is far better to carry out the program slowly but surely than to try to push it to a hasty conclusion. In the end time would have been saved by the former method.

I stated that establishing priorities requires a rational organization. on the part of the Government. Again, the Vice President agreed but added with emphasis and repeated it several times, a rational organization without interference. He referred to the fact that about a year ago he was offered the post of Coordinating Secretary of State for Security and said that he had refused it precisely because he knew he would not be permitted to do the job without interference by others in the GVN.

We both agreed that we do not really know how to solve this organizational problem of the GVN. I referred to USOMʼs effort to provide resources directly to the province chiefs as a means of getting around the organizational problem. The Vice President said that this would work, however, only as long as there is approval in principle by the central government of a particular operation, since otherwise Saigon will frustrate this method of meeting the problem.

The Vice President then said, however, that there is one extremely important way in which the United States can use money directly and effectively in the provinces—in the intelligence field. He said that if the proper rapport is established between U.S. advisors in the provinces with the province chiefs, they will find it possible to hand over money directly to the latter for the improvement of intelligence networks through adequate payment to informers. To establish the right kind of rapport the Vice President emphasized the importance of assigning Vietnamese language officers to these advisory positions. Recognizing the practical difficulty in obtaining enough such officers to meet all the requirements, he said it would be sufficient to assign one rotating language officer to three or four provinces for this purpose. The Vice President strongly stressed that at the present time the intelligence agencies of the GVN scarcely know the enemy at all. He asserted that information of a reliable kind can be obtained if sufficient funds are available to send agents into the enemy areas to collect it. The Vice President indicated that he could not overstress the importance of this and suggested that, if necessary, we divert to this intelligence purpose part of the funds that we are expanding in Viet-Nam for other things. He indicated he was not thinking of small amounts of money, but in terms of many millions of piasters.

Since the Vice President had brought up the influence of money in connection with the success of both the strategic hamlets and the intelligence programs, I felt it was important to determine whether he considered this monetary factor of major importance in both central and southern Viet-Nam. His immediate response was that he was thinking particularly of the people in the southern area since they were the ones he knows from his long experience as a province chief. He added that if the southern area could be held against the Communists it would not be too hard to hold the center, since the south provides the bread basket of the country.

The Vice President declared that it is important to act quickly in taking the proper measures to deal with the war. He warned that it should not be allowed to drag on too long because that would discourage the people, and at this point he warned with solemnity that the “Lao solution could be catching.” He also indicated that it is important to bear in mind that during the resumed Geneva Conference on Laos2 the Viet-Cong may well try to pull off a sensational coup, such as, for example the capture of Pleiku.

The Vice President indicated that he hoped that we do not believe the figures put out by the GVN on Viet-Cong casualties. He said many of these casualties were not VC at all but members of the population killed by the GVN forces. If all these casualties were VC, he said, the war would be over.

(It is of interest that a reliable American source told me about two weeks ago that Vice President Tho had just said to him in a conversation that, if another coup attempt comes which appears likely to eliminate President Diem, Ngo Dinh Nhu will see to it that the Vice President is eliminated through assassination during the attendant confusion. When the Vice President was asked why then he did not take measures to protect himself, he replied stoically that he preferred not to spend all of his time under guard, but to live as normally as possible. The Vice President said he would be prepared to die, but would have preferred to be killed by the Viet-Cong rather than by “one of our own.”)

Comment: The Vice President would, under normal constitutional processes, succeed to the Presidency if anything happened to the President. Elimination of the Vice President would leave the succession open to a man Nhu could control.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-016-69. Secret; Limited Distribution. See footnote 1, Document 228, concerning routing of this memorandum. Also sent to Nolting, Trueheart, Richardson, Harkins, Weede, the Vietnam Working Group in Washington, and INR.

2 The Geneva Conference on Laos resumed on July 2 and concluded on July 23.

230. Status Report on Southeast Asia, Prepared by the Southeast Asia Task Force 230. Status Report on Southeast Asia, Prepared by the Southeast Asia Task Force1

Washington, June 27, 1962.

[Here follow sections on Thailand, Laos, Burma, and Cambodia.]

VIET-NAM

General Situation Evaluation

The GVN is making progress against the VC, but it is still too early to predict assured success in the counterinsurgency effort. The strategic hamlet program and the two clear-and-hold operations now under way are moving forward well and seem to promise good results. With US assistance, the RVNAF has significantly reduced its reaction time in recent months and appears to have upset the VC timetable.

Government efficiency is slowly improving. By patient pressure, the mission has been able to eliminate or shortcut some of the bureaucratic delays, to speed supplies and funds to the clear-and-hold operations and to the Montagnard refugees. The present mass movement of the Montagnards out of VC controlled areas may represent a major victory for the GVN if it can provide prompt relief measures and train the Montagnard irregulars.

On the negative side, GVN control of the rural areas is probably still being eroded faster than it is being reinforced. The VC are attacking steadily and frequently and retain the capacity to strike in battalion strength at several points simultaneously. In spite of heavy losses, they seem not to have been seriously hurt. Perhaps most important, the VC apparently retain the aura of invincibility, while the GVN is making only very slow progress in gaining the sympathy of the rural population in some areas.

A major unsolved problem is the generation of piasters for the local costs of the counterinsurgency programs. The GVN, and President Diem in particular, are fiscally very conservative and fear further deficit financing to the point of cutting back on essential war measures to avoid further deficits. If Ambassador Nolting is able to keep the momentum of the counterinsurgency effort going with the emergency measures we authorized last week, we must then engage in serious talks with the GVN on the long term financing of the program.

The GVN scored an important psychological and political victory on the international scene with the June 25 publication of the long awaited ICC report on DRV subversion and aggression.

Progress on Action Program

1. VC Activity.

Viet Cong attacks continue to be concentrated in the III Corps area. Principal targets are still outposts, strategic hamlets, communication routes, and agrovilles. During the first five months of the year, armed attacks averaged 124 per week. In the period 5-11 June, armed attacks dropped to 101, 73 less than the previous all-time high of the preceding week. There were 91 armed attacks June 12-18. VC casualties for the year now stand at 11,925, including 8,100 killed. GVN losses for the year stand at 1,933 killed in action.

2. Clear and Hold Operations.

Operations Hai Yen (in Central Viet Nam) and Binh Minh or Sunrise (northwest of Saigon in Binh Duong province) continue as planned. As of June 15, military operations in the Hai Yen area were 30 days ahead of schedule and 84 of the planned 270 strategic hamlets had been set up. Financial bottlenecks which had hampered the Hai Yen operation in earlier stages appear to be solved. The Province Chief now has Saigonʼs assurances of funds to carry the operation through June 30 and a local GVN-US committee has been set up on the ground to approve expenditures. Resettlement of 12,000-16,000 people will be underway before the end of the month. The VC are reacting by increased activities in the area.

In Operation Binh Minh, a fourth strategic hamlet will probably be set up this month. The population in the first two hamlets to be established are now receiving simple basic self-defense training but have not been armed. Indemnities for relocation losses have been paid to all eligible families in these hamlets.

3. Australian Trainers.

The GVN has agreed to integration of the Australian military training group into US programs. The Australians will bear all costs of their mission, which may be on the ground by the end of August.

4. Piaster Problem.

In an effort to prevent delay in the counterinsurgency program Ambassador Nolting has been authorized to purchase 10 million dollars worth of piasters from the Viet Nam National Bank to be used in counterinsurgency programs and to set up a special counterinsurgency stockpile of about 10 million dollars worth of materiel. Waivers on counterinsurgency imports for this stockpile will be granted where the time factor is vital or where essential goods cannot be procured from an eligible source. This waiver authority is to be used only in rare instances, with a suggested ceiling of three million dollars.

While we understand Diemʼs fear of further deficit financing, the consensus here is that the GVN can undertake a much larger measure of deficit spending without serious danger of inflation. The US position is that the GVN must face up to the problem and we intend to initiate talks with the GVN to this end.

5. Montagnard Program.

On June 23 a joint GVN-US interagency team was despatched to several provinces to gather information on the Montagnard problem and lay the groundwork for fast joint action. USOM is studying the possibility of a 50 million piaster interim project agreement, with specific amounts to be released as information and plans are developed.

6. Communications Programs.

As of June 15, 670 of the planned 2,500 village radios had been installed. On June 12 a contract was signed with Philco for the construction of the telecommunications system between Saigon and Bangkok. Paving on the new runway at the Saigon airport is expected to be complete by the end of the month.

7. Identity Cards.

More than 2 million of the planned 7 million identity cards have been issued. The program has already resulted in the capture of a number of VC agents and ARVN deserters.

8. ICC Report.

The ICC report charging the DRV with a deliberate campaign aimed at the violent overthrow of the GVN and citing the GVN for importing military equipment and personnel above the limits imposed by the Geneva Accords was made public June 25. The Department, the GVN and the Canadians made statements on the release of the report, pointing out its significance and the cause and effect nature of the DRV attack and the increased US assistance to Viet-Nam.

All of our diplomatic posts outside the Bloc have been issued discretionary authority to bring the report to the attention of their host government, and USIA is seeking to maximize the impact of the report through its programming.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 264, Followup. Secret.

231. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 231. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 29, 1962—3:04 p.m.

1511. To Ambassador from Ball. The President desires that you be aware that he personally made decision against providing blanket authority to grant waivers from limited worldwide procurement policy for up to twelve million dollars of industrial machinery. Deptel 1474.2

He also has made decision against direct purchase of twelve million dollars worth of piasters to fund items in GVN military budget proposed urtel 1663.3

He desires that you understand and inform the GVN that these decisions were made in the light of our present basic policy to improve the US balance of payments position.

Further he is not persuaded that the above two proposals are necessary to accomplish your purposes.

He believes that any delays or cutbacks on the part of the GVN in providing piasters for necessary efforts to defeat the Viet Cong are incomprehensible in the light of the present grave threat to the independence of Viet-Nam and in view of the enormous quantities of economic and military aid we are providing.

FYI: Your discretion as how to inform Diem of substance this message. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Confidential, Priority. Drafted by Cottrell, cleared with Fowler (AID), Peterson, Wood, Little (State), Diehl (Treasury), Bundy (DOD), Kaysen and Bundy (White House), and approved by Ball. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 225.

3 Telegram 1663 from Saigon, June 27, proposed, in view of the withdrawal of $12 million waiver authority, that the U.S. Government buy $12 million worth of piasters to be used for military support of construction, facilities maintenance, and MAAG support. (Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051K/6-2762)

232. Memorandum From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (Timmes) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 232. Memorandum From the Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam (Timmes) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Saigon, June 30, 1962.

Reference cable number Embtel 1659 to Department, dated 25 June 1962,2 concerning conversation between you and Reverend Smith at Danang.

On last Tuesday and Wednesday, I visited the Hue area and spoke with the Senior Advisors from the I Corps area. None of the officers to whom I have spoken, including Colonel Patten, were familiar with the fact that any officer has spoken in a derogatory manner concerning the present regime, and each officer expressed amazement and surprise.

As you have been previously informed, since August 1961, I have made a particular point of personally orienting all the new personnel assigned to MAAG. A major part of this orientation is devoted to explaining the U.S. position concerning our unqualified support of the present government of Vietnam. It is particularly emphasized that President Diem and his associates have, since 1954, been faced with both the war against the sects and more recently with the Communist insurgency. It is further explained to the new MAAG personnel that, in my opinion, President Diem has proved himself to be the greatest anti-Communist fighter in the world today. Also, that no other country is so actively opposing Communism or making an effort of the same magnitude to remain a part of the Free World. I also explain that the reason for my orientation concerning the GVN is that certain of the critical articles appearing in the various news media fail to take into account the tremendous achievements of the government. Then I again discuss the position of the United States with respect to supporting the legally authorized government and explain that the consequences of failing to support the GVN can only result to the profit of the VC.

As you know, I make frequent visits to the various MAAG detachments. On the occasions of each visit, I always assemble the officers and enlisted men for the purpose of discussing MAAG operations and on each of these occasions, I further stress the fact that MAAG is here only to advise in military matters and is not concerned in any way with local politics. Also, I again point out the position of the U.S. Government and our adherence to this position.

I want to assure you that we in MAAG are doing everything possible to further your policy of supporting the GVN. Please be assured of my continuous effort in this matter.

Charles J. Timmes
Maj Gen, USA

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, SGN (62) 19-GVN. Top Secret. Attached to the source text was a copy of a memorandum from Nolting to Timmes, June 30, thanking Timmes for his report.

2 Document 226.

VI. Final Report of the Vietnam Task Force and the Establishment of the Vietnam Working Group JulyVI. Final Report of the Vietnam Task Force and the Establishment of the Vietnam Working Group July

233. Final Report of the Vietnam Task Force

Washington, July 1, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 219. Secret. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1981, 591A. A copy of the report was transmitted to McGeorge Bundy on July 11 with a note that the programs and momentum generated by the Task Force would be continued by a new Working Group on Vietnam under the newly created Task Force on Southeast Asia.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 6, 1962—3:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/7-562. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner on July 5; cleared with Cottrell, Cleveland, Wood, and S/S. Also sent to Geneva and repeated to London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

235. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, July 6, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.51K/7-662. Secret; Official-Informal.

236. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 7, 1962, noon.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

237. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, July 7, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: Lot 66 A 3542 Vietnam 1962, 000.1-091. Also sent to the Deputy Secretary of Defense. Signed “Ed”. On the source text McNamara wrote: “7/15 To Gen Lansdale. An excellent set of questions Ed—it is this kind of info I need & am not receiving—please discuss with Joe Carroll.” At the bottom of the source text Lansdale noted: “Discussed with Gen. Carroll. He said he would include this in further steps he is taking. He notes that some adding of intelligence & operations is needed.”

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Saigon, July 9, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 International Pol Rels—350 Laos Conf. In telegram 24, July 8, the Embassy in Saigon reported that Nolting and Harkins thought the draft letter transmitted in Document 234 was excellent. (Telegram 24; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series) But the following day Harriman cabled a new text from Geneva and stated that the old one was too general to be effective. (Confe 1196 and 1197; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/7-962) The source text is the same as that suggested by Harriman except for minor changes.

239. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 10, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/7-1062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Nolting. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 Laos Conference) Repeated to Paris, London, Geneva, Vientiane, Bangkok, and CINCPAC.

240. Editorial Note

241. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Special Correspondence, Bowles. Confidential.

242. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 16, 1962—5:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/7-1662. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Wood, cleared with AID, DOD/ISA, and Cottrell, and repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

243. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/7-1662. Secret; Noforn. Signed by Hilsman and sent through S/S.

244. Memorandum for the Record

Saigon, July 31, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: 65 A 3501, 092.Vietnam. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record. Copies were sent to McNamara, Gilpatric, Lemnitzer, William Bundy, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense. The source text bears the stamp “Mr. Bundy has seen."

245. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 20, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/7-2062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

246. Memorandum of Conversation, United States Delegation Building, Geneva, July 22, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Geneva, July 22, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, July 1962. Secret. Drafted by Sullivan on July 23, approved in S on July 24. Copies were sent to Saigon, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, and Geneva. Secretary Rusk was in Geneva for the final sessions of the Laos Conference. The meeting was held in the U.S. Delegation building.

247. Memorandum of a Conversation, Barringtonʼs Suite, Hotel Suisse, Geneva, July 22, 1962, 2:30 p.m.

Geneva, July 22, 1962, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Columbia University, Harriman Papers, Vietnam. Drafted by Sullivan and authorized by Harriman. The meeting was held in Barringtonʼs suite at the Hotel Suisse.

248. Record of the Sixth Secretary of Defense Conference, Camp Smith, Hawaii, July 23, 1962

Camp Smith, Hawaii, July 23, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Honolulu Meeting, July 23, 1962. Top Secret. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text. A 10-page summary of the discussions is ibid. Attached to the source text were a cover sheet, a memorandum of distribution, and a memorandum of transmittal from Felt to McNamara, dated July 26.

249. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, July 24, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-238-69. Secret.

233. Final Report of the Vietnam Task Force 233. Final Report of the Vietnam Task Force1

Washington, July 1, 1962.

A. Presidential Program (Initiated May 23, 1962)

1. Seek to increase GVN confidence in US by Vice-Presidential visit.

Achieved.

2. Attempt strengthen Diemʼs popular support by reappraisal and negotiation.

Continues: Our attempts continue, but Diemʼs popular support has decreased. The January 4, 1962, GVN-US Joint Communiqué2 spelled out a program aimed at providing every Vietnamese with a stake in the outcome of the war. The communiqué resulted from negotiations which began with Vice President Johnsonʼs visit and the Staley Mission.3 Negotiations aimed at producing action which will increase popular support continue.

The December 4, 1961 Memorandum of Understanding4 between Diem and Nolting specifically recognized the importance of developing democratic institutions. The GVN has taken a number of actions following from and related to this understanding which are calculated to increase popular support. These include the establishment of Provincial Councils, a National Economic Council, a Constitutional Court, a national flood relief organization (which included oppositionists), a continuing purge of officials charged with various abuses, an organization within the Presidency charged with the responsibility for collecting and acting on popular complaints, the continued toleration of at least a minimum of opposition activity (example: the opposition candidates in the 1961 Presidential elections are at-large and have organized a Democratic Bloc; another oppositionist group has been permitted to set up the Front for National Unity which has publicly demanded a forum and legal status for opposition groups).

A more vigorous civilian civic action program has been set in motion, combining the personnel of the former Youth, Information and Civic Action Ministries. US officials have influenced this program through constant contact and assistance to the information program and to the civic action aspects of counterinsurgency plans.

3. Begin negotiations looking toward bilateral arrangement with VN.

Suspended: The December 4 Memorandum of Understanding, plus our ongoing joint programs constitute an adequate bilateral “arrangement” for realizing our objectives in VN. A bilateral treaty would probably bring us into conflict with the provisions of the Geneva Accords, commit us irrevocably, and Diem has shown little interest in such a treaty since General Taylorʼs visit,5 and the increased American assistance which resulted.

4. Negotiation to improve VNʼs relationship with other countries, especially Cambodia, and its standing in world opinion.

Continues: Vietnamese-Cambodian relations continue to be bad. In spite of many US efforts to bring the two parties together, little progress has been registered. VNʼs standing in world opinion has probably improved as a result of clearer international understanding of the nature of the hostilities there.

In contacts with other governments, the US has consistently sought to present the facts of the Viet-Nam situation. In December 1961, the US published the evidence linking the DRV with the VC and documenting DRV aggression against SVN in our report A Threat to the Peace.6 At our suggestion' President Diem on March 31, 1962, sent a letter to all Heads of Government and Chiefs of State outlining the facts of the DRV attack on his country.7 The June 2 ICC Report charging the DRV with a deliberate campaign aimed at the violent overthrow of the GVN has been used by our diplomatic Missions to focus world attention on the DRV attack.8

5. Strengthen border control arrangements with Cambodia.

Continues: In spite of repeated efforts by the US, joint VN-Cambodian control has not been effected and incidents are frequent. This continuing friction and the absence of effective joint border controls has helped the VC.

6. Cooperate with GVN in planning effective use of assistance from other governments.

Continues: The British have sent a special advisory mission to Viet-Nam under R.G.K. Thompson. In cooperation with the Thompson Mission, the US and the GVN have worked out the Delta Plan. The Australians have agreed to send a military training mission which will be integrated into MAAG activities. The Koreans have sent a military survey mission, the Thais are being approached to send observers. We intend to approach New Zealand. Malaya has trained several hundred Vietnamese in counter-guerrilla operations.

The US is currently seeking to coordinate economic assistance to Viet-Nam by means of a special coordination group of donor nations. We are urging other countries to increase their assistance to VN, particularly in the form of commodity imports formerly financed by the US aid program.

Over the past few years economic aid from countries other than the US has amounted to more than $108 million, including both grants and loans. Donor countries include Japan, France, Germany, Australia, United Kingdom, New Zealand, Canada, China, and the Philippines.

7. Examine diplomatic setting for commitment of US forces to VN.

Suspended: Accomplished by the Taylor Mission. The present level of U.S. assistance, i.e., training and logistic support plus some limited operational forces, appears to be the most effective “mix” at this time.

8. Assess political implications of increasing GVN forces from 170,000 to 200,000.

Achieved: The current strength level is over 197,000.

9. Request recommendations from Nolting to accomplish actions 1 and 2.

Achieved.

10. Install radar to obtain warning of Communist overflights for intelligence or air supply.

Achieved: Temporary installations were set up and operational at Danang in October 1961. Permanent installations are under construction with a target date of early Spring 1963.

11. Military Assistance Program for 20,000-man increase in ARVN is approved.

Achieved.

12. Increase MAAG as necessary for 20,000-man ARVN increase.

Achieved.

13. Consider case for increase ARVN strength above 170,000.

Achieved: Current ARVN strength is 197,000. Target for the end of Fiscal Year 1964 is 225.000.

14. Provide MAP support for Civil Guard Force of 68,000.

Achieved:

15. Expand MAAG responsibilities to include support and advice to Self-Defense Corps.

Achieved.

16. Provide MAP support for Vietnamese Junk Force, including training of junk crews.

Continues:

See Action 54.

17. Accelerated Special Forces Training.

Continues: Eleven Special Forces teams are engaged in training programs in Viet-Nam.

18. Collaborate with GVN in use of military, health, welfare and public works specialists for activities in villages.

Continues: With US assistance, ARVNʼs Civic Action Program has improved steadily. However, this program still requires a great deal of effort to realize its full potential.

19. Study jointly with GVN border control techniques.

Continues: The use of defoliants, dogs, portable radar, invisible chemical markings and other devices and techniques are undergoing study and tests at the combat development test center in VN. See also Action 65.

20. Consider establishment in SEA of testing facilities for new techniques against Communist aggression.

Achieved: Combat test development centers have been established and are in operation in VN and Thailand.

21. Full examination of size and composition forces required in case of commitment US forces VN.

Continues: Contingency planning is under continual review.

22. Dispatch to VN economic and fiscal experts to work out with GVN a joint financial plan.

Achieved: The Staley Mission completed its work in June of 1961. Its plan was adopted as the Joint Action Plan (see Actions 34 through 44).

23. ICA (AID) is authorized to undertake rural development-civic action programs.

Continues: The January 4, 1962 Joint Communiqué outlined these programs. USOM/Saigon has mounted an impact crop protection program, including rat destruction and eradication of rice destroying insects which will directly benefit 50,000 families. A program for Montagnard relief and resettlement is under way. The International Voluntary Service under contract to AID has been expanded to 69 people.

Civic action in connection with the two clear-and hold operations, plus the country-wide strategic hamlet program, is being planned and supported jointly. This civic action effort includes agricultural credit and extension, schools, and rural medical programs from village dispensaries to provincial surgical facilities.

24. Undertake long-range economic development program as a means of demonstrating US confidence in the future of VN.

Continues: The GVN has announced a formal 5-year plan. The on-going US AID program has contributed and will continue to contribute significantly to the long-range development of the economic infrastructure, including both agricultural development and industrialization. US aid continues to make important contributions to education, medicine, and other social services.

25. Assess economic implications of an ARVN force increase of 170,000 to 200,000.

Achieved.

26. Assist GVN public information programs to build public understanding of actions required to combat VC and increase public confidence in GVN.

Continues: USIS has worked closely with the GVN to develop its information program. Accomplishments include the establishment of a radio net serving the entire nation, production and distribution of films, and the development of rural newspapers. We are currently negotiating for the establishment of joint branch USIS-VIS posts throughout the country.

27. Country Team in coordination with GVN should compile documented facts of Communist infiltration and terrorism for dissemination in VN and throughout the world.

Continues: The US publication A Threat to the Peace and Under Secretary Ballʼs speech on Viet-Nam,9 published by the Department in June, brought the evidence of Communist aggression to the attention of an international audience. USIS in Saigon works with the Vietnamese authorities on a continuing basis to collect and cross-file such information for use in media throughout the world.

28. In coordination with … USIS will publicize unfavorable conditions in NVN.

Continues: Information which can be declassified is not plentiful, but USIS continues to cross-file stories on unfavorable conditions whenever available.

29. Development agricultural pilot projects throughout the country.

Suspended: Security conditions make this type of project difficult. A US-financed center near My Tho is in operation, however, with IVS personnel (who have been fired on by the VC). Ten pilot agricultural stations are conducting tests and demonstration work in crop and livestock development.

30. Exploit rehabilitation of VC prisoners and broadcast their stories to Communist areas.

Continues: The GVN does not have a well-defined rehabilitation program for VC prisoners. (See Action 68). It has been reluctant to make prisoners available for interviews. Interviews with refugees from Communist NVN have been made and broadcast, however.

31. Provide funds for US participation in Saigon trade fair.

Cancelled:

The fair was called off.

32. Covert action to be carried forward and coordinated at appropriate levels.

Continues.

33. President reserves judgment on levels of funding proposed.

No Task Force action required.

B. Joint Action Program (Staley Report)

34. Provide equipment and assistance in training for an increase in armed forces from 170,000 to 200,000. To increase effectiveness of increase, mutually agreed geographically phased plan, understanding on training and use of 30,000 additional men, and regulation of rate of increase for most efficient absorption should be accomplished.

Continues: The force level now stands at 197,000. We have encountered difficulties in setting up and implementing a geographically phased plan. The Delta plan meets this requirement, but we are not sure that it will be completely implemented.

35. Decision regarding increase above 200,000 will be postponed until next year (1962). Meanwhile, training and equipment for Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps should be expedited.

Achieved: Force levels now stand at 197,000. The ultimate target is 225,000 by the end of FY 64. On the Self-Defense Corps and the Civil Guard see Action 55.

36. Within limits of available funds US will provide resources required to implement action program, including commodity imports.

Continues: The commodity import target for FY 62 was set at $135 million. The Vietnamese economy has been able to absorb only $110 million. Other external resources, i.e. equipment for economic and military projects, have been provided as needed.

37. VN should be strongly urged to undertake generation of piasters by the means spelled out in Joint Action Program.

Continues: The GVN instituted fiscal reforms, including what amounted to a devaluation, in January 1962. These reforms are a direct result of US urgings.

Internal tax receipts have increased over 1961. Piaster revenue remains inadequate, however, to cover counterinsurgency needs. The GVN has been unwilling to use deficit financing to meet this shortfall and has requested a cash grant from US. The problem is under negotiation.

38. Strongly urge GVN undertake tax reform and adopt principle of single and realistic rate of exchange.

Continues: Although the January 1962 fiscal reforms represent considerable progress, the GVN still has a multiple exchange rate which is set too high. Tax collections should also be improved.

39. Ambassador should make clear to Diem that we attach great importance to agreed criteria governing imports, we consider raising effective piaster rate indispensable, and increased piaster realization per dollar will not be used as reason for reducing US aid.

Continues: GVN has abided by the agreed criteria for imports in spite of shortfalls in the commodity import program. The January reforms raised the effective piaster rate but at the appropriate time it should be raised further.

40. President directed ICA to conduct thorough review of new proposals for emergency social action and of programs already under way.

Achieved:

Review continues.

41. Encourage long-range planning and urge Vietnamese create more effective planning machinery to develop a long-range plan.

Continues: The GVN has recently announced a five-year plan, but this plan is more in the nature of a catalogue of projects than an integrated economic plan. Manpower planning is still very haphazard. One step forward: doctors are subject to the draft and medical talent will presumably be allocated to the most urgent needs.

42. Make clear to Diem that we hope one consequence new joint efforts will be effective projection our confidence in future of Viet-Nam.

Continues: Our joint effort has markedly improved Vietnamese morale. Diem has been understandably concerned that the extent of US assistance may make the GVN appear to be the creature of the US.

43. Parallel committees should be given maximum delegation of authority.

Suspended: Parallel committees have been discarded in favor of direct contact and negotiation between the action people on both sides at each level

44. President shall be informed of matters arising in implementation of joint program requiring his attention.

Continues: TF/VN provided the White House with regular Status Reports, the NSC has provided an observer on TF/VN, and the Director of the Task Force appears bi-weekly at meetings of the Special Group (Counterinsurgency).

C. Actions under NSAM 10410

45. Make preparations for publication white paper on DRV aggression against SVN.

Achieved: “A Threat to the Peace” was published in December 1961.

46. Develop plans for action in ICC based on white paper.

Achieved: The ICC report of June 2, 1962 confirms the US position, i.e. the hostilities in VN are caused, directed, planned and led by the DRV.

47. Develop plans for presentation of VN case in UN.

Suspended: After studying matter several times it was concluded that in present circumstances presentation to UN would result in more complications than gains.

48. Introduce Jungle Jim squadron into VN for training purposes.

Achieved:

See Action 53.

49. Initiate guerrilla ground action against Communist aerial supply missions in Tchepone area.

Suspended:

Due to possible effects on Lao negotiations.

50. General Taylor should undertake mission to Saigon.

Achieved:

General Taylor went to Viet-Nam in October 1961.

51. President agrees that certain other actions developed by TF/VN which do not require specific presidential approval should be undertaken on an urgent basis.

Continues.

D. Actions under NSAM 11111

52. Provide increased airlift to GVN forces.

Continues: The US-provided airlift has sharply increased ARVN mobility and reduced reaction time. Perhaps more than other factors, it has enabled the GVN to take the offensive and upset the VC timetable. There are now 80 US-manned helicopters, 20 other (U-1A), and 21 C-123ʼs in Viet-Nam. In addition, 32 C-123ʼs based at Clark are available for operations in Viet-Nam.

53. Provide equipment and personnel for air reconnaissance, photography, instruction in and execution of air-ground support techniques, and for special intelligence.

Continues: Operation Farmgate (including 8 T-28ʼs, four C-47ʼs and four B-26ʼs) now provides instruction in and execution of air-around support. Results have been good, with evidence that many VC attacks and bases have been disrupted by air action. Equipment and personnel have also been provided for air reconnaissance and photography and for special intelligence.

54. Provide small craft, including advisers and operating personnel, for control of coastal waters and inland waterways.

Continues: A joint Junk Patrol has been organized with the Vietnamese Navy and elements of the Seventh Fleet to cut infiltration from North Viet-Nam. Construction is underway to develop a Junk Force of 28 Divisions (20 junks per Division). Four Junk Divisions are now operational. Three Junk Force training centers are operating, and recruitment of Vietnamese fishermen is satisfactory.

The US has provided the GVN with 713 craft in all. These include 693 boats for inland waterway patrol and to increase ARVN mobility in the Delta, 9 harbor support and logistics type vessels, and 11 vessels with off-shore and major river capability.

55. Train and equip CG and SDC with objective relieving ARVN of static missions.

Continues: Training of the Civil Guard by MAAG began January 1961 at a single training center. At MAAGʼs urging, the training was speeded up by establishing four other centers and reducing the training period from 24 to 12 weeks. By mid-June, 128 companies were trained, 51 were in training at the centers, and 21 additional were in training on-the-spot under MAAG contact training teams. The target for FY 62 is 372 trained companies. By the end of FY 64, total strength will be 90,000. Current strength, trained and untrained, is 75,000. FY 63 strength is set for 78,950 and FY 64, 80.000.

56. Provide personnel and equipment to improve intelligence system from provincial level upward.

Continues: 194 U.S. military intelligence personnel are in Viet-Nam working at all levels to improve the GVN intelligence capability. …

57. Provide new terms reference, reorganization and additional personnel as required by increased responsibilities of US military.

Continues: A military assistance command under General Harkins was established in February 1962 to direct our increased operational and training activities in Viet-Nam. US military personnel in Viet-Nam have been increased to 9,069 to carry out our increased responsibilities.

58. Provide increased economic aid for flood relief and to support the counterinsurgency program.

Continues: Emergency food relief assistance from the US included medicaments and PL 48012 foodstuffs. Major items in our increased economic aid in support of counterinsurgency to date include: funds and equipment for two clear-and-hold operations now in progress (Hai Yen and Binh Minh or Sunrise), funds and equipment for Montagnard refugee relief and resettlement; the establishment of a special stockpile of supplies and equipment for fast servicing of rural counterinsurgency programs (particularly the strategic hamlet program); funds and equipment for 25 new surgical suites (which will treat battle casualties) to be set up in provincial hospitals; new strategic road construction and repair of bridges and roads sabotaged by the VC; and the rapid development of communications systems, in particular a broadcasting net and the village radio program which now has installed 670 of a projected 2,500 two-way radios.

59. Encourage GVN to request international or multilateral assistance for flood relief.

Suspended:

Assistance was received from Malaya and Australia.

60. Provide administrators and advisors for the GVN as agreed by two governments.

Continues: The GVN has not yet formally requested advisers. MAAG advisors are/operating in all provinces.

61. Provide personnel for joint provincial surveys.

Continues: Three joint provincial surveys were completed by a formal joint US-GVN team . … Formal joint surveys have been abandoned, since it is found that the information can best be obtained by continuing local contacts. All agencies continue to collect the required information in cooperation with the GVN.

62. GVN action to place nation on war footing, including measures to tap full potential all non-Communist elements.

Continues: See Action 2. In addition to the measures noted under Action 2, the GVN has reactivated its National Internal Security Council, which Diem promised he would use as a war cabinet, created an Inter-Ministerial Strategic Hamlet Committee under Ngo Dinh Nhu, provided military training for civil servants and women, and in Central Viet-Nam organized a promising political-military irregular force to operate in the hamlets. Little or no genuine effort has been made to get the support of opposition cliques or to realize the potential of the religious sects, the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao.

A great deal of effort has gone into programs designed to give the rural population a stake in the war. The war will be won or lost in the provinces.

63. Vitalization of appropriate governmental wartime agencies.

Continues: An acute shortage of skilled administrators plus the temperamental reluctance of Diem to delegate authority (a reluctance understandably reinforced by the real dangers of subversion or another coup attempt) have made progress on this action slow. The National Internal Security Council has apparently met only five times since its inception in January and the Strategic Hamlet Committee is little more than an extension of Nhu. Progress has been registered in cutting red tape and increasing efficiency. Best results will probably be achieved by ad hoc arrangements and continued steady but patient pressure from the US rather than by insistence on dramatic structural changes in the GVN.

64. Overhaul of the military establishment and command structure.

Continues: Considerable progress registered on this item. With U.S. assistance,ARVN has cut its reaction time and markedly improved its mobility. A Field Command, a Joint US-GVN Operations Center, a Joint General Staff and a Tactical Air Command, have been organized and are operating. US advisors have been accepted and are operating effectively with all units, with the Province Chiefs, and in the intelligence organizations. The GVN has increased Pay and benefits for the Civil Guard and the lower ranks of ARVN. The weakest link in the GVN military is still its citizen defense forces, the Civil Guard and the Self-Defense Corps, but as noted in Action 55, this problem is being rapidly solved.

E. December 4 Diem-Nolting Memorandum of Agreement.

In addition to the Actions above, the following specific actions should be added from the Diem-Nolting agreement.

65. Border Ranger Force.

Continues: Ten companies of ARVN Rangers and 14 companies of Montagnard Rangers were made available for the Border Ranger Force on March 20. However, the old MAAG border control plan has not been implemented because high ARVN officers feel it is unrealistic. Plans and concepts for border control are under study by both RVNAF and their US advisors. The forces presently engaged in border control total about 7,000 in 88 posts.

66. Develop more contacts between GVN officials and people.

Continues: Increased activity by Civic Action cadre plus frequent trips to rural areas by the President, National Assembly Deputies, and Cabinet Ministers have helped. The President has been unwilling to undertake regular “fireside chats.” The basic problem is a change in attitude by District and Provincial officials. This is well understood at the top, but changing attitudes is slow work.

67. Bring non-Communist prisoners promptly to trial.

Continues: No non-Communist prisoners of note have been brought to trial. The principal civilian leaders of the November 1960 coup are still being held without trial in spite of reports that Diem intends to release them.

68. Develop and announce an amnesty policy for VC defectors.

Continues: The GVN has developed a nationwide plan approved by Thuan and General Ty, but it has not yet been coordinated with all Ministries. Surrender leaflets and rewards have been used locally in a number of areas with varying success. Although it seems to have great promise, the GVN has not yet really given this tactic a trial.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 219. Secret. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1981, 591A. A copy of the report was transmitted to McGeorge Bundy on July 11 with a note that the programs and momentum generated by the Task Force would be continued by a new Working Group on Vietnam under the newly created Task Force on Southeast Asia.

2 Document 4.

3 For documentation on the Johnson mission and the Staley mission, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 53 ff. and 72 ff.

4 See the enclosure to Noltingʼs December 5, 1961, letter to Diem, Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 307.

5 For documentation on Taylorʼs visit to Vietnam, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 169 ff.

6 See the editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 315.

7 Document 137.

8 Reference is to the Special Report of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Vietnam, see Document 208.

9 Presumably a reference to Ballʼs speech before the Northwestern Law Alumni Association on May 9; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, May 28, 1962, pp. 872-877.

10 NSAM 104, October 13, 1961, is printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 11, p. 328.

11 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 272.

12 Entitled the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954, P.L. 480 provided for the donation of U.S. agricultural surpluses to friendly governments; for text, see 68 Stat. 454.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 6, 1962—3:02 p.m.

20. Saigonʼs 14.2 Contains verbatim text. As per last sentence reftel Department is considering proposing for highest level signature following message to Diem to overcome fears US will move toward neutralization policy for Viet-Nam and gain GVN cooperation at Geneva. Request comments following text priority.

“Ambassador Nolting has told me of your concern over our Laos policy. It is a concern which I have long shared; the Laos situation is difficult, and the negotiations we are now seeking to complete at Geneva have not been easy. Perhaps it would be useful if I indicated to you in brief the basis of our thinking about Laos and our Southeast Asia policy as a whole.

We have sought to counter the Communist drive in Southeast Asia by programs and tactics which recognize both the regional nature of the Communist threat and the peculiar circumstances of each country in the region. We vary our strategies but at the same time we maintain our overall policy objective, which is to do everything in our power to help the nations of Southeast Asia preserve their independence.

In Laos, the United States believes that a neutral government, committed to neither the West nor the East, is most likely to succeed in providing the Lao people with peace and freedom. We are supported in this belief by most Free World Governments.

In negotiating with the Communists to achieve a free and neutral Laos, we have not been unmindful of the relationship between Laos and the security of its neighbors. We have sought to build adequate safeguards into the Laos settlement. We are aware of the danger that the Communists will not honor their pledges. But the only alternative to a neutral Laos appears to be making an international battleground of Laos. This would not help the Lao people and it would not contribute to the security of Laos' neighbors.

In the case of your own country, the strategy best calculated to preserve Vietnamese independence and enable your brave people to build a better future is clearly very different from the strategy required for Laos. I can assure you without reservation that this administration is not seeking a neutral solution for Viet-Nam. There is no change in the policy towards Viet-Nam which this administration has pursued since it took office. We have helped and shall continue to help the Vietnamese defend themselves. We believe our cooperation has been effective and will continue to improve. We believe the Vietnamese will defeat Communist aggression and subversion

In pursuing our efforts to insure peace and freedom for the people of Southeast Asia the United States must, of course depend heavily on its friends. Most of all, we must have the cooperation of the Governments and the peoples of Southeast Asia itself. Your Government has been most closely associated with mine in this effort, and together we have achieved a great deal to defeat the Communist threat to Southeast Asia. It is my earnest hope that you will instruct your representatives at Geneva to continue this fruitful cooperation there by helping us to establish a truly neutral Laos.

The Geneva conference cannot fully succeed without your help. I am convinced that failure at Geneva would have grave consequences for all the people of Southeast Asia.”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/7-562. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Heavner on July 5; cleared with Cottrell, Cleveland, Wood, and S/S. Also sent to Geneva and repeated to London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 14 from Saigon, July 5, reported that Nolting had discussed with Diem the dangers that would ensue if South Vietnam failed to sign the agreements being negotiated in Geneva on Laos. In the last sentence Nolting recommended sending a high-level message to Diem explaining the U.S. position on Laos and reiterating support for Diem. (Ibid.)

235. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 235. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, July 6, 1962.

Dear Fritz: In line with the recent changes in organization here and our new look on Southeast Asia, Cot2 has set all hands to developing “action programs” for each country in the area. This gives us an opportunity to reorganize and pull together our own somewhat ad hoc action plans into one package. After doing a final report on Task Force Viet-Nam keyed to the Presidentʼs Program, the Joint Action Program (Staley Report), NSAM 104, NSAM 111, and your December 4 Memorandum of Agreement with Diem,3 we pulled out the actions which seem to us to be continuing and used them as the basis for our new draft action program.

This draft action program, which I enclose, will be subject to revisions and additions at the next Task Force Meeting July 11. However, since we are anxious to get your views at the Honolulu meeting I am sending our unrefined version to you now. Cot would like to have Task Force Saigonʼs revisions, additions, etc., when we get together at Honolulu.

The final report on Task Force Viet-Nam which I mentioned above is still in draft. I will forward a copy to you as soon as we get it into final form.

With best wishes, I am looking forward to seeing you at Honolulu,

Sincerely,

Ben

[Enclosure]

Draft Action Plan Vietnam4

This plan is a reorganization and restatement of the continuing actions contained in the Presidential Program for Viet-Nam, the Joint Action Program (Staley Report), NSAM 104, NSAM 111, and the December 4 Diem-Nolting Memorandum of Understanding. Completed actions in those plans have not been included. New actions or modifications of old actions which flow naturally from previous plans and experience have also been included.

Political

I. GVN Actions: This portion lists actions we should urge the GVN to take in accordance with the necessity of working through the administrative machinery of that government. 1. Increase governmental efficiency and put the GVN on a war footing. The GVN will take prompt legislative and administrative action to cut red tape and carry out counterinsurgency programs with maximum efficiency. This will include the vitalization of wartime agencies, adequate delegation of authority at all levels, and allocation of personnel resources in accord with the war emergency.

2. Strengthen popular support. The GVN will take appropriate measures to build popular support for the war effort, increase confidence in the government, and mobilize all of its manpower resources. These measures will include the following: (a) Appropriate training and indoctrination of provincial, district, village and hamlet officials.

(b) Develop more contacts between GVN officials and the people' including institutionalized means of communication up and down between the national government and the rural population.

(c) Efforts to mobilize all non-Communist elements willing to contribute to the struggle. This might include exploring the possible use of the Hoa Hao and Cao Dai religious sects m the war effort as well as permitting the greatest amount of non-Communist opposition activity consonant with national security. A particular effort should be directed at those intellectuals and professionals now on the sidelines.

(d) Bring non-Communist prisoners to trial promptly.

(e) The GVN will take all practical and feasible steps to develop its democratic institutions at all levels. This means developing a governmental system responsive to the needs and desires of the Vietnamese people and does not imply an obligation to adopt western political forms.

3. Amnesty policy for VC defectors. The GVN will develop and announce an amnesty policy for Viet Cong defectors. This will be a comprehensive plan to include rehabilitation, resettlement if necessary, and full psychological exploitation of defectors.

4. Seek international support and cooperation against the VC. The GVN will take appropriate diplomatic and domestic measures to gain maximum international support. These measures will include: (a) Improved relations with Cambodia. Undertake negotiations aimed at settlement of outstanding differences and the establishment of joint border controls. Negotiate and maintain a press truce.

(b) In cooperation with the U.S., seek third country economic, and where appropriate, third country military aid. Take appropriate measures to coordinate and maximize the effect of this aid.

II. U.S. Actions 5. Make clear our confidence and support. The U.S. will continue to take periodic actions and make public statements to make clear its continued support of the Vietnamese people and their government. Our support and confidence must also be made evident to the Free World, and the Bloc for maximum effect.

6. Seek international support for Viet-Nam and our policy. The U.S. will take measures to gain international support for Viet-Nam and our Viet-Nam policy. The U.S. will actively seek third country economic and military aid as well as international political support for Viet-Nam. The U.S. will cooperate with the GVN in planning the most effective use of assistance offered by other governments. The U.S. will continue in its information programs to bring developments in Viet-Nam to the attention of the Free World.

7. Provide administrators and advisers. The U.S. will continue as opportunity offers to informally place U.S. adviser-operators with the Vietnamese governmental machinery. The U.S. will continue to develop and strengthen close working relationships with the GVN at all levels, placing particular emphasis on winning and maintaining *e confidence of both individual administrators and the GVN as a whole.

8. Cooperate with GVN in development of province CI requirements. The U.S. will continue to cooperate with the GVN in the collection of the detailed social, political, economic, intelligence and military information required to carry out province counterinsurgency programs.

Military

9. Overhaul the military establishment and command structure. The GVN will reorganize its military establishment and command structure as necessary to prosecute the war more vigorously and to assure mobile offensive capability. This will include adequate delegation of authority to field commanders and clear and rational definition of the role of Province Chiefs.

10. Carry out a program of military civic action. The GVN, with U.S. provision of advisory personnel and equipment, will plan and carry out program of military civic action aimed at winning popular support and cooperation for the armed forces and the GVN. The plan will be coordinated with counterinsurgency programs and will include medical assistance for areas not serviced adequately by civilian medical facilities.

11. Seek effective border control. In addition to diplomatic measures aimed at closing Viet-Namʼs borders to VC infiltration, the GVN will continue to study and implement military measures designed to achieve effective border control. In cooperation with the U.S., modem military technology will be applied to the problem. The GVN will also make available a Ranger Border Force and work out with the U.S. plans for its use.

12. Develop and implement a mutually agreed geographically phased plan. The GVN will in cooperation with the U.S. develop and implement a mutually agreed upon geographically phased strategic plan for bringing Viet Cong subversion under control. Geographic and strategic priorities will be established in order to utilize U.S. assistance most effectively.

13. Reorganize and strengthen the military-political-intelligence system. In cooperation with U.S. advisory personnel and equipment the GVN will take appropriate measures to strengthen its military-political intelligence system, beginning at the province level and extending upward through the government and the armed forces to the Central Intelligence Organization.

14. Accelerate the training of Special Forces. The RVNAF, with U;S. assistance in training and equipment will continue accelerated training of Special Forces.

15. Provide increased training, logistical, technical and advisory assistance to the GVN forces. This will include: (a) Increased air lift for the GVN forces, including helicopters, light aviation, and transport aircraft, manned to the extent necessary by U.S. uniformed personnel and under U.S. operational control.

(b) Provide such additional equipment and U.S. uniformed personnel as may be necessary for air reconnaissance, photography, instruction in and execution of air-ground support techniques, and for special intelligence.

(c) Provide the GVN with small craft, including such United States uniformed advisers and operating personnel as may be necessary for operations in effecting surveillance and control over coastal waters and inland waterways.

16. The U.S. will assist in training and equipping the Civil Guard and the Self-Defense Corps. Provide expedited training and equipping of the Civil Guard and the Self-Defense Corps with the objectives of relieving the regular Army of static missions and freeing it for mobile offensive operations.

17. The U.S. will provide advisory personnel and equipment required for mutually agreed force levels. The ARVN strength target now is 225,000 men by the end of FY 64. Future increases in strength will be subject to review and agreement between the two governments.

18. Review advisability of further increases in the Civil Guard, Self Defense Corps and other local forces.

Economic

19. The GVN should take appropriate economic and fiscal measures to mobilize the full resources of the nation in the struggle with the Viet Cong. These measures should include: (a) Generation of additional piaster resources adequate for the requirements of counterinsurgency operations. These additional piaster resources should be generated by tax reform, possibly exchange reform, possibly a savings and victory bond campaign, and by borrowing from the national bank.

20. Integrate economic measures and planning with counter-insurgency planning actions.

21. Study how further use can be made of US. surplus agricultural commodities (particularly wheat and corn).

22. Undertake long range economic planning. To the degree possible in the present emergency' long range economic planning and long range economic programs should be continued. Planning machinery and personnel should be provided by the GVN for this purpose.

23. Provide additional resources to the GVN. Within the limits of available funds, the U.S. will provide the external resources required by the GVN, to include implementation of mutually agreed counterinsurgency and development plans. Commodity imports will be justified and absorbed under the seven criteria of the Staley Report.

Psychological

24. Strengthen the information program. The GVN will accelerate its public information program to help develop a broad public understanding of the actions required to combat the Communist insurgents and to build public confidence in the GVNʼs determination and ability to deal with the Communist threat.

25. Publicize within Viet-Nam and internationally the facts of DRV aggression and the unfavorable conditions in North Viet-Nam. Documented facts concerning Communist infiltration and terrorist activities and the measures being taken by the GVN to counter such attacks will be compiled and publicized both domestically and internationally. The flow of information about unfavorable conditions in North Viet-Nam will be increased.

26. Exploit Viet Cong defectors. The GVN will exploit as part of a planned psychological campaign the rehabilitation of Viet Cong prisoners, stressing the errors of Communism, and broadcast this material to Communist-held areas, including North Viet-Nam, to induce defections.

27. Utilize USIA and diplomatic channels to focus world attention on DRV aggression and win international support for the GVN in its struggle against the Viet Cong.

28. Establish a network of sub-branch posts manned by one USIS local employee. These posts, which are primarily distribution points, are to be established in 12 to 18 major Provincial cities throughout the country. They will be housed in the VIS establishment in each city and function as a close support and advisory mechanism behind a VIS front.

29. Continue to press the GVN to establish adequate facilities for dealing with foreign correspondents. This would include a press lounge, a 24-hour duty officer in the Ministry of Information, and a senior official spokesman who is available at all times to answer questions on policy

30. Expand the already successful Kien Quoc, village newspaper designed in support of Operation Sunrise, into a network of village and provincial newspapers.

31. Arrange a sister-city relationship between Saigon and a major American city.

. . . . . . .

Presidential Action

The President shall be informed of matters arising in the implementation of this action program requiring his attention that they may receive his immediate consideration.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.51K/7-662. Secret; Official-Informal.

2 Sterling J. Cottrell.

3 The Task Force Report is printed as Document 233. Regarding the Staley Report, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 93. NSAM 111 is printed ibid., Document 272. The December 4 Memorandum of Understanding is printed as an enclosure to Noltingʼs letter of December 5, 1961, ibid., p. 713. Regarding NSAM 104, see footnote 10, Document 233.

4 Secret. Drafted by Heavner and Cottrell on July 3.

236. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 236. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 7, 1962, noon.

21. Reference: Department telegram 1266.2 Joint Embassy-MACV message. On basis several extensive briefings (including one June 25 with President Diem) and our own staff evaluation of technical factors and GVN preparations, Ambassador and COMUSMACV satisfied (1) crop destruction program could produce substantial military advantage; (2) satisfactory destruction of crop targets could result, as evidenced by Delmore Report;3 and (3) no further technical experimentation necessary.

Further convinced that GVN methods of determining targets, based on best available ground and air intelligence, take into account all necessary factors. MACV staff is in position to render adequate technical advice.

Only factor not entirely determined is RVNAF capability launch and sustain on its own a crop destruction program on operational basis. RVNAF plans deploy helicopters for spraying, providing both air and ground cover during operations. Latter will involve considerable number troops in areas of substantial VC strength and control. Best way determine GVN capability is to concur with trial operation on limited basis, with dear understanding results thereof will be used decide whether further operations feasible.

Propose, therefore, work out with GVN trial operation Phu Yen Province. Target zone encompasses area BQ750650 to BQ955650 to BQ750490 to BQ955490. Would involve destruction of eight target plots within defined area, totaling 2500 acres of rice, corn, sweet potatoes and manioc. Determination this target based upon best intelligence available from both military and political channels and would be re-confirmed by joint US/GVN assessment prior to attack. Proposed anti-crop operation to be initiated and conducted solely by GVN with US participation being limited to sub-rosa technical advice and assistance.GVN will carry out using helicopters as primary means of dispensing chemicals, and employ ground and air cover as necessary.

Target in general area Hai Yen II and could contribute to overall success that operation. Incursion of GVN forces into VC controlled and occupied territory may result in bonus effect of engagement of sizable VC forces by VN troops. Equally important, considerable GVN civic action resources and US support already deployed this area, thereby providing better opportunity follow up quickly re social, economic, political aspects crop destruction operation.

Request Washington approve above program and authorize release sufficient chemicals to GVN to undertake this operation. Based on results operation, we would then consider jointly with GVN further target areas which they have already developed on priority basis within a suggested overall crop destruction program.4

Nolting

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 174.

3 Not further identified.

4 Telegram 21 was subsequently sent to the U.S. Delegation at the Laos Conference as telegram 56. On July 9, Harriman reported that he “trusted” the request for crop destruction would be denied since the good name of the United States would be at stake. (Telegram 25 from Geneva; Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/7-962) On July 13, the Department of State informed both Geneva and Saigon that the proposal in telegram 21 would be held in abeyance pending Harrimanʼs return from Geneva. (Ibid.)

237. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 237. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, July 7, 1962.

SUBJECT

The “X-Factor,” Vietnam

Here is a way of getting a sharper picture of how we're doing in Vietnam. The “way” uses the largest U.S. resources in Vietnam. Defense resources under your control.

Attached are a list of questions. Most of them concern the “x-factors” of the real war in Vietnam. Some are vital to true measurements, others are significant as collateral. They are in addition to basic needs on enemy order-of-battle, casualties, lost weapons, etc.

Inexpert use of these questions in Vietnam can be harmful to our cause. If they become widely known among Vietnamese, as being of real official concern to the U.S. military, the Vietnamese could take this as a U.S. loss of faith in the Vietnamese armed forces, government, or people; they could open a bad, political Pandoraʼs box among Vietnamese or in our relations with them.

Thus, it is recommended that the questions be used in the following way: a. The use of the questions should be a staff function of MAC-V; General Harkins could have a small team (2 or 3 U.S. military) to handle this; they should be good listeners, good writers, who know Vietnam.

b. The questions should be asked only of Americans who have been out in the field, who have had first-hand experience, and who are judged to have gotten close to the Vietnamese; out of thousands of Americans, 50 or 100 might be selected; this should be repeated periodically.

c. The questions should be asked at a time and place where these “field Americans” can reflect upon them amply; if our best Americans in the field are given brief R&R leaves in Saigon, Dalat, Hongkong, Clark, or Baguio, it would be wise to add extra time and then question them there.

d. The questioners should do the work, not those questioned; verbal give and take can get better results than making field men write down what they know.

e. Since conditions vary from locality to locality, it is important to get a geographic fix on each locality reported upon; results could be translated on charts or maps, after analysis; every significant locality should be reported on.

In Vietnam, we are up against an enemy who uses Mao Tse-tungʼs tactics. The text-book rule of imposing our will on enemy forces needs further interpretation. The real contest is to win over the people on the land, which includes protecting them. My questions are to this point.

[Attachment]

VIETNAM QUESTIONS FOR U.S. MILITARY

Villagers

(Think of people you have seen, talked to in specific villages and hamlets, usually away from military camps.)

1. Where was the village? About how many houses and people? What type of houses? How do people earn a living? Were the market places (or shops) busy or vacant?

2. What was the villagers' attitude towards the Vietnamese troops? Friendly, indifferent, sullen, afraid, hostile? Where were the children, outdoors or kept hidden indoors? Where were the young women?

3. What does it cost the villagers to give information to the troops? Are they taken in custody to be questioned for several days? If so, who takes care of their families in their absence? What happens to these villagers afterwards? Are they protected? Do the VC exact reprisal? Are there any rewards for giving information? What? Do the children give information?

4. Was there a village defense organization? How do you size it up? What was the attitude of the troops towards it? It towards the troops?

5. If troops stopped in the town, what happened? Were the troops quartered in homes? If so, were families removed? Remunerated? How? Was food obtained from the people? For the unit or individual military? Was there fair compensation? Was it given willingly or unwillingly? Were people happy to have the troops there, uneasy, or indifferent?

6. What measures did the Vietnamese troops take to get along with the villagers? Do you think these were effective? What do you think they should do? What was the attitude of officers and troops towards the villagers?

7. How many caches of VC arms, equipment, propaganda were found in the village? VC personnel? Did villagers help uncover? Why?

8. How was the village governed? A mayor? A council of elders? What say did the people have in who would govern them? How was this done?

9. If you saw a village several times, did you notice any changes in the attitude of the villagers? If so, what changed? What caused this?

10. How do the VC treat these same villagers? How effective is this?

Civilians

(Think of these as people in terms of Maoʼs “water” in which the military “fish” live.)

1. What happens to civilian casualties in military actions? Are they ignored by the troops? Left for village care? Given first aid by troops, then left in village? Taken to military hospital or civilian hospital? If military hospital, are they given equal treatment to military? If civilian hospital, who pays for their care?

2. What is attitude of Vietnamese troops towards civilians at check points on the highway? Are the troops alert, polite but firm? How do they check on bus passengers? On trucks? On farm carts? Are the civilians manhandled? Are there other abuses (collection of tolls, etc.)? If so, what remedies have been taken? Effective? How does attitude differ among units known to you?

3. What happens to civilians who come to a Vietnamese military unit with complaints, problems, or questions? Does the commander talk to them? A special officer on the staff? Are they turned away by the guards? If there are wrongs complained about, what redress is given? How? Do the local people hear about this? How?

4. When a Vietnamese troop unit is transferred to a new area, what indoctrination is given to the troops about local customs, tabus, etc.? How is this done? How effective is it?

5. What civilian organizations help the Vietnamese military the most? The least? In what way? How do you think this help could be best assisted to become more effective?

6. What happens on the highways (waterways) at night? Do the VC control? Do passenger vehicles run? If so, how do the VC treat the passengers?

7. What are the fundamental things which the people feel are worth defending? Their lives? Their property? Their village? Their way of living (as opposed to the Communist way)? Their form of government? What? Which of these are the Vietnamese troops helping the people to defend?

Civil Officials

(Include military acting as province chiefs or in other civilian capacities.)

1. When the military secure an area, how good is the follow-through by civilian officials? Who are they? Do they follow right up on the heels of the troops? Delay? Are they effective in dealing with the people? Do they have good team-work with the military? What improvements can you suggest?

2. In localities known to you personally, describe the activities of civilian officials. Do they get out among the people? Daily? Or remain in their offices/homes? Do they have bodyguards? Is this necessary? Why? What is the attitude of the people towards them? Are they invited into peoples' homes? Only the biggest or poor farmers/shopkeepers as well?

3. In these localities, what were the last 3 visits by officials from Saigon? What did they come to do? Do you think they were successful? Why? Were their contacts on mandarin terms or on the peoples' terms (talking down to the people, or with amicable equality)? Do you think they really found out about the local situation? What promises were made? What promises fulfilled?

Propaganda

(Think of this in terms of what troops and people talk about, as well as radio, leaflets, etc.)

1. What are the main VC propaganda themes? In wooing popular support? Against the Vietnamese government? Against Americans? How much of this do people believe? What is being done to prove this propaganda false?

2. How are the Vietnamese hitting back psychologically at the source of enemy strength? To stop popular support? To induce surrender? Do you believe this is effective? How would you improve it?

Prisoners

(Identify facts known to you first-hand, and stories you have heard from others.)

1. What happens to VC taken by a combat unit? Are they questioned promptly for combat intelligence? By whom? Are any of them liquidated on the spot? Without interrogation for combat intelligence? Why? What corrective measures are being taken? What happens to female prisoners?

2. What happens next, after capture and initial interrogation by the combat unit? Are they held in a compound by a military unit known to you? Turned over to another authority? Are they questioned further by military? How is this done? What use is made of the information?

3. What do you know about prisoner rehabilitation? First-hand? Hearsay? What methods are used? Do the prisoners learn a vocation? How do they earn their freedom? Do they denounce Communism publicly? Help the troops as scouts? Try to induce VC surrenders? Are freed rehabilitated prisoners turned loose on the community or sent to a separate community of their own? Do you think this system is effective? Why?

4. How do the VC treat prisoners? Vietnamese military? Vietnamese civilians? Foreigners?

Troop Morale

(Candid opinions are desired.)

1. What is the attitude of the troops on patrol? Aggressive? Need the eye of an officer on them? Have self-reliance if alone or with small group? Do they do night patrols? In storms? Do they really push into the jungle? Into swamps and grasslands? Into mountains?

2. Do the troops have any strong convictions about why they are fighting? What are they? Is there any troop I&E? Who does it? Do you think it is effective? Any ideas on how to improve it? What?

3. What are the feelings of troops about being in military service? Proud to be in uniform? Indifferent? Proud of unit? Indifferent? Homesick? Worn out? How much longer do they think the fighting will continue? What do they think will end the fighting?

4. Which weapons do the troops like best? Why? Which do they like least? Why? How effective are they with these weapons?

5. What are the major gripes of the troops? Which are justified and correctible? How? What do you know of Can Lao membership in units you have been with? About other political membership? How does this effect morale, promotions, preferential treatment, attitude towards top Vietnamese government officials?

6. What are the main superstitions of the troops? What are the main customs which are different from the military of other countries? How widely held are these? How do they help or impair the effectiveness of the troops?

7. How do you think the Vietnamese troops stack up in comparison to the VC? What are the main differences? Your ideas on why? Your ideas on how the Vietnamese troops think they stack up against the VC? Why?

8. What are the most important points you believe your replacement should know, for getting along with the Vietnamese?

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: Lot 66 A 3542 Vietnam 1962, 000.1-091. Also sent to the Deputy Secretary of Defense. Signed “Ed”. On the source text McNamara wrote: “7/15 To Gen Lansdale. An excellent set of questions Ed—it is this kind of info I need & am not receiving—please discuss with Joe Carroll.” At the bottom of the source text Lansdale noted: “Discussed with Gen. Carroll. He said he would include this in further steps he is taking. He notes that some adding of intelligence & operations is needed.”

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Saigon, July 9, 1962—8 p.m.

28. Re: Confeʼs 1196 and 1197.2 You are authorized to deliver the following letter from President Kennedy to President Diem urgently.

“I have been told of your concern over the agreements on Laos now being negotiated at Geneva. Since these long and difficult negotiations are reaching a conclusion, I thought it would be helpful to Your Excellency for me to review with you our thinking about Laos and Southeast Asia generally.

We have sought to counter the communist drive in Southeast Asia by programs and tactics which recognize both the regional nature of communist threat and the particular circumstances of each country in the region.

In the case of your own country, the strategy best calculated to preserve Vietnamese independence and enable your brave people to build a better future is clearly very different from the strategy required for Laos. Such a strategy is based upon the fierce desire of your people to maintain their independence and their willingness to engage in an arduous struggle for it. Based as it is on these facts, our policy toward Viet-Nam must and will continue as it has since my administration took office. We have helped and shall continue to help your country to defend itself. We believe your efforts have been and will continue to be increasingly effective. We believe the Vietnamese will defeat communist aggression and subversion.

In Laos, the circumstances are quite different. Because of that countryʼs location and because of the conditions in which its people find themselves, the United States believes that a neutral government, committed to neither the west nor the east, is most likely to succeed in providing the Lao people with peace and freedom. We are supported in this belief by most of the free world governments.

In negotiating with the communists to achieve a free and neutral Laos, we have not been unmindful of the relationship between Laos and the security of its neighbors. We have sought to build adequate safeguards into the Laos settlement, including assurance Lao territory will not be used for military or subversive interference in the affairs of other countries. We are aware of the danger that the communists will not honor their pledges. But the only alternative to a neutral Laos appears to be making an international battleground of Laos. This would not help the Lao people and it would not contribute to the security of Laos' neighbors.

I am informed that the Geneva negotiations have reached the point where the agreements which have been hammered out over the past thirteen months are nearly ready for signature. In considering the position of our government at this juncture I think it is important for us to keep firmly in mind the real political foundation upon which these agreements rest.

When Mr. Khrushchev and I met in Vienna last year,3 we were able to agree on only one of the many issues which divide us. This was our mutual desire to work for a free, independent and neutral Laos. The result has been that the Soviets, as one of the Co-chairmen, have undertaken an international responsibility under the Geneva Accords to assure the compliance of the communist signatories with the terms of those accords. This responsibility will be tested soon as the agreements are signed.

In return for these undertakings by the Soviets, both your delegation and mine have made some concessions in the course of the thirteen months of negotiations. These concessions are the result of the almost complete ineffectiveness of the Royal Laotian Army, as demonstrated again in the recent action at Nam Tha. It is only the threat of American intervention that has enabled us to come as far as we have in Laos. But I hope you agree with me that considering this deteriorating situation the safeguards built into the Laos settlement give us the best hope of future improvement against continuing communist military encroachment through that country.

It is in this lilt [light] that I hope you will reconsider the wisdom of insisting upon a solution of the problem of diplomatic recognition by Laos as a condition for your signature of the Geneva Accords. I recognize the importance of the question and particularly the problem it may create in other countries. On the other hand, I believe that when it is compared with the change of achieving a viable settlement of the Laos problem, the question of the type of representation in Vientiane should not be allowed to determine your countryʼs attitude toward our mutual effort at Geneva.

I hope you will instruct your delegation not to raise issues on which general agreement had been reached last December, nor to bring up new issues. It is unrealistic to expect that other countries will undertake obligations to your nation unless your government, through its signature of these accords, assumes reciprocal obligations. That is why I urge you most earnestly to continue your help in making it possible for the Geneva Accords to be signed promptly by all the participants.

In working to ensure peace and freedom for the people of Southeast Asia, the United States must, of course, depend heavily on its friends. Most of all, we must have the cooperation of the governments and the peoples of Southeast Asia itself. Your government has been most closely associated with mine in this effort, and together we have achieved a great deal to defeat the communist threat to Southeast Asia. It is my earnest hope that we may continue this fruitful cooperation by working together to establish a truly neutral Laos.”

In presenting letter you should stress in strongest terms the importance we attach to Vietnamese help in reaching Laos settlement, safeguards we have in Russian promises and which we building into settlement itself and our determination continue help Viet-Nam defend itself.

We plan no publicity on this note and believe you should request GVN handle as classified communication

Rusk

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 International Pol Rels—350 Laos Conf. In telegram 24, July 8, the Embassy in Saigon reported that Nolting and Harkins thought the draft letter transmitted in Document 234 was excellent. (Telegram 24; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series) But the following day Harriman cabled a new text from Geneva and stated that the old one was too general to be effective. (Confe 1196 and 1197; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/7-962) The source text is the same as that suggested by Harriman except for minor changes.

2 See footnote 1 above.

3 Kennedy and Khrushchev met at Vienna, June 3-4, 1961.

239. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 239. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 10, 1962, midnight.

35. Embtel 29.2 Presidentʼs letter delivered to Pres. Diem at 5 pm this afternoon, followed by two hour discussion. Diem was courteous but absolutely adamant against signing accords which he claimed would result in the communization of Laos by legal means. He took position, in essence, that it would be immoral to do so, and none of my arguments seemed to have any effect.

However, one hour after I had left Diem and was in process drafting report of above, Thuan telephoned to say that Diem was changing his positron. Thuan then came to my house and said Diem on reconsideration requested me to report his reply to President Kennedyʼs message as follows: 1. He sends his sincere thanks to President for his letter.

2. He has instructed Foreign Minister Mau to seek clarification of texts to be signed at Geneva, including the “implementing protocols" especially those relating to functions of ICC (presumably the “Protocol to the Declaration on the Neutrality of Laos"3 ). Mau instructed to seek this clarification through Governor Harriman.

3. On question recognition DRV, Diem requests that US take position of less favorable to SVN than that taken by France and UK. [sic] In this connection, Souvanna Phouma reportedly told French that action taken by Souvanna is unconstitutional (since not taken in ministerial session) and would be reconsidered. Also GVN Ambassador Vientiane reports Lao Foreign Office has authorized press announcement that recognition of 5 Communists postponed until Souvannaʼs return. (GVN clearly has impression that we have thus far been less sympathetic on this problem than French and UK.)

I asked Thuan whether this meant that Mau was “back in business” at Geneva. He would be, Thuan said, once clarifications referred to para 2 above had been received. Without saying so in terms, he gave me clear impression that Mau would be instructed to sign agreements. With regard to “clarification”, I think GVN will no longer insist on proposing amendments to agreements. They do want reassurance that ICC will have responsibility and authority to supervise and control exodus of Viet Minh military personnel. It is important, I believe, that Mau be given all possible help by USDel Geneva in reassuring his government on this point and other provisions for enforcement of agreement. Re recognition, GVN is not asking that we obtain RLG commitment not to recognize DRV. They do, however, want us to indicate sympathy with their problem and to indicate interest in finding some more palatable solution than full recognition DRV. Again, I think it will be most helpful if Mau can report that we are working along these lines with French and British.

In sum, I cannot guarantee that GVN is now back on tracks and prepared to sign up. However, I believe that there is better than even chance that rather bewildering developments today represent an effort to save face. I urge that USDel Geneva deal with Mau on this hypothesis.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/7-1062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Nolting. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 Laos Conference) Repeated to Paris, London, Geneva, Vientiane, Bangkok, and CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 29 from Saigon, July 10, reported that the text of the Presidentʼs letter (supra) had been received and that Nolting had an appointment to see Diem that afternoon. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/7-1062)

3 For text of the Declaration and Protocol on the Neutrality of Laos, signed at Geneva, July 23, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1075-1083.

240. Editorial Note 240. Editorial Note

On July 11, 1962, Acting Director of Central Intelligence Marshall S. Carter transmitted a memorandum to Secretary of Defense McNamara giving an analysis of the overall situation in South Vietnam with special emphasis on the Strategic Hamlet Program, the situation of the Montagnards, and the capabilities of the armed forces. For text, see Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, pages, 684-689. For text of the CIA telegram, July 11, that provided the analysis of the Strategic Hamlet Program and the Montagnard situation (virtually the same as that in the memorandum), see Declassified Documents, 1977, 93A.

241. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Secretary of State 241. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Proposed Mission to Southeast Asia

Since our talk yesterday2 I have carefully considered the mission to Southeast Asia which you suggested I undertake. My conclusions are as follows: 1. It is important that something of this kind be undertaken soon. Averell could do it well himself if he could be spared. However, if you, the President and Averell want me to make the tap, I will be happy to do so.

2. However, if the purpose of the mission is no more than a series of vague discussions with Southeast Asian leaders I doubt that it could be particularly productive. I have already made two taps to the area during the past nine months3 and have had extensive conversations with Sukarno, Sihanouk, Macapagal, and the Tunku.

We are well aware of their thinking on most major issues and they are aware of and sympathetic to my personal views. It would be a mistake for me to return so soon unless my visit is given a specific purpose which we and they understand.

3. My memorandum of June 13th4 on “The Need for a Definition of U.S. Political Objectives in Southeast Asia" may provide the solid terms of reference which would give the mission both purpose and promise.

In this memorandum I sketched the heavy cost, in time of an armed conflict (which can be graphically illustrated from our own history), of failing to develop an appealing and realistic set of political-economic objectives to define the purpose for which we are fighting.

I urged therefore that we publicly clarify our long-range objectives for Southeast Asia in terms that transcend our present military image in that area and which will appeal to the widest possible spectrum of non-Communist people and governments.

If we can reach agreement among ourselves and with the various Southeast Asian leaders on economic and political goals for the area and publicize these goals in every village and community we could expect three minimum results: a. We would secure the political initiative and therefore strengthen our basic position and influence.

b. We would ease much of the criticism of our present alleged support for the status-quo

c. We would undercut the Viet Cong-Communist claim that we are seeking to recapture the French colonial position.

As a maximum, we might begin to isolate Communist insurgents from political support in the region and thereby greatly ease our military problem in dealing with them.

For the longer haul such an effort could lay the basis for a politically viable, non-Communist Southeast Asia, able and willing to defend itself against internal subversion and protected against overt aggression by great power guarantees.

4. If you and the President accept the basic premises of my memorandum I would like to work out with FE and Policy Planning, on an urgent basis, an outline of an appealing set of political-economic objectives for the region in the form of a proposed “Charter for a Free and Independent Southeast Asia".

I suggest that I then discuss the confidential draft outline on an off-the-record basis with the leaders of the seven Southeast Asian states (excluding Laos). On my return the “Charter" could be revamped in line with these discussions and our own views and launched in the form of a public statement by the President.

5. I believe that my first stop should be Manila, where I am confident these proposals will encounter a favorable response which will be helpful in some of the other capitals.

Going first to Manila on such a mission would also help improve our bilateral relations with the Philippines.

My last stop would be Burma. In order to avoid giving undue weight to our current uncertainties about Ne Win, it can be treated as only one of seven stops on the trip. While in Rangoon, I can perhaps also be of some assistance in other matters.

6. If you wish me to undertake this project, I would prefer to leave within ten days for two reasons: first, delay in preparations will risk leaks which might undercut the mission; and the second, I have some long standing important personal commitments between August 18 and September 8 which I am anxious to meet if it is possible.

If FE and S/P can work with me on the preparations on a crash basis, I could be ready to leave Washington no later than July 20. I would hope to take with me a qualified regional expert from FE as well as one of my own assistants.

7. Attached is a very rough preliminary draft outline of the concept which I might discuss with the Southeast Asian leaders. Obviously it requires careful study and refinement before my departure. It would also be improved by new ideas, deletions or additions that would be suggested by the various Southeast Asian leaders.

Although many of the points can be hedged so as not to commit us definitely to institutional arrangements, we need not try to foresee every reservation at this juncture. Wilsonʼs Fourteen Points, and Marshallʼs Harvard address were filled with what seemed at the time to be political utopias. However, they raised visions which in each case turned out to have a profound political impact. Here we have an opportunity to do the same.

8. May I add that such a mission, in my opinion, will be welcomed by Mike Mansfield, Bill Fulbright, Hubert Humphrey and others of our strongest supporters in Congress who are now deeply concerned by what appears to be our present open end commitment without clear indication of our long-range objectives for Southeast Asia.

This mission, in my opinion, could do much to dear the air here in the United States as well as abroad, and to give us the political initiative in an area where we have been on the defensive ever since the war.

[Attachment]

DRAFT PRINCIPLES FOR A PROPOSED SOUTHEAST ASIAN CHARTER

1. Achievement of peace throughout Southeast Asia so that the people of each nation may realize their full potential within the framework of their own traditions, cultures, and religions.

2. To this end, termination of the guerrilla warfare which is now threatening the independence of South Vietnam, and withdrawal of Vietminh troops north of the 17th parallel.

3. Withdrawal, in due course, of all foreign troops from Southeast Asian territories, except those provided at the request of governments to train self-defense forces.

4. Broad guarantees by the great powers of the sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of the Southeast Asian nations.

5. Similar guarantees against all forms of internal subversion, with an inspection system to assure full compliance, so that Southeast Asia may cease to be a battlefield in the Cold War.

6. Renunciation of force, in accordance with the United Nations Charter, as an instrument for solving disputes among the nations of Southeast Asia.

7. Increased international cooperation for the more rapid development of Southeast Asiaʼs natural and human resources.

8. Peaceful resolution, through negotiation, of the dispute between Indonesia and the Netherlands over the status of West New Guinea.

9. Preservation of the neutrality of all nations that seek to remain unaligned with any of the great powers.

10. Development of the Lower Mekong Basin under an International Authority to increase the industrial capacity of the four riparian states (Thailand, Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia) and to provide a greatly expanded food supply for distribution through peaceful international trade.

11. Similar development of the Irrawaddy River Valley for the benefit of Burma.

12. Strengthening of such regional associations as ECAFE, the Asian Productivity Organization, the Colombo Plan Organization, and the Association of Southeast Asia.

13. Creation by the Southeast Asian states of regional production and marketing authorities for the principal staple exports of the region: rice, teak, tin, rubber, jute.

14. A comprehensive study of the practicability of a Southeast Asian Common Market.

15. Under the aegis of regional associates, creation of regional communications systems, educational institutions, shipping lines, air lines, and industrial development plans for the benefit of the nations of the area.

On the basis of these principles, a pledge by the United States Government that on the cessation of hostilities a reasonable proportion of the funds now necessarily devoted to military operations in Vietnam, Laos and Thailand will be devoted to the peaceful economic and social development of the entire area.5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Special Correspondence, Bowles. Confidential.

2 No record of Bowles' conversation with Rusk at 11 a.m. on July 11 has been found.

3 On the first trip, November 7-19, 1961, Bowles visited Japan, Malaysia, and Indonesia; on the second, February 8-March 19, 1962, he toured the Middle East, Africa, South Asia, and the Far East.

4 Document 214.

5 On July 18, Bowles sent a 3-page memorandum to Rusk outlining the preparations that needed to be made for the trip and attaching a more detailed draft of principles. (Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Special Correspondence, Bowles)

242. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 242. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 16, 1962—5:21 p.m.

61. Viet-Nam Working Group (formerly TF/VN) to Saigon Task Force. Working Group remains concerned that GVN has apparently not yet decided on any priorities for strategic hamlet program.

Realize subject not new, but if hamlet program spread too thin and too fast resultant failures may be fatal to GVN. Also costs this program seem very likely increase and sound programming justification will be needed for further increases US aid and assistance.

Would it be useful lay these problems before Diem or Nhu prior Honolulu meeting with request that on basis experience gained thus far GVN give us its preliminary views on: a) geographic priorities strategic hamlet program, b) whether rate of construction can be decided on basis situation in each province, e.g. can rate be slowed in some areas so that job can be done more thoroughly with less Asks causing undue peasant disaffection, c) whether more earth-moving equipment now in VN be allocated to helping hamlet construction and e) when will GVN be prepared commence join study costs this program? Programming of funds and commodity procurement needed to support strategic hamlet concept will be increasingly difficult obtain in absence such guidance. TF/Saigon might also wish elicit Thompsonʼs current views.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/7-1662. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Wood, cleared with AID, DOD/ISA, and Cottrell, and repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

243. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State 243. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Reports on Increased Communist Infiltration into South Vietnam from Laos

RFE-30

In accordance with your request we have examined the available intelligence information related to recent reports on increased Communist infiltration into South Vietnam.

Abstract

Communist infiltration into South Vietnam appears to have increased since May 1962, but it is not necessarily related to current developments in Laos. Althou,2h the magnitude of this movement is difficult to assess, it is believed to involve largely well-trained armed cadres and key officials rather than armed units. As in the past, moreover, the movement is confined principally to South Vietnamese (Annamites and Cochinchinese), trained in North Vietnam, rather than North Vietnamese (Tonkinese) who constitute the bulk of the DRV forces now serving in Laos.

Communist infiltration will continue to remain a problem in South Vietnam. The DRV has the capability of stepping up infiltration over the present level, if circumstances warrant, with no great difficulty and relatively little danger of detection.

American press despatches from Saigon continue to report a sharp step-up in Communist infiltration into South Vietnam from southern Laos. The latest such report, on July 14, 1962, quoted a “US civilian observer” (who was allegedly quoting a “US intelligence adviser") as stating that 2,500 to 3,000 Communists “have been streaming like water through a sieve across the border from Laos into South Vietnam" during the past five-week period. Earlier this month, American newsmen reported that US sources agreed with South Vietnamese intelligence estimates that as many as 8,000 to 9,000 Communists may have been infiltrated from Laos. US sources were also quoted as speculating that, “with the pro-Communists firmly in control of the Lao infiltration routes under the new coalition government,” North Vietnamese may be moving more of their estimated 10,000 troops in Laos into South Vietnam.

US Field Assessment

The US Military Assistance Command in Vietnam (MACV) has recently concluded that Communist infiltration into South Vietnam has increased significantly since early May 1962. On June 29, MACV reported that probably 800-1,000 Communists had been infiltrated during May and another 800 during the first three weeks of June.2 (MACV infiltration assessments for previous periods are 500-1,000 per month from June through November 1961, and 100-200 per month from December 1961 through Apri1 1962.) MACV also reported that the formation of a coalition government in Laos might prompt the North Vietnamese regime to step up infiltration further.

On July 5, Embassy Saigon reported that the MACV assessment was based largely on unconfirmed information, that forces infiltrated were mostly well-trained cadres and key officials, and that the infiltration pattern was not related to the formation of a coalition government in Laos.3

Recent Increase in Infiltration Evident

Despite the paucity of confirmed reports, the MACV assessment of an increase in the infiltration rate appears valid. First, the increase in the number of unconfirmed reports on infiltration during the past two months cannot be ignored. Second, there is at least one confirmed report of the crossing of a 200-man Communist unit into Kontum province from Laos on May 6-7, 1962. Third, Communist control of the border area in southern Laos has improved. And fourth, the increased aggressiveness and mobility of the South Vietnamese Government forces has begun to hurt the Viet Cong, and the North Vietnamese authorities may now feel that they must quickly strengthen the position of the Viet Cong.

It is difficult, however, to accept the reliability of the statistics—and therefore the magnitude of the increase—in MACVʼs assessment Virtually all such information comes from Vietnamese intelligence sources which tend to overstate the infiltration factor. Moreover, South Vietnamese patrolling of the Laos frontier, which could constitute an important means of collecting or confirming intelligence on the Viet Cong in that area, has been very limited.

Laos Developments Probably Unrelated

It does not necessarily follow, as apparently some American press and even US military (as well as official Vietnamese) sources suggest that the step-up in infiltration is related to recent developments in Laos which have resulted in the freeing of Vietnamese Communist forces there for use in South Vietnam. The Communist forces infiltrated into South Vietnam are believed to be almost entirely Cochinchinese and Annamites, the same stock as the people who constitute the bulk of the South Vietnamese peasantry; on the other hand, the Vietnamese Communist forces serving in Laos are largely Tonkinese. The deployment of Vietnamese Communist armed forces in Laos to the South Vietnamese theater, therefore, would go counter to a basic Communist tactic which has heretofore proved effective in South Vietnam in building up an apparatus from personnel native to this area, familiar with local conditions and terrain, and closely identified with the local populace.

There are other reasons which do not favor the deployment of Vietnamese Communist forces fighting in Laos into South Vietnam. There is a certain amount of mutual distrust among the Annamites, Cochinchinese, and Tonkinese, and some problems in integrating these forces could be expected. Moreover, the capture of Tonkinese personnel would destroy North Vietnamʼs propaganda claim that the Viet Cong insurgency is entirely a movement of the South Vietnamese people.

Conclusions

On the basis of available intelligence information, we conclude that: 1. there has probably been an increase in the infiltration of Communist personnel into South Vietnam during the past two months;

2. it is difficult to assess the magnitude of this movement;

3. the increase in infiltration probably is not related to recent developments in Laos;

4. it appears unlikely that North Vietnamese or Pathet Lao forces in Laos would be committed to South Vietnam at this time; and

5. North Vietnam has the capacity to step up infiltration further, if the situation warrants, with relatively little detection and no great difficulty.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/7-1662. Secret; Noforn. Signed by Hilsman and sent through S/S.

2 Not further identified.

3 Transmitted in telegram 15 from Saigon; Department of State, Central Files 751K.00/7-562.

244. Memorandum for the Record 244. Memorandum for the Record1

Saigon, July 31, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting at Gia Long Palace, Saigon—18 July 1962

ATTENDANCE

His Excellency Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam

General Paul D. Harkins, Commander, Military Assistance Commands, Vietnam and Thailand

General Harkins opened the meeting by telling the President that he and Ambassador Nolting were to leave on Sunday for Hawaii, where they would attend a conference with Secretary of Defense McNamara, which would be attended by members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, representatives of the State Department, and Ambassador Young of Thailand.2 He said that he was sure that he would be asked to review the situation in South Vietnam and its evolution since his arrival in this country. General Harkins told President Diem that he. welcomed this opportunity to give him a résumé of some of the points which he considered to be most important and to receive from the President any advice or any request which he might want to be transmitted to the people attending the Hawaii meeting.

General Harkins then told President Diem that, following their recent meeting, he and Ambassador Nolting had sent a message to Washington on the subject of crop warfare and defoliation. No answer had yet been received concerning the crop warfare portion of their message, but he hoped that the matter would be discussed in Hawaii. Permission has been received to carry out defoliation operations at Bien Hoa.

Since his arrival, the General said, much progress has been made. The number of advisors has increased. There are now advisors down to battalion level, and during the month that they have been there, they have come to know their counterparts and have established a good relationship with them.

Intelligence advisors are now working down at Sector level. Their communications have been installed and the reports that are now coming in are much improved. On the subject of communications, the General added that all divisions now have good equipment. In two months, air-ground coordination will be much improved by the completion of installation of new equipment in aircraft. On 1 September the backbone of the tropo-scatter system will be completed. The new airfield at Pleiku is finished and would be tested this same day. In reply to a question from the President, General Harkins said that the runway was some 6,500 feet long. General Harkins next expressed his satisfaction that we now have M-113ʼs and M-114ʼs in the country and that a promise has been made that 150 more amphibious vehicles would be expedited from the United States and would be here by next Spring. He said that he had requested three more helicopter companies and had been told that he would receive two. The President commented that two would be very good, but that three would be better. General Harkins pointed out that what he said up to this point was all for the good, and added that training will be completed for the Civil Guard by the end of the year and for the SDC by February or March. The President interjected the remark that he considered General Harkins to be somewhat optimistic. The General went on to say that the system of rotation of units for the purpose of retraining them was continuing. The President commented that he saw the necessity of doing this but that he regretted that the procedure created a void. After pointing out the necessity of training, General Harkins repeated that these were all points for the good.

General Harkins then said that during the preceding week he had visited all the divisions. Everywhere it had been reported that there was a serious shortage of company grade officers. In some instances there were only six officers in a battalion. There were instances of companies commanded by aspirants or sergeants. Leadership, he added, was lacking in platoons and companies, the very place where it is needed most—since these are the units which do the fighting. He said that in July there would be some 1500 officers graduating from training school. This will help some, but it would be another six months before any more could be obtained. He told the President that he had checked with Secretary Thuan and General Ty to see if any young officers were surplus in headquarters or in logistic commands and could be freed for service with fighting units which needed them most and were shortest in personnel. The President told General Harkins that he agreed with him completely.

General Harkins then said that he had been informed that some aspirants and other officers, up to major, had been in grade for 3, 4 and 5 years. He felt that selective promotions could be of definite help. The President replied that last year he had reviewed the entire list of officers. Priority of promotion had been given to combat men. In order that they would understand that the selection of those to be promoted was a serious thing, the President had waited several months before announcing the selections. However, when the promotions were made, the date of rank was made retroactive to November 1961. He then added that he was concerned over the number of senior officers who have reached the height of their potential and who lack the education and initiative required in higher grades. In response to General Harkins' remark that such men should be eliminated, the President commented that the situation had been inherited from the French, who were too easy and had made colonels and lieutenant colonels who had no real capability or training. He was considering the thought of elimination. General Harkinʼs suggested that there might be an examination given and that those who failed to qualify would be eliminated. President Diem commented that one of the difficulties in identifying incompetent officers lies in the fact that his Generals do not want to recommend separation of officers who are old friends. General Harkins then commented that promotions have a great effect on morale.

General Harkins then referred to the ambush which had taken place on the preceding Saturday and asked the President what he thought had happened to the leadership of his paratroopers. An hour after the attack, the survivors were still standing around without having taken any counter action. He reminded the President that the force had consisted of 270 men, of whom 20 were killed, but the other 250 did nothing. President Diem said that he had been informed of this and was greatly concerned over it. General Harkins said that he felt this to be an example of the lack of junior leadership. He said that he could understand the Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps had been a considerable drain on the regular forces, but he felt that some way had to be found to get more officers. He suggested that the course at the military academy might be temporarily reduced. The President said that he had contemplated this and thought perhaps three years would be temporarily acceptable. He felt that a two-year course would be too short. General Harkins said that during World War I the course at the U.S. Military Academy had been reduced to two years although in World War II the reduction had been only to three years. He added that although he felt that the situation warrants a temporary reduction in the length of the course, he was in favor of keeping a core of career officers. General Harkins told the President that in World War I the U.S. Army had been expanded to 5 million men and in World War II to 8 million men. The officer strength had been built up by taking specialists from civilian life and giving them 90 days of training. These men were engineers, mechanics, police and other professional types. The President said that he would discuss the matter with Mr. Thuan and review the situation.

General Harkins then told President Diem that he felt that, rather than have large 6 or 7 battalion operations, covering 80 square kilometers, which resulted sometimes in the capture of as little as two VC, better results could be obtained from smaller battalion sized operations based on good intelligence and carried out with speed, under the greatest possible secrecy. Such an operation had been carried out by Colonel Khien in Ba Xuyen and had resulted in 20 VC killed and 200 captured. This, said General Harkins, he considered to be an outstanding operation. In large operations troops must move on the preceding day and, consequently, the VC is alerted and disappears. President Diem agreed completely with General Harkins. General Harkins then said that Zone D, where there are reported to be many VC, would be a good place for the specially trained and equipped units to go in and stay for a couple weeks or more. The President said that this was precisely what he wanted to talk to the General about. The General continued by repeating that the units must stay out on operations and not go out and return the same day. He said that supply of the units would not be difficult. He stressed that the only way to win is to attack, attack, attack. He then spoke of General Khanʼs plan to reorganize the Ranger companies into battalions with a Montagnard company assigned as scouts, somewhat like the American Indians of yore. The President agreed that reorganization of this type is most important.

General Harkins then asked the President if he could give him some information on the overall plan for the establishment of strategic hamlets. He said that Secretary McNamara would surely question him on the subject for the purpose of establishing his plans for the provision of necessary supplies and equipment. He asked if the national plan has been prepared and stated that he realized that there were strategic hamlets in Phu Yen, Binh Duong, Kien Hoa, in fact—everywhere, and added that he liked what he had seen. He asked the President if he could give him some idea of the number of hamlets which were planned for the next month, or the next two or three months, in order to permit orderly planning. He knew, he said, of no National Plan except an order of magnitude which gave the figure of some 7,000 per year. The President indicated that he was aware of the requirement but said that there were many difficulties which he would attempt to explain. General Harkins then told the President that he knew of the recent decree which assigned responsibility for the program to division commanders. He added that this procedure would require a certain amount of time for the formulation of plans. He said that he felt that hamlets were not needed everywhere and added that advance planning was necessary in order to permit time for training of cadres and to obtain the necessary materials. President Diem commented that he realized that this project is an expensive one and that, as for many other projects, money is the main problem. He added that Secretary McNamara must give strong support to the program. General Harkins said that Secretary McNamara would be able to give it stronger support if he were provided some sort of plan to be used as a talking point.

Speaking on the general conduct of the war, General Harkins said that he thought there should be greater use made of the Air Force, citing that no activities had been reported for the previous day. There is now plenty of air support in Vietnam. Targets should be located by intelligence and free areas defined. Where an area is known to be VC controlled it might be a good idea to warn the people by means of pamphlets that they must leave. If they refuse to leave then we could assume the village was VC or VC controlled. General Harkins next spoke of some 15 to 20 naval vessels which are sitting at docks in Vietnam unmanned. Little river craft, in particular, could help much in operations. He next said that there should be greater coordination of activities. The Joint General Staff, Field Command, the Corps, and the Divisions, as well as the Army, Navy and Air Force, should all work in coordination. There should be somebody directly responsible for the war. This might be Field Command, who could be the coordinator but need not necessarily run all operations. As an example of lack of coordination, General Harkins referred to the ambush at Ben Cat saying that if they had been notified, the Air Force could have provided cover for the operation and there probably would have been no ambush. The President commented that the unit involved was overconfident.

General Harkins next said that war is not all military and that the military should help in civic actions such as building bridges, digging wells, providing medical assistance to the people, etc. This would contribute greatly toward winning the people over to the side of the government. President Diem replied that until 1955-56 the Armed Forces were very actively engaged in such activities but with the reorganization of forces into Corps there was no longer any possibility of doing this. Now division commanders say that they have no time and no personnel for this sort of thing. General Harkins suggested that troops on static jobs in defense of key villages, industries, dams and bridges, might find time to participate in a civic action program. For instance, the officers might teach school; the troops could build roads across the dikes, or dams in the paddies. The President replied that all his commanders had said that the troops were very limited and they could not be distracted from their primary duties. It was essential that they stay alert against possible attack at any moment. General Harkins said that the U.S. forces had done a great deal of work with the people in Korea and had won over their hearts and their minds.

(At this point the meeting was interrupted by the arrival of the Presidentʼs Aide with a note.) President Diem, referring to the paper which had been given to him, said that he had just received good news; that in a paratroop operation near Binh Duong two radios had been seized. Also, in the swamp area the Marines had seized a radio receiver, a public address system, a mimeograph machine and a tape recorder. The President added that there was also news of the fact that two of the Americans who had crashed in the C-123 had been found and that the search for the others still continued. He said that he was summoning General Khan, who should have further details. General Harkins expressed his pleasure of the operation and suggested that the battalion involved should stay in the area until Sunday to seek out and destroy the VC.

General Harkins once again referred to the successful civic action program of the Armed Forces in Korea. He said that he recognized the fact that the situation is different here in Vietnam but that he hoped that units would do whatever they could wherever they could. President Diem agreed that they would. General Harkins then suggested that companies assigned to static duties be rotated at three months intervals, otherwise they lose the benefit of their training and tend to develop static thinking habits. As an after-thought, the President said that the Self Defense Corps in the center of the country was doing a great deal to help the people, particularly in building their houses. General Harkins said that this sort of close relationship with the people was very valuable and that if the populace is not treated properly by the military there was danger that the people would be resentful and possibly look to the side of the enemy for help.

General Harkins then said that he thought that the training program in Vietnam was going along very well. He added that he had instructed his advisors to continue the training, particularly in shooting rifles, pistols, and mortars whenever units were in an inactive status. He next said. that we now have a good intelligence system which needs only to be coordinated so that the sectors, the provinces and the military units would receive the same information. With good intelligence and the new mobility, a policy of constant rapid attack is bound to beat the VC. He said that he that he was proud of the ARVN forces and that he only wanted to see more initiative taken. Here, in conclusion, he said, were some of his observations which he would report to Hawaii. In answer to the classic question: “Are we winning or losing?" he could tell them that we are not losing the war. It is true that the ARVN forces are still in a training phase and that the Civil Guard and SDC won't be fully available to relieve regular forces before the end of the year, but he still felt that by exerting constant pressure, by full use of the Air Force, ground forces, the Rangers and Special Forces, the VC could be cleared out. He concluded by saying that he was pleased to see the large number of Montagnards who were coming over to the side of the government. He then asked how he could help the President.

President Diem said that he would like General Harkins to make one thing understood to the Vietnamese senior officers, the Corps and Division Commanders, as well as the Joint General Staff, and that is that General Harkinsʼ headquarters is not running the war. He said that President Kennedy had explained carefully to the Congress of the United States and to the entire world that the Americans were in Vietnam to advise and to assist. His senior commanders should understand that they should not expect the Americans to plan for them, or to issue orders. Some of his officers seemed to feel that if they told their American counterparts what they proposed to do, they then had to wait for agreement before they could carry out their plans. The President said that he wanted them to take their own actions. It was very well to receive information and advice and if the advisors did not agree with the commanders, there should be a discussion of the differences and, if necessary, an appeal through channels for a decision from higher command. Then they should act on their own initiative. Too many officers have a background of service with the French. It is time that they realized that the Americans in Vietnam are not a French expeditionary force. They need equipment and material which they must get from the Americans, but they must not expect plans and commands. General Harkins said that his headquarters is here to advise only, not to command. The President repeated that the General must tell the Vietnamese military that the initiative in waging the war belongs to the Vietnamese. General Harkins told the President that he agreed with this and that, in fact, President Diem is really the Commander-in-Chief. He added that many of the division and regimental commanders were young men who were shouldering great responsibilities. He said that they were acquiring experience and added that the American advisors, who have experience, attempt to pass this experience on to their Vietnamese counterparts by making suggestions to them. General Harkins said that his heart goes out to these young men who, under the Presidentʼs guidance, are working so hard to free their country. President Diem then said that his judgment of the officers is rather severe. Two years of war have brought maturity to some Army personnel serving as province and district chiefs. Many show great promise for the future. Some are very good and have stood up under test. He told General Harkins, that, before the Generalʼs arrival, visitors who had made a tour of the country and had seen some of the military commanders had given him very glowing reports on the fine military bearing of some of these officers. He added that unfortunately his scepticism, in some instances, had been justified because, when under trial, some of these officers have proven that this was all superficial and that in fact they were incapable. President Diem went on to say that since a few months before the arrival of General Harkins he had allowed complete initiative to his commanders. There had been some instances, where, because of special information which he had received, he had issued direct instructions to commanders to be careful or to watch a particular situation closely. He said that command initiative was now so much a function of his military leaders that they rarely inform him anymore of any action they intend to take. He said that he permitted this in order to assess their capabilities. General Harkins said that, with reference to the Presidentʼs comment about his officers' French background, he wanted to point out that the French concept was different from the American. He said that they had been strongly influenced by the Maginot Line concept. The only effect produced by this is that the enemy knows where you are. He added that he would like to see units go out on operations more often and to stay out for periods of three to four weeks. Every unit, he said, needs to have a few victories under its belt. It has to get out and kill the enemy.

The President said that he had wanted to talk to General Harkins about an idea which he referred to as “Cutting the Forest.” He would like to set up special small units to go deep into the jungle and set up ambushes along known or suspected trails. These units would stay away from the isolated villages because otherwise they would be betrayed to the VC who could then find them and destroy them. They would be responsible for obtaining their own information and would remain for periods of at least a month. The Chief of the Phuoc Long Province had told him that, contrary to common belief, the troops did not get sick when they stayed in the woods for prolonged periods of time. They got ill when they returned to the outside. First, their wives fed them too well, and secondly, they failed to purge in order to destroy the effect of the water which they had drunk while in the woods. The President spoke very highly of the Phuoc Long Province Chief, saying that he went out on deep operations two or three times each week and was the only one who knew how to use the Montagnards. In an answer to General Harkins' question, the President said that the Province Chief had obtained valuable intelligence through his operations but that Field Command did not give him proper credit for the information which he had submitted. The President said that one major operation which resulted in the capture of a certain amount of VC material had been carried out on the basis of information supplied by this man. The operation failed to trap any VC. This was because Field Command and Colonel Tranh (5th Division C.O.) had thought that helicopters and paratroops were all that would be needed to carry out the operation. This, said the President, was stupid because there are no drop zones in this densely overgrown area. The Province Chief had suggested a joint operation on the ground which certainly would have produced far better results.

President Diem next told General Harkins that he had seen the U.K. Undersecretary, Mr. Amery, who is a flier and well-versed in air actions against guerrillas. This man had said that the use of helicopters in counter-subversive activities was a fairly new idea and that no doctrine had yet been developed. He advised that careful study be made and that doctrine be developed through experience.

President Diem then reverted back to the subject of “Cutting the Forest.” He said that these units, like the Montagnards, would not use main trails but would mark their routes by breaking inconspicuous little twigs which would not be detected by the enemy. These units should be most effective during the rainy season when it is easier to set up ambushes than it is during the dry season. Too many military leaders, with their routine thinking, have the idea that the rainy season means the dead season as far as operations are concerned. This idea is completely false. General Harkins agreed wholeheartedly with the President and said that he had instructed his advisors to find ways of keeping actions going during the rainy season. The President said that the VC was greatly handicapped by the rains. It is very difficult for them to preserve their foodstuffs and, with the constant drizzle and thoughts of families and native villages, morale drops. The President added that the habits of the VC are known. They get up at 0400, eat, have a period of physical education, and then disperse. At about 1800 they return for their evening meal which is followed by courses in political indoctrination. Obviously, the time to attack is at 0400 in the morning or after 1800 in the evening. The President said that he had discussed this plan with the Chief of the Phuoc Long Province and with Colonel Thong and Lt Colonel Dung, who all agreed that this tactic would pay off, particularly during the rainy season, and each had prepared a rapid study on the subject which the President had consolidated and which he would make available to General Harkins on the following day. Other military leaders had raised objections to the plan. Some had claimed that since the battalions are already thoroughly understrength men could not be withdrawn to form new units. Leaders could not be spared. If carried out on a large scale, this plan could disorganize the Army. General Harkins said that he thought it should be tried. The President said that he felt that the men selected for this program should be given some supplementary reward. He had talked about this with Secretary Thuan, who agreed but pointed out that it could amount to a sizeable sum of money. General Harkins repeated that he thought the idea should be tried and added that he felt that the men involved should be volunteers. Training would offer no particular problem because of the Special Forces available to do this. With the combination of strategic hamlets and activities such as these, the VC would certainly suffer. He added that the Rangers should go out on sustained operations. The President agreed, saying that the Rangers, either in company size or reconstituted battalions, could certainly create insecurity for the VC and would leave them no bases which they could consider safe havens. General Harkins agreed and said that it was absolutely essential that the VC be permitted no permanent base from which they could operate.

General Harkins next asked the President how much infiltration he thought there had been during the past month. The President replied that the VC had come in in large numbers but he didnʼt know how many. He referred to the incident regarding the capture of a VC sergeant in Phaoc Long Province who had spoken freely and revealed that a company composed of cadres had departed from the North in April and had infiltrated into the South. These men were natives of the South who had gone North following the Geneva Accords, had been trained there, and were now returning. The President said that the recent aggressiveness of the VC which had resulted in a number of defeats to ARVN forces was the result of the desire of newly arrived cadres to show their superiors in the North that the VC in the South were more effective under their leadership. General Harkins commented that the ARVN soldiers must not be permitted to believe that the VC is 12 feet tall, adding that this had been done to the Americans during World War II when attempts were made to convince them that the Germans were 15 feet tall. President Diem said that this was the fault of Western journalists who exaggerate the prowess of the VC. He added that in order to overcome this, the initiative must be stressed. General Harkins agreed, repeating his earlier statement that RVNAF must drive constantly against the VC.

At this point Brigadier General Kanh, Colonel Vinh and another paratroop officer arrived with the radio equipment which had been captured earlier in the day. General Kanh said that the two pieces of equipment had been captured in two separate places. There had been no major engagement with the VC. He added that the principal radio which had been broadcasting to Saigon-Cholon had been moved northward and that Colonel Thanh was carrying out an operation in that area. There was a brief discussion of the equipment during which it was pointed out that it was handmade and that there was a possibility that some of the parts might have been obtained in Cambodia. General Harkins said that his technical intelligence officer could help to identify the material. General Kanh spoke briefly on the operation, saying that it had been carried out in secrecy and that deception had been used to divert the attention of the VC from the real target. He added that the plan had been formulated and carried out so swiftly that the III Corps Advisor had not been informed of it. He also spoke briefly of a Marine Corps operation carried out the night before which involved two companies using boats. This operation had resulted in the seizure of a battery-powered radio, a mimeograph machine and a tape recorder. General Khanh then said that the Airborne troops involved in the operation in Binh Duong would be withdrawn and replaced with Special Forces. (General Kanh and the paratroop officers left.)

President Diem described to General Harkins a visit which he had made to a Montagnard area near Dalat where 3,000 members of the Koho tribe have been relocated. He expressed satisfaction with the defenses of the settlement, which include fox-holes in each house. The spirit of the tribe was demonstrated on the 29th of June when they wounded two or three Viet Cong who had come to terrorize them. On the occasion of the Presidentʼs visit they carried out a mock raid with the help of the Civil Guard. The exercise was well performed even to the explosion of grenades to simulate shells which could have been fired from the artillery at the Military Academy. The President also told General Harkins that he had checked on a report made by some Missionaries that there was a serious shortage of rice. He found that the claims were exaggerated and premature. He had also visited Montagnards near Lake da K'Lac some sixteen kilometers from Ban Me Thuot and had gone from there to see the Montagnards and the Cham near Phan Rang. There, he had exceptionally donated 300,000 piastres to help the people to build their homes. He had wanted to go as far as Dak To but the weather would not permit him to do so. General Harkins told the President that he had recently visited the high plateau and had found that the weather was not good. He mentioned that at Achau he had found mat the battalion stationed there was operating properly, with one company in the fort and two out on patrols. When the President commented that this battalion was too far out and was in fact immobilized, General Harkins pointed out that they were only 5 kilometers from the Laotian border and were performing useful patrol duty. The President replied that if it were not for the fertile valley which extends from A Luoi the employment of this battalion would constitute a luxury which could not be afforded in view of the general shortage of effectives.

President Diem then said that the first class of “intellectuals" would graduate from Tu Duc at the end of the month. He could not give the General an answer to his question as to how large the class was, but explained that these were the pharmacists, doctors, engineers and other professional men who had been mobilized. He said that, at first, there had been some difficulty because the faculty of the school lacked qualified instructors to discuss cultural subjects, but this had been remedied by having the Commandant of the Military Academy and other competent teachers present special courses several times a week. At this point, the President referred briefly to early attempts, which had been prompted by Secretary of State Dulles, to mobilize the brain-power of the country. The response to an appeal to serve had been completely negative. When General Harkins asked if the men who were about to graduate were properly motivated, the President replied that they were, and that Colonel Huyen, the Military School Commandant had done much to help in this. General Harkins then asked if the Colonel had good military training, to which the President replied that Huyen had worked with the General Staff on plans and training for four or five years. He added that, because of his educational background, the Generals detested him and that he had received no vote for promotion during the last review of potential candidates. General Harkins commented that there were many good officers who were not graduates of the Service academies and pointed out that General Decker and General Marshall were among these.

General Harkins was then told that President Diem had received a visit from his Artillery Commander. After explaining that he had followed this officerʼs career closely and that he was a graduate of the Command and General Staff School at Leavenworth, the President said that they had discussed the situation of the 4.2 mortars. He said that this weapon was not being used because it was too heavy and that the roads were not good. He said that there were nine battalions, each equipped with 27 mortars amounting to a total of 243 pieces. Only four hundred rounds had been fired from them. He added that their range is too short and that too many men have been immobilized because of them—in fact the entire personnel of nine battalions. On the other hand, the twelve battalions equipped with 105s were working well. There are a total of 156 pieces, twelve in each battalion, and twelve at the Military Academy which are far more effective than the 243 mortars. General Harkins said that he would look into the situation.

The President next mentioned the fact that he had talked with the Korean Military Mission prior to their departure. He said that they had made suggestions based on their observations but that most of these were erroneous because the Koreans saw critical areas where there were none. They had no real appreciation of the terrain in Vietnam and saw everything in neat geometric patterns. They did tell the President that there was a great deal more artillery in Korea—to counteract the Soviet concept of mass employment of heavy guns. General Harkins commented that 11,000 tons had been shot in one day while he was in Korea. The President went on to say that the Koreans had made the valid suggestion that the main defenses of strategic hamlets should be out of range of grenade launchers. This could be accomplished by erecting an exterior fence.

Next the President said that he had received a visit from the Director General of the Banque of Indo China. This gentlemen, whose main office is now in Paris, had been one of the first to resist the Japanese. He had also followed the Algerian problem carefully and suggested a system, like that used in Algeria, to protect the high tension transmission lines which would soon be ready for installation from Danh Quan. The President described this system as a very wide swath, many meters across, which would contain a series of barbed-wire obstacles, with the intervening spaces strewn with anti-personnel mines. This system had been completely effective in Algeria and had the advantage of not requiring large numbers of troops. General Harkins, at this point, said that a group of Chinese business men, whose identities were unknown to him, had offered to clear a kilometer wide swath the full length of the border in return for the right to sell the lumber obtained. President Diem expressed the opinion that transportation problems would be insurmountable, but offered to talk to the men if they asked to see him. He then reverted to the subject of the protection of the high tension lines, saying that most of the pylons were already erected—an average of two per kilometer—and that the cost, $6,000 per kilometer, had been appreciable. With porcelain insulators (General Harkins indicated how easy it would be to knock them out with high powered rifles) there was a great problem in ensuring security of the lines. The President added that the VC were even beginning to kidnap and harass the Japanese who were in charge of the project.

President Diem then told General Harkins that he had held discussions with Secretary Thuan over a period of months on the subject of how to economize men. He had finally decided that Field Command should be eliminated. Not only would this afford an economy of personnel but would permit faster reaction time in the execution of orders from the General Staff. It had become obvious to him that the Field Commander was not capable. When General Harkins said that General Minh was one of the best combat commanders in Vietnam and asked what plans the President had for him, President Diem replied that he was giving thought to the matter.

When General Harkins thanked the President for having granted him so much time, President Diem said that he would like to continue their discussion. He wanted, he said, to talk about the civil situation in Vietnam. He first outlined briefly the history of education in the country, explaining that it was only from 1920 that the French had set up high schools. In 1930 they added certain University faculties to the educational system. Before the war there were few secondary schools and, of course, during the nine years of war educational facilities were practically non-existent. Since 1954 education in Vietnam has mushroomed. The Vietnamese, who are studious by nature, are rapidly filling the gap in educated people. Foreign observers, said the President, do not understand the evolution which has taken place. Before this regime, only favored children were able to attend moneymaking private schools, or go abroad, to France, for study. From these came many amateur politicians who gathered around Bao Dai. When President Diem took over the reins of government, he accepted the counsel of friends, both Vietnamese and foreign, and included some of these people in his first cabinet. They were not capable and had no credit with the population. When the President formed his second cabinet in September 1954, he said, these people were eliminated. Also, he added, he was urged to accept the participation of representatives of religious sects who, at the time, were nothing but powerful bandits with their own private armies. Their audacity reached the point where they even fired upon officers of the Vietnamese General Staff. It was necessary to suppress them, and this was done. Next, said the President, Mr. Malcolm MacDonald came to give him a lesson about not imposing his ideas too strictly. Even since 1960 there has been constant criticism of the government. This, President Diem insisted, is due to the fact that observers are looking at past history. For the past two years, especially, he said, there has been a great change in the younger generation. There are many fine technicians now in government service. The status of the business man has also gone through a great transformation. When the President first took over the government he was told that only the French and the Chinese could hope to obtain bank credits. Officials of USOM, he said, had advised him that if he attempted to wipe out the black market, the Chinese would paralyze the finances of the country. He was told that it was fine to be nationalistic, but without good management he would be running to failure. General Harkins asked at this point where people were now trained for government service. The President replied that a school is now operating for municipal administrative officials and that selections for more important positions are made from the ranks of those best qualified by education and experience. Great strides have been made in the management field. The Chamber of Commerce, now four years old, is doing valuable work. There has been a gradual, but steady build-up in industry and in the import-export trade. Men, who three or four years ago thought of government laws and regulations as pure annoyances, now see that this was normal and in the interest of good order. Opposition today, said the President, is from fossils who are still far behind the actuality, who are still ambitious but who recite stupidities about the subjugation of government officials. The new class of technicians is independent. They discuss the philosophy of the regime and they accept it because it is valid. Ministers are independent and express their own ideas. Among them are relatives of known rebels and of refugees to France. Some of them, when they were invited to join the cabinet, were reluctant to do so. They now present their ideas and certain ones among them are quite stubborn. In addition to this, continued the President, the members of the National Assembly are former judges, lawyers, engineers, doctors and other professional men who have independent means and do not need to serve. When General Harkins asked if there were any members of the sects in the Assembly, the President replied that there was a member from Tay Ninh—though not associated with the former bandits.

He then insisted that when people formed opinions of the country they did so only in the light of the former officials who lacked professional conscience. These people are no longer in office. There is a new group of younger men, graduates of schools such as the Ecole Polytechnique, who have ideas and who are capable. There is a newly formed National Economic Council which is now holding its second session. They raise and discuss economic problems, and nothing could be better. Still, they are not opposed to the government and they defend national interests. Opinion in America, said the President, is behind the times. The latest report of the Bank of Indo China praises the economic development in Vietnam and points up the progress which has been made and the prestige acquired. Much in the minds of United States Senators is because of their neglect to see the progress made. They must realize that government officials here are independent and have their own ideas. At this point the President apologized for having taken so much of General Harkins' time and said that he had done so because he had wanted to tell him what the true situation is. He commented that a manʼs stomach can be quickly filled but that it takes a long time to fill his brain. It is unfortunate, he added, that many people will pay no attention to what is said unless it is bad. He wondered why USOM and others did not put the record straight. General Harkins said that the Embassy had recently published a progress report on Vietnam.4 The President said that he was aware of this but he deplored the fact that people still listened to disgruntled amateur politicians who had nothing to say about the government which was not contemptuous or otherwise unjust. General Harkins suggested that the President might call some of these people in and talk to them—to which the President replied that it would be useless. They have preconceived ideas and can see only those things which were bad in former days. They refuse to see the thousands of competent men now in service and particularly the thirty or so in the National Assembly who are moral, patriotic and independent in their thinking. Those who judge by what they hear from malcontents and plotters merely encourage these unbalanced minds. The President then went on to say that last year, at the time of the floods, he had accepted Ambassador Noltingʼs suggestion that some of the people who were critical of the government be invited to serve on a flood relief committee. Even though he considered them to be incapable, they had been invited to serve. It soon became obvious that they didnʼt want to leave Saigon because of the danger to their persons. These were the people who formed the opposition to the government—who uttered vague criticism but had nothing constructive to contribute. General Harkins said that the first question that he asked of any member of the press who came to see him was whether or not he had been anywhere in Vietnam outside of Saigon. The answer was usually “no".

The meeting came to a close.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: 65 A 3501, 092.Vietnam. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record. Copies were sent to McNamara, Gilpatric, Lemnitzer, William Bundy, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense. The source text bears the stamp “Mr. Bundy has seen."

2 See Document 248.

4 See Document 222.

245. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 245. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 20, 1962—7 p.m.

84. For Viet Nam Working Group. Deptel 61.2 Although Task Force Saigon fully appreciates importance establishment geographical priorities for Strategic Hamlet Program, we favor somewhat different approach from that suggested reftel. As Dept aware, Task Force some time ago agreed on geographically phased counterinsurgency program including priorities (Emb despatch 429).3 This program has served as basis US advice to GVN on Strategic Hamlet Program and in deciding allocation of US resources to specific clear and hold operations. Believe we now have more effective means of applying these priorities de facto to ongoing Strategic Hamlet Program. With establishment US owned piaster fund and PA/PR for dollar procurement, we should have carrot with which to induce GVN to come up with coordinated clear and hold operations in those areas which we regard as having highest priority. If this approach works, effect will be to apply bulk of resources and effort in highest priority areas. Through experience we should also be able to develop more accurate programming justifications.

This approach will not result in slowing down or stopping Strategic Hamlet Program in non-priority areas. GVN is firmly and publicly committed to pushing program on nation-wide basis. While this is bound to result in some failures, we do not think that there is any substantial risk that these will be “fatal to GVN”. Our impression is that even where program appears to be spread quite “thin”, it is causing VC trouble. Moreover, GVN, specifically Nhu and MinInterior, are aware of risks and are now insisting that hamlets be established in most secure areas first.

In sum, Task Force Saigon believes should welcome undeniable momentum behind Strategic Hamlet Program, seek to impose priorities on it by device of concentrating resources under US control on areas considered most important, and accept as divided any benefits which flow from operations of program in other areas.

We are in regular touch with Thompson and believe above is in accord with his own thinking. Will discuss further with him prior Honolulu meeting if possible.

Re earth moving equipment, there are indications President Diem is prepared to cut back on Presidential Road Program and this may release some equipment for hamlet construction. We are also studying other possibilities.

Comment: In discussion with Pres Diem July 19, he raised question priorities in Strategic Hamlet Program, saying he understood our desire to gear our aid programs to the Strategic Hamlet Program, and need for priorities. He said that general priorities are: (a) in white areas extending into blue and eventually red; (b) in the richest and most heavily populated parts of the Delta, roughly the ten provinces of the Delta Plan; (c) in areas, especially coastal plains of central provinces, where Viet Cong pressure greatest and danger of cutting the country greatest. He said that the establishment of fixed priorities in building strategic hamlets is not simple. In some areas, the districts, villages and hamlets themselves are sufficiently rich and enthusiastic to carry out program largely under their own steam. In poorer areas, or in areas where the people are less ready to take sides, govt resources would be concentrated. Thus there would continue to develop Strategic Hamlets beyond the first priority areas indicated above, but govt help would be applied on a priority basis as indicated in (a), (b), and (c) above. In short the substance of this conversation, I believe, reinforces the rationale of this telegram.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/7-2062. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 242.

3 See footnote 1, Document 11.

246. Memorandum of Conversation, United States Delegation Building, Geneva, July 22, 1962, 11:30 a.m. 246. Memorandum of Conversation, United States Delegation Building, Geneva, July 22, 1962, 11:30 a.m.1

Geneva, July 22, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Governor Harriman

William H. Sullivan

Anthony Clinton Swezey

Viet-Nam Vu Van Mau, Foreign Minister of Viet-Nam

SUBJECT

Tour d'Horizon on S.E. Asia—Laos, Viet-Nam-Cambodia Relations, Progress in Viet-Nam struggle

USMC/8

Foreign Minister Mau called on the Secretary by appointment. The Secretary opened the conversation by asking for the Foreign Ministerʼs assessment of the progress being made in Viet-Nam. The Foreign Minister replied that real military progress was being made, especially as a result of the mobility provided to the Viet-Nam forces by United States military assistance. He thought the next need was for rapid telecommunications which would make this mobility more effective.

The Secretary said that in his view there were two essential elements to success in Viet-Nam. The first was to be sure of full popular support for the Viet-Nam forces in their struggle against the guerrillas, and to pursue that struggle to a successful conclusion. The United States did not look upon Viet-Nam as a problem similar to Laos. In the first place the Vietnamese people are fighting against infiltration and in the second place the geography of Viet-Nam makes our assistance more feasible. We therefore do not anticipate any negotiations looking toward a Lao-type settlement in Viet-Nam. We have told the other side that if they will stop the attacks peace will result in Viet-Nam. But we do not intend to permit the other side any foothold in Viet-Nam, particularly one which might be assisted by an airlift. Therefore the orders are to shoot down any strange aircraft that appears over Viet-Nam. The second element of success for Viet-Nam will depend upon good relations with its neighbors. This would apply both to Laos and to Cambodia.

The Foreign Minister said he agreed that good relations were essential but dilated for some time upon the difficulties in establishing good relations with Cambodia. He mentioned the Viet-Nam desire to have mixed military commissions to secure the Cambodia-Viet-Nam border. He said that Sihanouk had turned this down but had proposed the establishment of a Viet-Nam military mission in Phnom Penh, a proposal which the Vietnamese Government had accepted as a satisfactory first step.

The Secretary observed that unsatisfactory relations with neighboring countries in Southeast Asia seemed to arise partly from undue publicity accorded to statements by personalities. There followed a certain discussion about the problems of calming mutual press attacks, from which the Foreign Minister drew the conclusion that external assistance to this end would be of very little use.

The Foreign Minister said there was a point which he wished to raise concerning the representation of the Viet Minh in Vientiane. He had discussed this with Couve2 and twice with Souvanna. Couve will discuss it again with Souvanna in Paris on July 25. He realized the Lao could not cut off all contact with the Viet Minh but perhaps they would be willing to maintain the current status in which South Viet-Nam has an Embassy and the Viet Minh merely a trade and cultural mission. He asked U.S. support for this position. The Secretary said that the problem does not concern Viet-Nam alone but also China, Germany and probably Korea. He said that the U.S. will be alive to the interests of Saigon in this matter.

The Foreign Minister said that the next important problem concerned the routes and points of control for withdrawal of Viet Minh forces from Laos. Governor Harriman pointed out that this matter should best be discussed in Vientiane. The Foreign Minister said he agreed but wished to stress his Governmentʼs interest to the Secretary. The Secretary said that this was a matter of special interest because of the difficulty in identifying Viet Minh troops and suggested we should not rely entirely upon the ICC. We should for example attempt to control infiltration into Viet-Nam from the Vietnamese side of the border and we should also exploit other means of assuring ourselves that the Viet Minh will withdraw from Laos back into North Viet-Nam.

The Foreign Minister asked whether the Secretary Felt that the Russians will really exercise control over the Chinese and the North Vietnamese to observe the agreement on Laos. The Secretary Felt that the Russians did not want a war in Southeast Asia and that they would therefore presumably exercise control over the North Vietnamese to a point.

The Foreign Minister asked whether the Chinese Communists had proposed a conference on Viet-Nam. The Secretary replied that he had seen this only in statements which the Chinese Communists had made but that no direct proposals had been made to the U.S. The Foreign Minister pointed out that Souvanna Phouma has made a similar proposal.

Governor Harriman said that Souvanna Phouma has a tremendous problem in making neutrality a success in Laos. He felt that the Vietnamese should not lay too heavy demands upon him. In the Conference Saturday3 the North Vietnamese had disgusted everyone by their intervention and Harriman thought the South Vietnamese had made a tactical error by answering that intervention by a parallel statement of accusations, some of which were directed against Souvanna Phouma. He said that Souvanna had been annoyed and told us afterwards that he had been tempted to reply to Foreign Minister Mauʼs speech. Harriman thought that it would be wise for the Vietnamese to establish good relations with Souvanna because they must work with him in the future. The Foreign Minister agreed that they must work with Souvanna but that they should not shield him from the problems he must face. No accusation had been intended directly against Souvanna in the Foreign Ministerʼs speech. Governor Harriman said that Souvanna had interpreted it in that way and hoped that the Vietnamese in the future would work with us helpfully to bolster Souvanna Phouma rather than making his work more difficult.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330, July 1962. Secret. Drafted by Sullivan on July 23, approved in S on July 24. Copies were sent to Saigon, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, and Geneva. Secretary Rusk was in Geneva for the final sessions of the Laos Conference. The meeting was held in the U.S. Delegation building.

2 Maurice Couve de Murville, French Foreign Minister.

3 A summary report of the North and South Vietnamese speeches at the final plenary session of the Laos Conference, July 21, was transmitted in Secto 8 from Geneva, July 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/7-2162)

247. Memorandum of a Conversation, Barringtonʼs Suite, Hotel Suisse, Geneva, July 22, 1962, 2:30 p.m. 247. Memorandum of a Conversation, Barringtonʼs Suite, Hotel Suisse, Geneva, July 22, 1962, 2:30 p.m.1

Geneva, July 22, 1962, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

United States W. Averell Harriman

William H. Sullivan

North Vietnam Foreign Minister Ung van Kiem

Mr. Hoang Nguyen, Secy. Gen. of Delegation

Interpreter (name unknown)

Burma Under Secy. for Foreign Affairs, James Barrington

Mr. Maung Muang Gyi, Foreign Office

During the course of a reception given by the Burmese on Saturday, July 21, Mr. Barrington asked Governor Harriman whether the latter would appreciate an opportunity to talk privately with the North Vietnamese. When the Governor indicated his willingness to do so, Barrington arranged a meeting for the following day in his room at the Hotel Suisse.

Governor Harriman opened the conversation by recalling that the wartime policies of President Roosevelt had envisaged independence for Vietnam through the mechanism of some sort of international machinery. President Roosevelt had not anticipated that the French would return to Indochina. He asked the Foreign Minister what would have happened in his country if President Rooseveltʼs policies had been carried out.

The Foreign Minister replied that he and his government were well aware of President Rooseveltʼs policies, and had been very surprised when the Americans acquiesced in the attempt of the French to reestablish their colonial control in Indochina. He felt that the following years were a great tragedy and had caused much suffering to the people of Vietnam.

[Here follow eight paragraphs on the situation in Laos.]

The Foreign Minister said he wished to turn from Laos to the question of Vietnam. He said that the Vietnamese people strongly resented American intervention in Vietnam. He said that the 1954 Agreements on Indochina had provided for the reunification of Vietnam through elections. If it had not been for the intervention of the US in 1956, that reunification would have been achieved, either by federation or by elections, which would have placed all of Vietnam under a single regime. US intervention had in recent years grown worse until it was now a fact that American forces were mercilessly killing Vietnamese citizens. While Governor Harriman spoke of President Kennedyʼs policy which respects neutrality, and the fact that it has produced an agreement on Laos, the Foreign Minister could not understand how President Kennedy could continue the policy of military intervention in Vietnam.

Governor Harriman said that he wished to reply very frankly to the statement which the Foreign Minister had just made. President Kennedy, before making a decision to send increased military assistance to South Vietnam in response to President Diemʼs request, had directed that a very careful study be made of the situation. From that study he was convinced, as the recent ICC report2 has later borne out, that the guerrilla activity and the killing in South Vietnam were directed from the North, and that the guerrillas were led, trained and supplied by the North. When President Kennedy sent the additional forces into South Vietnam, he made clear that they were there for the purposes of helping the Vietnamese to defend themselves against this aggression from the North. He also made clear that if that aggression stopped, there would be no need for continued presence of those American forces. Therefore, the way that peace could be brought to Vietnam would be for the North Vietnamese to cease their aggression against South Vietnam, and to stop the guerrilla activity. Then the status envisaged by the 1954 Agreements could be reestablished and the possibilities of dealing with other difficulties could be explored.

The Foreign Minister replied that the Americans did not seem to understand the situation in Vietnam. The history of South Vietnam has always been one of struggle. The forces who are fighting against the Diem regime are people from the South who take their weapons from those supplied by the Americans. There are no North Vietnamese airplanes, ships or motor vehicles which can bring guerrilla forces or weapons into Vietnam. This is a popular revolt against the Diem regime and American intervention is trying to suppress it. Governor Harriman, noting an impending appointment he had with Secretary Rusk, said that he did not believe it would be useful to argue the issue. He was thoroughly convinced, as were other objective observers, that the cause of the trouble in South Vietnam came from the North. The US military assistance to South Vietnam would continue so long as that aggression persisted. He wanted the Foreign Minister to understand that and to understand that the way to bring peace to Vietnam was for the North to cease its aggression.

Before departing, however, he wished to return to the first part of the conversation which he and the Foreign Minister had had concerning Laos. He felt that clear undertakings on the part of the US Government and on the part of the North Vietnamese to carry out scrupulously all the provisions of the Geneva Agreements on Laos would result in peace in Laos. He trusted that that would be done and that this sort of cooperation between the US and North Vietnam could make a great contribution toward the peace of Southeast Asia.

The Foreign Minister agreed with this statement and said he would remember the first part of the conversation that he and Governor Harriman had had this afternoon. He hoped, however, that Governor Harriman would not forget the second part of the conversation, and particularly what the Foreign Minister had had to say about American military intervention in Vietnam.

On that note, the meeting broke up with mutual thanks to Mr. Barrington for providing an opportunity for these talks to have taken place.

1 Source: Columbia University, Harriman Papers, Vietnam. Drafted by Sullivan and authorized by Harriman. The meeting was held in Barringtonʼs suite at the Hotel Suisse.

2 See Document 208.

248. Record of the Sixth Secretary of Defense Conference, Camp Smith, Hawaii, July 23, 1962 248. Record of the Sixth Secretary of Defense Conference, Camp Smith, Hawaii, July 23, 19621

Camp Smith, Hawaii, July 23, 1962.

VIETNAM

Item #1—Review of GVN and RVNAF actions and progress since 1 May to include estimate of situation now and forecast for next six months.

Summary of Discussion

1. Gen Harkins opened the discussion by summarizing progress to date. He indicated there is no doubt that we are on the winning side. If our programs continue, we can expect VC actions to decline. The following subjects were summarized: a. Strategic Hamlet Program

With regard to the Strategic Hamlet program, 2400 have been constructed and a total of 6000 should be completed by the end of the year. Some of the hamlets are not particularly good. There has been no national plan for their establishment. However, Pres Diem has recently formed a committee to coordinate the program and ARVN division commanders will now be included in implementing actions. COMUSMACV has initiated a program to insure that equipment is phased into the Hamlet project in an orderly manner.

It was pointed out that in certain areas the reception of the Hamlet program has been very good. Approximately 115,000 Montagnard tribesmen have come out of the hills, asking for help by the government. Pres Diem has visited some of the tribes and has spoken to the people about the Hamlet program.

b. Communications

Thus far, 14 provinces have been equipped. The Backbone system will be completed by 1 September 1962. Reaction time has been improved considerably.

c. Training

Intelligence is improving and training programs are generally ahead of schedule, including programs for the Army, the Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps. In this connection, it is planned that a retraining program for the Self Defense Corps will be initiated next year.

d. Operations

Contact is being made with the VC every day. During April 434 ground operations were mounted. This was increased to 441 in May. Over 1000 air sorties were flown in June. The GVN still needs to work on their organization but progress is being made. Pres Diem has indicated that he plans that his troops will get out in the field more often and stay out longer.

e. River Boat Program

With regard to the boat program for inland waterways, Gen Harkins stated that the program is going well and that additional boats are not needed at present.

f. Armed Helicopters

Gen Harkins stated that some helicopters should be armed for suppressive fire. Adm Felt outlined a request he had made to the JCS for new USA flexible gun kits, the XM 153. He recommended the kits and tech reps to assist in installation be sent to SVN. Sec McNamara directed VAdm Riley, Director of the Joint Staff, to start a project on this item so that a report could be made next week. SecDef asked if helicopters were equipped with self-sealing fuel tanks and/or armor. He was given a negative reply. SecDef then indicated he would speak with Army personnel further on the question during a forthcoming visit to Fort Bragg.

g. Defoliant Operations/Crop Destruction

Gen Harkins next outlined requests that have been made for further defoliation operations. The single approved operation at Bien Hoa started the week of 15 July and is in progress. A requirement exists for crop spraying in areas vacated by the Montagnards when they move to the Strategic Hamlets. The VC will use these crops unless they are destroyed. Amb Nolting pointed out that real progress is being made with movement of the Montagnards and that greater results could be expected if crop destruction is undertaken. A critical point on the side of the VC is how to keep the infiltrators fed. Adm Felt pointed out that two recommendations were pending in JCS with respect to defoliant operations (Delta area) and crop destruction. He stated he has not forwarded a COMUSMACV recommendation on defoliating communication routes and an elephant grass area in Northern SVN. With regard to crop destruction, SecDef inquired if the GVN could procure required chemicals on the world market, outside of the US. Mr Bundy stated that they could probably purchase chemicals from Dow Chemical Corp. SecDef asked Amb Nolting if he felt that crop destruction would create adverse propaganda in SVN. Amb Nolting replied that destruction of vacated Montagnard crops should not create a problem and that the GVN have used napalm to burn these crops. Food is a limiting factor in the VC campaign. The harvesting season is approaching and we will need to act fast if we are going to get results. Sec McNamara next pointed out the political problem involved. The US has just agreed to a settlement in Laos. This is a critical time with regard to international relations. It will be necessary to discuss this further in Washington.

[Here follow sections h. Jet Aircraft, i. Armored Personnel Carriers, and decisions made and actions to be taken.]

Item #2—Training and Equipment Status of RVNAF, CG and SDC.

Summary of Discussion.

1. Gen Harkins summarized progress of RVNAF, CG and SDC. The programs are coming along well and in most cases are ahead of schedule. Equipment is being provided as fast as the troops are capable of absorbing it. The limiting factor is the shortage of ARVN officers and NCOʼs which should improve within the next 6 months. The VNN and VNMC are in good shape and there is no shortage of equipment.

2. SecDef noted that 6 months ago we had practically nothing and we have made tremendous progress to date. However, we have been concentrating on short term crash-type actions and now we must look ahead to a carefully conceived long-range program for training and equipping RVNAF and phase out of major US combat, advisory and logistics support activities. He asked how long a period before the VC could be eliminated as a disturbing force. Gen Harkins estimated about one year from the time that we are able to get RVNAF, CG and SDC fully operational and really pressing the VC in all areas.

3. SecDef directed that a long-range program be laid out to include training requirements, equipment requirements, US advisory requirements, and US units assuming that it is going to require approximately 3 years to bring the VC in SVN under control. SecDef pointed out that we will have a big replacement job next year for US personnel; about 8,000 will have to be replaced. We must get moving now on language training, guerrilla training and other related items in order to keep the pipeline full. Adm Felt noted that in the materiel field, availability of helicopters for VNAF would be a problem. SecDef stated that production of helicopters could be speeded up and directed that optimum requirements be submitted in order that FY 64 procurement can be expedited.

4. The subject of availability of VNAF pilots was discussed and BGen Anthis pointed out the major problem of obtaining GVN clearances for personnel to be sent to CONUS for pilot training.

5. SecDef then stated that we are behind schedule in our Defended Hamlet-Strategic Village program and the key to the problem is wresting areas from VC control and protecting the population. We must take a conservative view and assume it will take 3 years instead of one year. We must line up our long range program as it may become difficult to retain public support for our operations in Vietnam. The political pressure will build up as US losses continue to occur. In other words we must assume the worst and make our plans accordingly.

6. Gen Harkins pointed out that some areas are better than others and described successes in the Delta area where the GVN has increased its control in one area from 40% to 70% in the past year. He also pointed out that all actions are not VC actions but some are conducted by “bandits” which have been operating in SVN for thousands of years.

7. SecDef announced that training of Citizens' Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG) would be assumed by DOD. The details for this takeover will be worked out by … COMUSMACV-CINCPAC and requirements reported to DOD.

8. Mr Johnson asked about the morale of the CG and SDC. Gen Harkins stated that this was a problem in view of the large numbers of casualties, infiltration of SDC and CG by the VC, separation from families, no rotational policy for relieving troops in the field, and other matters. Amb Nolting stated that a request had been made to State Dept to provide PL 480 foodstuffs to help in this area.

9. Adm Felt passed out CINCPAC Weekly Intelligence Digest of 20 July2 and called attention to articles on Vietnam.

Decisions Made and Actions To Be Taken

1. Prepare plans for gradual scaling down of COMUSMACV during next 3-year period. (COMUSMACV) a. Prepare a long-range training program with view to establishing Officer Corps to manage GVN military operations.

b. Objective is to give SVN an adequate military capability without the need for special US military assistance.

c. Lay down long-range program and requirements to place material in country designed for turnover to RVNAF 3 years from now.

2. Prepare optimum helicopter requirements for procurement in FY 64. (COMUSMACV)

3. Prepare plan for replacing US personnel to be rotated out of SVN. Place personnel in training now and get into pipeline in time for replacement, e.g. language and intelligence training, etc. (COMUSMACV, CINCPAC, Service Depts)

4. Update figures on CG/SDC training. (COMUSMACV/CINCPAC)

5. Develop plan for DOD assumption of training responsibility for CIDG. (MGen Krulak … COMUSMACV/CINCPAC)

6. Reexamine numbers of M-113ʼs and M-114ʼs required for SVN and advise SecDef. (COMUSMACV,CINCPAC)

7. Speed up delivery of presently scheduled M-113ʼs and M-114ʼs from 1 June 1963 to 1 November 1962. UCS, DA).

Item #3—Strategic Hamlet Program.

Summary of Discussion

1. Gen Harkins gave a brief description of the GVN strategic hamlet program. There is no overall government program for building strategic hamlets: Country Team is working with GVN committee, appointed last week, to develop this program. CT plan is to introduce materials as soon as possible for 1500 additional hamlets. Amb Nolting stated Country Team was pushing on all fronts with GVN to get orderly priorities. Situation still not clear. Basic problem is that GVN is building sporadically all over the country where it is safe to do so. CT agrees following priorities are paramount; First—Delta Region, Second—Coastal Region, Central SVN.

2. Gen Harkins cited definite progress evidenced by Presidential Decree issued two weeks ago placing division commanders in charge of implementation of the strategic hamlet program in their respective division tactical zones.

3. Amb Nolting indicated that the Country Team is working in closer relationship with GVN and can influence priority location of strategic hamlets by placing US assistance in areas we deem important.

4. Sec McNamara asked what types and quantities of materials were needed for strategic hamlet construction, and what items came under MAP.

Col Buchanan, COMUSMACV, indicated that 397 villages had been programmed in FY 62 and FY 63 MAP for completion by the end of FY 63.MAP would support only such ordnance items as carbines, shotguns, Very pistols, flares and so forth. AID furnishes construction items such as barbed wire, steel posts, etc., plus communications equipment. Request is being completed to develop an add-on for FY 63 MAP budget of $4,000,000 for 1,500 additional villages. He cited the following planning figures: a. Each village averages four hamlets. There are roughly 2,500 villages and 17,000 hamlets in SVN.

b. Village package consists of following organization: Four squads of 12 men each, armed with carbines, shotguns, Very pistols, and flares.

c. Village periphery calculated at an average of 6 kilometers. Sec McNamara asked if the AID Budget carried complementary items for the number of villages mentioned under MAP. Mr Fippin,AID SVN, stated that AID program had been planned complementary to the number of villages planned for MAP. He made the following points: (1) AID SVN has authority for 67 villages in FY 62.

(2) AID SVN has $3,000,000 for 330 villages, the same numbers planned by COMUSMACV for FY 63.

(3) AID SVN and MAP are preparing a request for FY 63 for 1,500 more villages. AID SVN will request $13,000,000 as part of a $22,000,000 add-on package for the FY 63 SVN AID Budget.

5. Sec McNamara asked Mr. Janow, Assistant Administrator AID Washington, if AID could make available funds to cover the $13,000,000 item. Mr. Janow stated he had $15,000,000 initially earmarked for SVN. Sec McNamara emphasized the vital nature of the strategic hamlet program and asked that the AID/MAP hamlet programs be organized, balanced, and a report returned to Washington.

6. Adm Felt brought up the fact that many critics hold the hamlet program as being of no value and equate it to the old French program. He stated that the two were not the same and we need to do something to emphasize the effectiveness of the hamlet program. The SecDef called for a series of articles to educate the populace. Adm Felt stated we have been putting emphasis on the CG/SDC in defending the villages, thus freeing ARVN units for pursuit of Viet Cong. Sec McNamara mentioned a pessimistic report of the Washington teams on the hamlet program and indicated perhaps Washington was uninformed with respect to the progress mentioned by Gen Harkins. Sec McNamara asked Assistant SecDef Sylvester (PA) to look into the situation with CINCPAC and COMUSMACV representatives in order to get good material into the press.

Decisions Made and Actions To Be Taken

1. Insure MAP and AID, SVN programs for Strategic Hamlets are balanced and equated to each other. (COMUSMACV, CINCPAC, AID)

[Here follow items 4. Communications Capabilities, 5. Intelligence, and 6. Clandestine Radio Stations.]

. . . . . . .

4. Adm Felt said that we do not necessarily need Special Forces personnel for all these tasks, but that other qualified people could do the job. CINCPAC has been of this opinion for a long time. Adm Anderson3 stated that Gen Hamlett4 shares this opinion.

Decisions Made and Actions To Be Taken

1. Sec McNamara made the decision that DOD will assume responsibility for the training of Citizensʼ Irregular Defense Groups, subject to agreement as to details. (DOD, … CINCPAC, COMUSMACV)

2. Teams will be introduced on schedule without waiting for details to be worked out. (DOD, … CINCPAC, COMUSMACV)

3. Draw up schedule of output of trained irregulars (COMUSMACV- … )

4. Organize assets according to schedule of trainee output. (COMUSMACV- … )

Item #8—Appraise the political and economic progress of GVN.

Summary of Discussion

1. Amb Nolting stated that there is a fear on part of GVN that the United States may change its policy toward SVN. We have to nip this in the bud and convince the GVN that they donʼt have to fear a Laos-type neutrality.

2. Amb Nolting mentioned the piaster problem and fact that US aid must be backed up by sufficient VN-generated funds. SecDef said that the piaster problem should be discussed in plenary session later in the day (see Item #10).

3. SecDef then addressed the gold problem by saying that we are not going to solve it by reducing our job in SVN. SVN has No. 1 priority in foreign exchange when supported by valid military requirements. He said that he assumed State and AID would act accordingly.

4. Amb Nolting said that he looks upon the Strategic Hamlet Program as a principal arm of the general pacification program. He pointed out that, in addition to strengthening the village physical defenses, it was necessary to develop the will of the village people to resist. Mr Phillips added that hamlets which demonstrate the will to resist are targets of the VC. SecDef asked what arms the villagers possessed. Mr Phillips said shotguns, grenades, and some French rifles.SecDef then said not to let shortage of arms keep us from arming the villagers properly. Requisition carbines if they can do the job better. We should indicate the number of people in the villages that should be armed with the carbine.

5. Amb Nolting said GVN is hurting for trained manpower, not only in military but in all branches of government. GVN is doing better and quality of Province Chiefs is improving. Developments in education were highlighted and Mr Phillips, in answering question by SecDef, said that the school capacity has increased.

6. Amb Nolting pointed out that organizational arrangements on American side their linking with GVN side was greatly improved. Amb Nolting said members of hamlet councils must have a living wage. GVN wants to pay 300 piasters per month. This is not enough. SecDef said he wished the Sub-Committee on piasters to think about PL 480; that there is no limit on the amount of goods that the United States will supply. Amb Nolting is encouraged by the GVN planning not to stop improvements in the education of leaders at hamlet and village level but to go on up to higher levels of government. SecDef pointed out that we should get to the US press the fact that village officials will be elected.

7. Amb Nolting said that economic progress also depends on the success of the pacification program. He said that there is better economic planning. Now there is a more realistic point of view displayed by GVN on deficit financing—hopes that we can make good on this. Agreed with Gen Harkins that we have signs for encouragement.

8. Mr Fippin said that some hamlets will be overrun, that it was not intended that they stand fast against all odds. In regard to local administrators, the National Institute of Administration has trained 500 people. Each province has a training leader conducting formal training programs.

Decisions Made and Actions To Be Taken

1. Use carbines for arming villagers. Indicate how many villagers should be armed with the carbine and forward requirements. (COMUSMACV)

Item #9—Progress of MAP for SVN with emphasis on FY 63.

Summary of Discussion

1. Capt Byrnside (J5 CINCPAC) charted MAP Program for FY 63 and projected deliveries FY 63-68.

2. Amb Nolting requested guidance on what to say to the press on amount of money being spent in SVN per year. Sec McNamara stated US policy in this respect is not to make public the specific dollar amount.

3. During Capt Byrnsideʼs discussion of ARVN deliveries for FY 63 and projected deliveries for FY 63-68 Sec McNamara stated he needed a more detailed break-down of the force maintenance figure of 47.1 million for ARVN plus 20 or 30 million for the Navy and Air Force for a total of approximately 70 million. Sec McNamara directed Adm Heinz to give him details on the 70 million force maintenance request prior to approval. Adm Felt added that experience factors and better training of the RVNAF in maintenance of equipment would decrease the force maintenance total.

4. During the discussion of the Air Force items Capt Byrnside pointed out that additional 18 HUS-1ʼs in the 63 program would provide for a second squadron of helicopters. Sec McNamara asked when the VNAF pilots would be trained and ready for these helicopters. Gen Anthis stated this would occur in 1964.

5. Amb Nolting then pointed out that entry of additional US equipment into SVN could raise an ICC contention that we are violating Article 17 of the Geneva Accords. In response to a SecDef question regarding the Article 17 limitation Amb Nolting stated it was hard to sort out, but gave helicopters as an example. Sec McNamara stated, as a basic principle, that equipment would be taken in and that the US would proceed on the basis that the equipment is owned and operated by SVN. In this process, if the US is cited by the ICC, this is a risk we have to take. Sec McNamara asked Adm Heinz to work with the military departments to package and deliver items in an inconspicuous manner.SecDef stated he was willing to absorb the extra expense involved.

6. Capt Byrnside pointed out that the force maintenance budget for SVN included attrition, replacement, follow-on spares, POL and MAAG administration, as well as training.

7. Sec McNamara asked if there is a shortage of medical supplies in SVN. Gen Timmes stated there is no shortage of medical supplies; that he has inspected many medical warehouses and there are adequate stocks. Amb Nolting stated that the GVN has imposed rigorous controls on the issue of medical supplies to prevent their falling into the hands of the VC. Sec McNamara then stated that the shortage was reported in connection with the SDC/CG. Gen Timmes answered that we are only responsible for taking care of treating wounded personnel from the CG. Adm Felt asked about Filipino help in alleviating the shortage of medical personnel. Amb Nolting replied that Pres Diem is not sold on the Philippine offer (Operation Brotherhood). Sec McNamara then asked if the CG has radio equipment and was informed by Gen Timmes that they have one radio per platoon.

Decisions Made And Actions To Be Taken

1. Reference information to be given to the press. US policy is not to divulge the specific dollar amount per year spent in SVN. (COMUSMACV, CINCPAC)

2. Sec McNamara requests details of 70 million force maintenance item for SVN prior his approval. (RAdm Heinz, DOD/ISA)

3. Sec McNamara requests he be informed on problems involved in effecting inconspicuous deliveries of major items of equipment in order that DOD can work out solutions. (DOD, MGen Krulak, CINCPAC, COMUSMACV)

Item #10—Progress of AID for SVN with emphasis on FY 63, to include progress in training village and provincial administrators.

Summary of Discussion

1. This item was mentioned briefly under item #8 but deferred until item #10 discussion.

2. Amb Nolting stated that a sub-committee earlier in the day had studied the problem as to what to do about the piaster shortage. Amb Nolting pointed out that it was necessary to keep momentum on GVN side of the picture. Application of economic and social measures at village level is essential to success in SVN. In order to accomplish this, radical changes should be made in the AID Program as follows: a. Shift emphasis from long-range AID projects to short-range village and Montagnard aid.

b. AID can be made effective only by breaking away from some of the existing restrictive procedures, thereby achieving flexibility in funding.

c. Project aid should be increased from $27 million for FY 62 to $83 million for FY 63.

d. Scale down commercial aid allocated for FY 62 to generate piasters.GVN has agreed to deficit financing of 3-1/2 billion piasters. Import program of $120 million commercial aid will prevent inflation and get SVN through this calendar year. GVN will have to use deficit financing of at least $120 million to get through next year (their FY 63). To back up military expenses and efforts, some new paths in AID program must be cut; i.e., stand behind GVN on the import program.

e. With regard to problem of off-shore procurement and gold outflow, Amb would request waiver of US supply requirement on a case-by-case basis.

3. Sec McNamara agreed with Amb Nolting and mentioned that he should continue to request waivers. We should further be willing to accept the price penalty.

4. Sec McNamara stated he was willing and anxious to take over financing of certain AID programs that have military application. However, to do this the MAP-AID programs for FY 63 must be reviewed. Sec McNamara directed Mr Bundy to look into this.

5. Amb Nolting stated the foregoing discussion should cure the piaster problem but that if abuses against people by GVN, i.e., attempts to save on expenditures with “free labor”, continue we may have to impose restrictions or changes on US AID program.

Decisions Made and Actions To Be Taken

1. Amb will continue to request waivers on a case-by-case basis of AID items (Amb Saigon).

2. Review FY 63 MAP-AID projects with view to MAP taking over financing of certain AID projects that have military application. (DOD, AID, CINCPAC, COMUSMACV, AID-Saigon)

[Here follow sections on Thailand, Cambodia, Burma, and general subjects.].

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Honolulu Meeting, July 23, 1962. Top Secret. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text. A 10-page summary of the discussions is ibid. Attached to the source text were a cover sheet, a memorandum of distribution, and a memorandum of transmittal from Felt to McNamara, dated July 26.

2 Not found.

3 Vice Admiral George W. Anderson Jr., Chief of Staff to Admiral Felt.

4 Lt. Gen. Barksdale Hamlett, Deputy Chief of Staff, Department of the Army.

249. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 249. Memorandum From the Naval Aide to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Bagley) to the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, July 24, 1962.

SUBJECT

State Policy Planning Council Paper on Political Actions in South Viet-Nam

1. You will recall in November and December 1961 that Diem was reluctant to accept U.S. advice or specific political actions incident to increased U.S. military and economic assistance. At the time, the U.S. decided to accept Diemʼs reservations and move forward with the positive military aspects of your mission, with the hope that Diem could be encouraged later to carry out parallel political reforms. Subsequently the military position has improved, but progress on the political side has been slow. The final report of the Vietnamese Task Force2 concluded that Diemʼs popularity has, in fact, decreased in the past year. During this period there has been continuing public criticism of Diemʼs regime. If the possible Communist proposal for an international conference on South Viet-Nam materializes, South Vietnam will be without a favorable political base from which to bargain. At the same time, our strengthened military capabilities may be facing their severest test by increased Communist infiltration of personnel and improved equipment via Laos which occurred just prior to signing of the Accords.

2. You have broached the subject of political progress within the Special Group (CI) on several occasions during the past six months. Both within that forum and the Viet-Nam Task Force, State has emphasized the need for patience in encouraging Diem to make necessary reforms. The acceptable procedures are stated to be selected approaches to Diem by the Ambassador, a hoped-for evolution of Diemʼs own comprehension of the needs, and limited placement of U.S. advisors in the countryside to effect improvement at the lower end of the administrative chain without recourse to the Saigon hierarchy. Though State adhered to this strategy, there has been conviction on the Defense side that action is urgently required to make the political gains essential to further improvement of the military situation.

3. In the past month or so Mr. Rostow has apparently decided to grab this ball. He told Bob Johnson to study the political relationships in South Viet-Nam and determine steps that might be taken to improve the political environment. He also asked for suggestions as to how to implement such actions. Johnson completed his paper3 last week, and it is to be discussed at the NSC Standing Group luncheon today. Copies were taken by Mr. Cottrell to Honolulu to be passed to Ambassador Nolting for his comment.

4. The basis from which the paper was formulated does not depart from the policy established some months ago. The following extract from the introduction will illustrate this: ” … We have approached this problem, at least in recent months, with certain basic assumptions:4 “a. That re-establishment of security in the countryside was the sine qua non; that it is difficult or impossible to establish a relationship of cooperation and mutual confidence when the countryside is under heavy coercive pressure.

“b. That we should not seek to impose our concepts of government on a society which is not ready for them and which is, in any event, not presently in a position where it can realistically adopt many of them.

“c. That we must work with the Diem Government.

“The analysis in this paper accepts these assumptions. The argument that security must come first, however, also recognizes that improved intelligence on VC activities is a precondition to successful military action and that improved intelligence depends upon improved cooperation of the rural population. If the present vicious circle is to be broken non-military measures to improve identification of the government with the population are important to military success. Democracy per se is clearly not the answer in Viet Nam, but our analysis will suggest that improved channels of upward communication are important and that one way to improve channels may be to provide new means of participation. We must work with the Diem government, but we must also be prepared to make a sustained effort to press for essential non-military reforms. Sustained failure could raise questions about the assumption.”

5. A revealing conclusion of this study is the major lack of information available on the nature of political actions taken by the Diem government. This includes many programs viewed by the Country Team as positive accomplishments, i.e., land reform, training of civic action cadres for the strategic hamlets and province pacification, and administration of the strategic hamlet program. Some of the recommendations made in the study are conditioned on the subsequent provision of such information. Bob Johnson specifically deplores the GVN failure to implement the province surveys which emanated from your report.5 (He does not cite the fact that this survey was agreed to in the joint U.S.-GVN Memorandum of Understanding of 4 December 1961.6 )

6. In general the paper implies that difficulties in government relationships with the populace are due in part to lack of action, but beyond that is due to poor implementation. There is a flow of administrative authority downward, but no provision for a flow upward from which subsequent decisions can be predicated on actions, recommendations, and situations existing at the village level. Rural officials are accorded responsibilities without parallel authority.

7. The recommendations which stem from this study are summarized on dipped pages 3 through 8 which you may wish to scan. In brief form, these recommendations call for: a. Closer collaboration between the U.S. and the GVN.

b. Proper training of province and district chiefs aimed, by positive demonstration, to achieve a change in attitude.

c. Training of village and hamlet chiefs similar to that for the higher officials in b above, with the participation of AID advisors.

d. Refinement of the training of civic action cadres for strategic hamlets.

e. The inclusion of a simple training program covering the elements of procedural protection in judicial proceedings against individuals.

f. Supplement appointed village and hamlet councils by elected advisory councils and establish procedures whereby an entire village and/or hamlet population can contribute regularly to local administration.

g. Reduce the number of mass organizations at the hamlet level to the one or two organizations which can be useful.

h. Obtain GVN approval for the placement of an AID advisor in each of the provinces.

i. Seek GVN action to complete implementation of the land reform program.

j. Press the GVN for a decision on the Montagnard program proposed by the Country Team.

k. Seek a means of reducing the price of fertilizer to the farmer through subsidy or otherwise.

l. Develop a feasible public works program to improve the lot of the poor farmer by keeping him employed at work during off seasons.

m. Establish fair salaries for village and hamlet chiefs.

n. Press the GVN for action on U.S. proposals for military civic action.

o. Study the possibilities of having the sects throw their political weight behind the GVN.

p. Establish a defector interrogation program under U.S. leadership designed to get at the reasons why individuals join the Viet Cong.

q. Improve our information on the sources of dissidence, status of GVN programs, quality of local officials, and other essential information, using U.S. personnel now in the countryside.

8. On implementation, the paper suggests that these recommendations be reviewed carefully and, as a starter, two or three items be selected as a subject of a serious high level démarche to Diem, using as a pretext prospective economic discussions. The requirement for a Presidential communication is recognized.

9. This paper is important because it recognizes our actions on the non-military side are moving behind, and hazarding, the military effort. If this premise gains acceptance, it raises basic issues: a. Can improvements be achieved through Diem or is a change necessary?

b. Can the military handle prospective increased VC actions within the environment of the current rate of political progress or are accelerated political reforms required?

c. Is the current political atmosphere in SEA conducive to a direct confrontation with Diem on this issue?

d. If the risks outweigh the prospective gains of pressing Diem for reforms, what alternatives will gain time for the current evolution of political reform to take effect in the countryside?

There will be an early need to assess these questions here and in Saigon. You may wish to raise the subject again in the Special Group (CI), subject to the reaction in the NSC Standing Group today.

W.H.B.7

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-238-69. Secret.

2 Document 233.

3 Reference is to a 55-page draft paper entitled “South Viet-Nam: The Political Relationship Between the Central Government and the Countryside”, July 17. Divided into seven sections, it traced the relationship from the colonial period to post-war Vietnam and analyzed the sources of disaffection in the countryside. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962) The final text of the paper, dated July 27, was 78 pages including a summary and recommendations along the lines, summarized here. (Ibid.)

4 Ellipsis in the source text.

5 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 210.

6 See the enclosure to Noltingʼs December 5 letter to Diem, Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 307.

7 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

VII. U.S. Consideration of a Crop Destruction Program for South Vietnam, July-SeptemberVII. U.S. Consideration of a Crop Destruction Program for South Vietnam, July-September

250. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, July 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Noforn; Limit Distribution. Signed by Hilsman.

251. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, July 28, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385. Secret. Copies were also sent to the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for ISA, and the Director, Defense Research and Engineering.

252. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staffs' Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, July 30, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Vietnam 092, July-Dec 1962. Secret. On the source text McNamara wrote: “8/4 To Bill Bundy-Bill, please talk to Gen. Krulak and see what what [sic] can be done to make better use of the Montagnards.”

253. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 30, 1962.

Source: Columbia University, Harriman Papers, Bowles, Chester. Confidential; Personal—No Distribution. Drafted by Harriman.

254. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President

Washington, August 1, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 178. Secret.

255. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 1, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD(C)(A) Files: FRC 77-131, Republic of Vietnam, 1961-1962. Secret. Signed “Ed”. Also addressed to Gilpatric and copies were sent to Adam Yarmolinsky, Nitze, and Bundy. On the source text was written “8/4 To Gen. Lansdale, A good idea—try to work it out with Gen. Krulak. R McN”.

256. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, August 2, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.8128/8-262. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Rice on August 1.

257. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Director (Wood)

Washington, August 3, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 1A-2 Briefing Papers,GVN 1962. Secret.

258. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 3, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/8-362. Confidential, Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

259. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, August 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 1-C-1, Off-Inf Lets,GVN 1961. Secret; Official-Informal. Sent as an enclosure to this paper but not found, was a draft memorandum for McGeorge Bundy, entitled “Viet-Nam: Project for Crop Destruction”.

260. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 7, 1962—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-762. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Paris. and London.

261. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 8, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda, Michael V. Forrestal.

262. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President

Washington, August 8, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret.

263. National Security Action Memorandum No. 178

Washington, August 9, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Secret. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

264. Editorial Note

265. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 16, 1962—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-1662. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Hong Kong, New Delhi, London, and Paris.

266. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to the Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 16, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field—Far East (IAF). Secret. Drafted by Thomas C. Sorensen, Deputy Director of USIA.

267. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Special Correspondence, Bowles. Secret; Eyes Only.

268. Memorandum From the Former Political Counselor of Embassy in Vietnam (Mendenhall) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice)

Washington, August 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-1662. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Mendenhall.

269. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President

Washington, August 17, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, Colonel Burris Reports. Secret.

270. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, August 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. According to another copy, this memorandum was drafted by Rice and Wood on August 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 851K.23/8-2362)

271. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, August 24, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Washington, August 24, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172. Top Secret. The source text bears a notation that it was a Department of State draft that was not cleared with the Department of Defense. The meeting was held at the Pentagon.

272. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 24, 1962—5:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2462. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by SOV. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

273. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 25, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2562. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

274. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, September 5, 1962—11:33 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/8-362. Secret. Drafted by Barnard and cleared with SOA.

275. Letter From the Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, September 5, 1962.

Source: Department of state, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Robert Johnson. copies were also sent to Rice, Harriman, Cottrell, and Wood.

276. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, September 6, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Vietnam 1962, 370.64. Secret.

277. Memorandum for the Record

Saigon, September 10, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 A 5159, Sgn(62)42 Taylor Visit. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record of the meeting.

278. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to Congressman Odin Langen

Washington, September 8, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2862. Drafted by D.A. Diefenbach of the Vietnam Working Group.

279. Memorandum for the Record

Saigon, September 14, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: 68 A 5159, Sgn(62)42 Taylor Visit. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record of the meeting. Taylor was in Vietnam September 10-13 as part of a tour of the Far East, August 31-September 21.

250. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 250. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, July 28, 1962.

Attached is a study of Embassy Saigonʼs and MACVʼs proposals for destroying crops in South Viet Nam, which we have prepared at Mr. Riceʼs request.2 A brief description of the reasoning and conclusions contained in the basic study follows:

Destroying crops will inevitably have political repercussions. Intelligence is not yet reliable enough to assure that the crops destroyed are those controlled solely by the Viet Cong. Some innocent, or at least persuadable, peasants will be hurt and the Viet Cong will make the most of this in their propaganda and recruiting. Internationally, there will undoubtedly be greater reaction to a program of crop destruction than there was to defoliation.

These are serious liabilities, but under certain conditions the benefits from an effective program for destroying crops might be even weightier.

Food in South Viet Nam is plentiful, and it is not likely that a program for destroying crops would be effective enough to produce starvation among the Viet Cong, but two realistic strategic goals do seem possible. First, an effective program might be able to cut down food supplies enough to prevent the Viet Cong from stockpiling, thus making it difficult for them to concentrate large forces and sustain them in combat. Second, an effective program would force the Viet Cong to spend an increasing proportion of their time on acquiring and transporting food, rather than fighting.

If these results could be achieved, then the political price might be acceptable. It seems clear, however, that such results could be achieved only at a later stage in the counter-guerrilla campaign, after the Viet Cong have been isolated from the peasants and driven into well-defined areas of concentration. To be effective, the program would have to be extensive, and it is doubtful whether the government could carry out an extensive program while the Viet Cong are as widely dispersed as they are at present. An ineffective or premature program would only force the Viet Cong to intensify their efforts to penetrate or destroy nearby strategic hamlets, and the strategic hamlet program is in its present nascent state still extremely vulnerable.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Noforn; Limit Distribution. Signed by Hilsman.

2 Not printed.

251. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 251. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, July 28, 1962.

JCSM-563-62

SUBJECT

Chemical Crop Destruction, South Vietnam (S)

REFERENCES

a. Saigon to State message #21, dated 7 July 19622

b. CINCPAC message to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, DTG 130343Z July 19623

1. By references a and b, Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins have recommended and CINCPAC has concurred in a proposal for the Vietnamese to conduct a trial program of chemical crop destruction in eight target areas totaling 2,500 acres in South Vietnam. This program would be conducted in conjunction with the Hai Yen II operation to pacify Phu Yen Province. There is considerable Viet Cong (VC) strength in this area.

2. The proposed operation would be carried out entirely by Vietnamese personnel using their own helicopters. US personnel would not participate directly and their aid would be limited to technical advice and assistance. Target determination has been based on best intelligence available and would be reconfirmed by joint US/GVN assessment prior to the attack.

3. Air and ground cover by the Vietnamese armed forces will be required for the operation. In the target areas which are controlled and occupied by the Viet Cong the cover operations may result in the bonus effect of improved possibilities of engagement of Viet Cong by Government of Vietnam forces.

4. On the basis of extensive briefing (including one on 25 June 1962 with President Diem)4 and their evaluation of the technical factors and GVN preparations, Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins are convinced that crop destruction can result in a substantial military advantage and that the material and herbicides to be employed are technically effective. They are further convinced that the GVN methods of determining targets, based on best available ground and air intelligence, take into account all necessary factors. The Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, staff is in a position to render adequate technical advice.

5. In order to determine the capability of the armed forces of the Republic of Vietnam to launch and sustain on its own a crop destruction program on an operational basis, a trial operation such as proposed herein should be conducted to determine the feasibility of further operations.

6. The Montagnards, who have been threatened, attacked, raped, and murdered by the VC, are leaving their tribal areas because of VC levies upon them for food, forced labor, and other support. They are fleeing to the security of the Government of Vietnam controlled areas. Their crops, abandoned to the VC or taken over by them, must be destroyed in order to deprive the VC of this capability of living off the land.

7. An interesting side effect in such an operation as crop destruction is that because of the superstitious nature of the rural peasant in Vietnam, the ability of the GVN to kill large areas of vegetation “magically” makes a deep impression on him. During the Delta Mangrove defoliation operation one hundred and twelve VC surrendered when it was publicly announced that additional defoliation operations would be conducted.

8. An additional factor favoring this proposal is that it would be the first trial of the strategic hamlet concept with complemental food denial operations. President Diem has consistently supported the use of herbicides, particularly for crop destruction.

9. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that you approve the proposal contained in reference a. Authority for its implementation is requested.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L.L. Lemnitzer
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385. Secret. Copies were also sent to the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for ISA, and the Director, Defense Research and Engineering.

2 Document 236.

3 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385)

4 The report on this meeting is not printed.

252. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staffs' Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 252. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staffs' Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities (Krulak) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, July 30, 1962.

SUBJECT

Support for Paramilitary and Irregular Elements in Vietnam

1. One matter which was discussed at Honolulu2 was the care of the Montagnards, some of whom are hungry, most of whom need assistance in some form. The GVN, for many reasons, has done less than they might have to care for these people, despite the great importance of their good will and their potential usefulness as combatants.

2. It is my belief that Montagnard fighters, along with the village defenders, the Civil Guard and the Self Defense Corps are going to be the decisive factor in the war. While the ARVN will ultimately be the mobile mechanism that attacks the hard VC concentrations, the battle will largely be won in the hamlets and the countryside by the less sophisticated elements.

3. It is plain, in supporting these irregular and paramilitary elements, that there should be no restraints anywhere. Unfortunately, there are. The United States can give them hardware and training, but it is not easy for us to give them pay, pensions, family gratuities or other support which embodies gold. The GVN, on the other hand, is reluctant to spend its cash on these same support projects.

4. Perhaps there is a way out. I suggest this sort of reasoning: a. The GVN would like very much to have some of the more sophisticated hardware items, which they do not really need—more tanks, aircraft, etc.

b. We are quite able to produce and deliver these items.

c. We should therefore tell the GVN that: (1) We do not think they need the articles; but

(2) We will build and sell them to the GVN at 10-20% of their cost; understanding that

(3) They will make payment to us in piasters.

d. These piasters should then be applied, at our discretion, to meeting the currency needs of the irregular and paramilitary elements mentioned in paragraph 3 above. We could even make the disbursements through Diem, if to do so would enhance his prestige.

V.H. Krulak
Major General, USMC
SACSA

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Vietnam 092, July-Dec 1962. Secret. On the source text McNamara wrote: “8/4 To Bill Bundy-Bill, please talk to Gen. Krulak and see what what [sic] can be done to make better use of the Montagnards.”

2 Document 248.

253. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Secretary of State 253. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 30, 1962.

Since our talk this morning on the objectives of Mr. Bowles' proposed trip, I have been over his memorandum2 again and find it even more impractical than I mentioned this morning. His whole thesis is based on the assumption that a Laos-type of international agreement is possible and enforceable for the whole of Southeast Asia. The proposed Presidential statement, “Peace Charter for Southeast Asia,” could only be implemented by an international agreement similar to the one that we have reached on Laos. This would require us to take commitments without any assurance of the other side doing the same, with no enforcement procedures that would be workable. To negotiate such an agreement would require another Geneva meeting, which I understood everyone was opposed to because of its effect on the situation in South Vietnam. Most of the suggested economic objectives can be achieved only after there is peace, and do not give a sufficient basis for immediate heads of government discussions.

I will be glad to go over the memorandum in detail with you (which shouldn't take long), and Ed Rice and I believe you will come to the same conclusions we have.3

1 Source: Columbia University, Harriman Papers, Bowles, Chester. Confidential; Personal—No Distribution. Drafted by Harriman.

2 Document 241.

3 At the bottom of the source text the following was typed in capital letters: “I find Walt Rostow agrees that plan is impractical under present circumstances and would cause difficulties if raised with governments now.” On August 1, Harriman sent a memorandum to Rice stating that he could see no value in the trip unless a brand new approach was developed. He instructed Rice to make no commitments without clearing them with him and suggested that Bowles' staff be informed that a special trip at that time would be counterproductive. (Harriman Papers, Bowles, Chester)

254. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President 254. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President1

Washington, August 1, 1962.

SUBJECT

Herbicide Operations in South Vietnam

The Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Felt and General Harkins have recommended initiation of an operational herbicide program in nine selected portions of the Delta area of South Vietnam, comprising approximately 60 miles of overland routes (map, Tab A).2 Their recommendation is predicated on the belief that the application of herbicides will increase visibility to Vietnamese forces and aid in the detection of Viet Cong units; perhaps improve fields of fire in limited fashion; and deny concealed forward assembly areas, attack positions, and ambush sites to the Viet Cong. The spraying will be done by American crews in C-123 aircraft with South Vietnamese observers on board.

Upon review of this recommendation, and after consultation with research specialists, I recommend that you approve the operational employment of herbicides in South Vietnam. The Department of State concurs and is forwarding its favorable recommendation to you under separate cover.3

The equipment modifications recommended in the course of our intensive review of the herbicide program last spring have been accomplished and successfully tested in the United States. Chemical specialists are in Vietnam to provide General Harkins with the requisite professional advice. The best results in the original herbicide test program were achieved against mangrove targets and the present program is aimed primarily at mangrove areas. A measure of the improved visibility attainable in mangrove is illustrated in the attached photographs (Tab B).4

Politically, it would appear that the earlier herbicide tests in South Vietnam induced the maximum amount of adverse Sino-Soviet propaganda, although we received none of the benefits of a successful herbicide operation. I am inclined to believe that the propaganda impact has now been made and that we can use herbicides without causing a serious new international incident.

The herbicide program recommended herein is distinct from a separate proposal to initiate crop destruction activities in Vietnam, now under discussion. If you approve the resumption of herbicide operations against mangrove targets in the Delta area, the program will be activated immediately.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 178. Secret.

2 The recommendation was made in a memorandum from Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, to McNamara, July 28. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 370.64) The map is not printed.

3 A copy of this memorandum, July 27, is in Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/7-2762.

4 Not found.

255. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 255. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defenseʼs Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 1, 1962.

SUBJECT

Prisoners in Vietnam

Here are some thoughts about prisoners in Vietnam and a recommendation for your consideration.

The Vietnamese program for prisoners is still mostly an “oriental mystery.” U.S. military and civil authorities in Vietnam have some knowledge of and influence on parts of the Vietnamese program, and some improvements have been made. However, the entire program is still quite short of the real potential a well-done prisoner program has for giving substantial support towards winning the war against the Communists.

In Vietnam, the war embraces the entire population. In Vietnam, also, the political prisoners range from captured Vietcong military on down to non-Communist politicos opposed to the regime, including some whose opposition is mainly forensic. In a total war, such as Vietnam, what happens to all of these political prisoners has a direct bearing on whether or not the people support the governmentʼs war effort. In effect, the people are the judge and the governmentʼs actions must reflect the true desires of the people, to be successful. If the actions donʼt reflect this, being either too timid or too harsh, the people will either lose respect for the government or sullenly resent it; in either case, they will be vulnerable to Communist exploitation.

A well-done prisoner program should follow a uniform code, in practice and not just lip-service. It should include providing ways and means for establishing true justice in the country, for collecting intelligence, for attracting the surrender of the Vietcong, for separating hard-core Communists from other prisoners, and for true rehabilitation of prisoners as deserved and earned.

The Vietnamese leaders have been sensitive about their prisoner program, probably due to spotty administration as much as anything. It is embarrassing to have an American note sloppy work by an administrator and then criticize it; this is particularly true if the American is inclined to righteousness over maladministration of justice. The problem of Vietnamese prisoners is further compounded by the jurisdictional overlapping between GVN Defense and Interior, the split of U.S. responsibilities between U.S. civil and military authorities, and the emotions aroused by the savagery of guerrilla warfare. Also, Vietnamese methods of prisoner rehabilitation, based on French “disintoxication” procedures, deserve a hard evaluation

U.S. experience with the handling of prisoners similar to the problem in Vietnam is limited. Most of the prisoner problems in Korea were quite different. In Greece, there was some pioneering experience with the rehabilitation of Communists in the Greek Army (which gave me some starting ideas for the later development of EDCOR in the Philippines). In Vietnam, my own early work was mostly on assisting the Vietnamese compile a single code of justice from three regional codes then in existence and in establishing uniform penal procedures; I relied heavily on “metis” in the French Army at first, and later passed the legal and police program aspects to Michigan State contract personnel with USOM in Vietnam; my last work on this was when President Diem asked my advice on quelling a prison riot, some time ago.

The Philippine experience in handling Huk prisoners offers a helpful starting point, although there are some basic differences in the Vietnamese problem which must be considered. The psychological aspects of the Philippine experience, which led to the surrender of large numbers of Communist guerrillas and which led to favorable rumors throughout Asia, and the sound social justice administered (even when the writ of habeas corpus was suspended temporarily), suggest that there are lessons to be learned and applied.

Recommendation

It is recommended: a. That you continue giving a personal touch to U.S. actions in Vietnam by sponsoring a team to visit Vietnam, where it will assist the Country Team in constructing a full, realistic Vietnamese prisoner program, in the spirit of the Presidentʼs memo of 18 July about helping Country Teams in critical areas.2

b. That the team be interdepartmental, within the framework of existing Task Force, but known to have your personal backing; both the substantial help to military operations and the need to scotch ugly stories of torture m the presence of U.S. military dictate Defenseʼs paramount interest in the program.

c. That ISA assist you with Task Force staffing and that my office assist you in the selection and readying of the team; my staff and ISA know how to work well in tandem for you.

d. That the team be small, picked for its “feel” for political/psychological and intelligence needs as well as technical penal know-how, and composed of workers willing to work hard in cooperative staffing in Vietnam for the Country Team; my choice would be a personal representative for you and a technician from AID, with your representative being either Lt-Col Wilson of my staff or Col Kent of ISA; the team must be able to get willing cooperation from the Vietnamese—not just write another staff paper.

e. That the team visit the Philippines, en route to Vietnam, to obtain details of the prisoner program (including EDCOR) during the Huk campaign.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD(C)(A) Files: FRC 77-131, Republic of Vietnam, 1961-1962. Secret. Signed “Ed”. Also addressed to Gilpatric and copies were sent to Adam Yarmolinsky, Nitze, and Bundy. On the source text was written “8/4 To Gen. Lansdale, A good idea—try to work it out with Gen. Krulak. R McN”.

2 Not found.

256. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 256. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, August 2, 1962.

SUBJECT

Crop Destruction

I am firmly opposed to letting crop destruction be tried out. The Task Force memo2 takes one over the jumps on a well-laid course: If the pros and cons were only those dealt with in the memo, I too would go along. They deal with an experimental first use—which would impose some costs—but do not deal adequately with the costs implicit in the wider use which probably would follow. If we make chemicals available for crop destruction we would not be able long to deny it to the world. This would hurt us everywhere:

The way to win a guerrilla war, basically, is to win the people. Crop destruction runs counter to this basic rule. The problem of identifying fields on which the Viet Cong depend is hardly susceptible to solution so long as the Viet Cong and the people are co-mingled. The Government will gain the enmity of people whose crops are destroyed and whose wives and children will either have to stay in place and suffer hunger or become homeless refugees living on the uncertain bounty of a not-too-efficient government.

Other people, who merely sympathize with them, will also hate the government for crop destruction. The use of strange chemical agents, to destroy crops, strikes at something basic implanted in human beings (even if the people do not—as many will—fear that the chemical agents are also directly harmful to people).

Those relatively few of us who study the means of warfare run a risk of forgetting how the mass of people are likely to feel about those means. It is only natural for Cott and Ben3 to be in favor of crop destruction just as it is natural—at the other end of the spectrum—for SAC generals to be for atomic bombs. The people who may prospectively or actually be at the receiving end will feel differently, and the best way to achieve their estrangement is to lose sight of their very human reactions. Obviously, it is for this reason that politicians must control those whose technical job is the waging of war.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.8128/8-262. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Rice on August 1.

2 Not further identified.

3 Sterling J. Cottrell and Chalmers B. Wood.

257. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Director (Wood) 257. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) to the Director (Wood)1

Washington, August 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Great Leap Forward—I mean Quantum Rump [sic]

1. Politics is people. People donʼt change quickly. Helicopters can move fast; attitudes take longer.

2. Nhu and company are moving on what they might be willing to describe as a political quantum jump. The strategic hamlet program, particularly as described by Nhu, is designed as a political revolution. Nhu means to build democracy at the hamlet level, give the people a stake in the hamlet status quo, and rearrange hamlet power structure with emphasis on the common struggle and contributions to it in place of the traditional emphasis on an oligarchy of wealth and privilege. For quantum jump, read strategic hamlet, Mr. Rostow.

3. To what extent Nhuʼs ideas will be translated into reality remains to be seen. Certainly there are formidable obstacles, without counting the VC. But the easiest and most promising course for us is to join Nhu on this one. I donʼt think we can get a quantum jump, but steady progress and the defeat of the VC do seem possible.

4. We have already a factual if not a formal alliance with Nhu on this one. Our support for strategic hamlets has begun to move and will be accelerated. The following may be considered as possible means to sharpen the political focus of our supporting effort: (a) Ultimately, the modernization of the countryside—i.e. more income and more services for Nguyen van Hai—will depend on more agricultural production, for export. (It is a good Rostowian premise that an agricultural revolution must precede any industrial revolution; if the transition to a modern economy is to be successful, it begins with increased agricultural output. The agricultural Achilles' heel of the Bloc seems to bear him out.) In the past, for domestic and other reasons, we have done very little in Viet-Nam to increase rice production (I believe AID was formally forbidden to do anything until 1958 or 1959). We skill act as though self-sufficiency in rice is all that is necessary for Viet-Nam.

I certainly know very little about agriculture and economics, but I do know that rice yields in other parts of the world are much higher than in Viet-Nam. I also understand that our demonologists figure the ChiComs could, and perhaps will, increase their rice output dramatically by known means such as fertilizer, better seed, etc. We have talked a lot about fertilizer and agricultural extension in Viet-Nam, but I think done less than we could. Third country experts (Taiwan, Japan, Italy) might have more to offer than our own technicians on this.

I understand the political problem here and abroad of an effort to deliberately and massively increase Viet-Namʼs rice exports. Perhaps the reaction could be blunted by a parallel effort to process the rice (alcohol?) and find new uses for it (George Washington Carver van Hai? Plastics from rice? More rice-fed hogs, cattle, chickens, for export?) If we mean business about modernizing the Vietnamese economy and setting it on its own feet in some reasonable length of time, and most of all, if we are serious about wanting to help the peasant, I think it will have to involve an effort to increase rice production and export. The often heard charge that U.S. aid never gets to the peasant is partly true. Could it be because we have never been concerned about the basic source of peasant income—rice?

We have an item on agricultural prices in our action program. If I understand the problem, the GVN has deliberately held down agricultural prices, in some cases below production costs. This applies especially to hogs, which used to be exported but now are not. Why not talk to Nhu about this, putting it in terms of strategic hamlets, his rural revolution plans and personalism (which stresses the need of an independent economic stake for each citizen). If we talk his language, it may be easier to get through. As for the peasants, an increase in agricultural prices, properly exploited by all media as a GVN policy decision, ought to have an immediate political effect. (It would probably also increase the countrysideʼs absorption of commercial imports over a period of time, thus easing our piaster generation problem.)

The losers in this world, of course, be the articulate and powerful salaried bureaucracy; Nhu would get pressure from that quarter and from urban areas generally.

(b) We have several negative despatches from Montgomery2 on land reform. While his case is probably overstated, I think Jim is essentially right in asserting that rent control is a dead letter, that free land from the VC is more attractive than land for sale from the GVN, and that the GVN tends to represent landlords more than peasants. In talking with Nhu, it might be well to suggest tying the strategic hamlet program to free distribution of the 260,000 hectares of French lands which the GVN now holds and has not yet distributed, possibly as common land (on the GVN model) to the strategic hamlets (the rent to support hamlet officials and improvements) or possibly directly to heroes or families of VC victims. This, too, should be exploited by media, as a major GVN policy for the little peopleʼs benefit, and could be coupled with aggressive exposure of Communist land policy in North Viet Nam and elsewhere. Land bought from Vietnamese landlords and still unbought (125,000 hectares) could also be used.

Getting rent contracts renewed and enforced is harder, but should not be given up. I do not believe we should press the GVN to allow the Farmers Tenant Union to fight for this on the local level because I think it would be unacceptable to Nhu and Diem, both of whom are at least middling sour on labor unions. But cast simply in terms of the GVNʼs good faith, Nhu and Diem might be willing to take some action on the problem. Perhaps the Chinats, speaking from their advisors' experience in the Farmers Associations could back up this ploy. (Those advisors have strong opinions, and seem like pretty good people.)

All this to-do about a land reform program which Diem thinks is completed is important because the Communists have apparently made some yardage simply by being against landlords.

(c) How about a strategic hamlet congress next spring, with elected representatives from each strategic hamlet, to meet in Saigon, study the program, compare notes on experiences, and advise the GVN on future moves? The opportunities for bally-hoo of the peasant reps, medals for the brave defenders, etc., played back to the countryside by media and word of mouth, would be worth the effort.

(d) The CI paper from FSI3 suggested that National Assembly Deputies go to the country and get the folks (with our help) what they need, i.e. barbed wire, fertilizer, etc., thus making a direct link between the Saigon government and the peasants. This is a risky idea because it suggests we approach the deputies. I suggest we approach Nhu with the idea of putting the Assembly to work on the strategic hamlets; a National Assembly Deputy could be a fine civic action cadre and help drum up enthusiasm and support, provided he saw the program as a job and not a chance for personal aggrandizement. Perhaps the Deputies could be attached to the appropriate Division Commander chairman of the strategic hamlet regional committees as special advisors and inspectors or something. They are talented and loyal people for the most part, and the Assembly does not demand all of their energies, by any means; there should be some way to tie them into the strategic hamlet effort.

(e) The key to a political revolution in the countryside is the attitude of the people toward government, any government. This in turn depends, at least in part, on the attitude of the officials toward their own role. This is a long-term problem and basically a question of education. Training and retraining officials is one approach we should continue to study and pursue. The GVN is pretty sensitive on the subject, however, and I am not sure that we have so much to offer, anyhow. Do we really have the experts and the methods which could convert the provincial bureaucracy, even if we had unlimited power to impose them? I doubt it. We should offer our assistance on this one continue to indicate that we think it is a basic need, back up people like Colonel Thao who do seem to be able to train effective officials and assume a bit of humility.

(f) As education is the key to vertical mobility for many Vietnamese, an effort might be made through scholarships to capture the loyalty of those young Vietnamese who might otherwise seek to shoot their way to position and prestige with the Viet Cong. At the hamlet level, this could be tied to active participation in the hamlet defense unit, heroism under fire, etc., the candidates to be selected by popular secret ballot. Or the Republican Youth might be the proper instrument for selecting these young people. Their training might be in subjects useful to them personally, i.e. an avenue to government service by the acquiring of a high school education, or to the hamlet generally (health technicians, mid-wives, mechanics) by providing a needed skill. In urban areas, it could extend even to scholarships for higher education, to be used as a means of stimulating participation in various GVN programs such as the Republican Youth.

(g) We should continue to give all the support we can to Canʼs Force Populaire. Because of the difficulty of recruiting people with sufficient intelligence and sufficient motivation to do this work properly, I doubt that it can be more than a partial response to the VC. Getting people to defend themselves and their stake in the hamlet is probably easier, and the strategic hamlet program should remain our top priority, even in CVN. As Helble noted, however, these programs are not mutually exclusive. And Canʼs idea is more political than Nhuʼs in some ways. At least mention it to Rostow, along with our support for it.

Motivation for the Force Populaire might be increased by a stake in land or money, to be paid at the end, say, of two years service. Or scholarships might be offered to outstanding members.

Probably the possibility of applying the Force Populaire idea to the delta provinces is already under study in Saigon. I would guess that it is not readily applicable there, however.

5. At the national level, I do not think that the opposition can be persuaded to work with Diem or he with them. Nor do I think any useful purpose will be served if they are allowed to generate more divisive forces at this time. Oppositionists in the government or a legal opposition outside of the government will not be helpful or possible at this time. Public criticism of the government now would be interpreted by most Vietnamese, many of the Saigon intellectuals included, as a sign of weakness, if not imminent collapse. When the Viet Cong are dearly on the run, something dramatic like a legal opposition with its own newspaper and forum might be useful in meeting the needs of the elite groups and the foreign press. Not now.

6. Our chief effort at the national level should continue to be a gradual improvement in the efficiency of the whole GVN, military and civilian. Our people are doing this in a multitude of ways, with the help of Thompson and other allies. Progress will continue—and will probably continue to be slow. Perhaps we should raise with Diem again the National Security Council and its proper use, but Nolting is the best judge of that.

7. We should encourage the efforts which the GVN has been making to develop channels for complaints from the people (not the oppositionists) to the central government. This could perhaps be beefed up to cabinet level and given a great deal more publicity.

8. We should also encourage the continuing effort to prune the provincial bureaucracy of corrupt or abusive officials. (The press accounts of this campaign sound good, but we need provincial reporting to check it out.) This item can be tied to seven (above), perhaps as part of the function of a complaints cabinet officer.

9. The GVN should be encouraged to take a more aggressive and more positive posture with regard to reunification. It cannot afford to seem to acquiesce in the continued division of Viet Nam while the Commies plump for reunification on their own terms. Perhaps the National Assembly should include Deputies representing the northern part of the country (as the DRV does with the south), the Assembly committee on reunification should be more active and get press attention, and a cabinet position might be created for the study and coordination of efforts to peacefully reunite Viet-Nam. The pitch should be militant without being threatening. This is difficult, but could be done. Perhaps the main thrust would be that Communism is a temporary aberration and that after a few years more of hunger and failure the DRV leadership will be compelled by its own people to abandon its Communist doctrines.

Itʼs easy to win a war on paper.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 1A-2 Briefing Papers,GVN 1962. Secret.

2 James M. Montgomery, Third Secretary and Vice Consul at Saigon.

3 Not further identified.

258. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 258. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 3, 1962—7 p.m.

120. This is a Task Force message. Subject outline FY 63 aid program, interim fund request. Ref: (a) Deptel 61 (b) Embtel 84 (c) Aidto 215 (d) Toaid 87 (e) Aidto 207 (f) Toaid 1077 (g) Toaid 1192 (h) Toaid 175.2

Two purposes this message are (a) provide Washington outline of Task Force thinking re FY 63 program, with brief description its nature, rationale' and summary cost figures; (b) put forward definitive request interim funds covering identified needs in ongoing priority activities which cannot be delayed. (Dollar and piaster programs listed para 7 below following introductory text.)

a. Total FY 63 Program

1. Situation

As discussed SecDef meeting Honolulu in July,3 all-out drive against insurgency in Vietnam requires as much innovation, speed and imagination in economic and social assistance as in military and other forms U.S. aid. We consider next year to be crucial in counterinsurgency effort here, and are recommending aid program designed specifically to assist major GVN counterinsurgency measures. Programs launched by GVN (especially Strategic Hamlet Program), state of rural economy, and military events (including all types VC pressures) are combining in present period to open way for rapid and profound changes in SVN. One example already in evidence is Montagnard exodus mounting to major proportions. Widespread efforts in rural hamlets bearing heavily on lives of ordinary people, offer great opportunity, and at same time great risks if VC able to prevent fulfillment of hopes of people and government plans.

2. Urgency

This seems evident: (a) that as result social, political, military pressures accumulating at accelerating rate, next 6-12 months will be period of crisis in sense that either great improvement in situation or considerable deterioration could ensue; (b) that our side on hia1 with tremendous opportunity for progress if it can be seized, and grave dangers if it is not. Important note specifically that several GVN, U.S.-supported, programs have made commitments and raised hopes, which could boomerang disastrously if not followed through, e.g. strategic hamlets, still largely in construction/population control stage awaiting improvements of civil programs.

3. Program Based on Events, Not Independent Planning

Another aspect of situation relating particularly to American aid program is that, while U.S. able influence events, it is not able to “program” or control them, nor cause them to adhere to schedule of its choice, nor to await its decisions. In FY 63 significant results will be obtainable from aid efforts only if they tied in with principal current GVN programs, and only if such efforts applied at time events require them. Our program must be defined, in other words, as support of and influence on forces in motion in present struggle, rather than as self-sufficient plan or side scope of fluid situation.

We not proposing at this time, therefore, a static 12 months' program fixed in detail since neither developments in the country nor activities and programs which may need support can be assessed far in advance. Planning approach include (a) calculation order of magnitude 12 monthsʼ requirement; (b) calculation of detailed initial requirements; (c) establishment of adequate personnel capability and minimum, revolving, supply inventory of major items (requirement for which will be common to a number of potential programs); (d) action immediately on programs and plans ready to move (without compromising, but without waiting for, final 63 plans and program approval); (e) firming up over next 5-6 months succeeding tranches of total program.

4. Rationale

Major shift in emphasis planned for 63 program (as against 62) from: ordinary economic development (of infrastructure, etc) with trickle down benefits, managed through central government as national programs, to: direct injection in rural economy and society, through decentralized machinery of benefits to individual communities and measures enabling communities produce benefits for selves. Rationale for shift, of which experience in 62 makes us more certain than ever, is that outcome of struggle dependent on tangible direct evidence GVN capacity improve economic and social life. There is good prospect for action on such programs by GVN and province authorities, and we aim associate much our own action with them. Initiative at this level appears also be main chance for strengthening representative and democratic processes in hamlet/village society without which crucial economic, social improvement not likely occur, or, if occurring, not likely translate into satisfaction towards regime.

5. Nature of Program

“Public Aid” Program (as distinguished from commercial aid) will include four major segments: (a) Ongoing development work (such as technical education, crop improvement, town water supply) proportionately reduced from similar activities in 62 and amounting roughly 6.5 percent total dollar cost. Includes also programs seeking influence policies and improve performance central government agencies (taxation, civil service, finance, budget, etc.).

(b) Counterinsurgency support activities. These relate to programs, units of government, etc. which not directly in contact with the target population groups (e.g. strategic roads, replacement RR sabotage, agricultural machinery, police weapons), or whose content not per se essence of C.I. (e.g. malaria eradication, national and province level health installations), but which are essential for support and backstop of sound impact programs of counterinsurgency proper. Some of these activities are carried forward intact as priorities from 62 program (e.g. agricultural credit); some will be carried forward in substance but only m the event that their administration can be revitalized or performed through new direct action channels (e.g. training of teachers for “clear and hold” operations); and some which are new in substance (e.g. POL support for C.I. transportation needs). This category approximately 13 percent total public aid;

(c) Direct civil counterinsurgency, first part, meaning those activities (health, education, agricultural production, public works, information communications, security, self-help, etc.) that will be operated inside hamlets, villages, districts with object of altering life of rural population. (Note: last category below fits this description, but listed separately because distinct from viewpoint U.S. administration.) Twelve of 16 activities this category new in 63. Category represents 25 percent program cost, or combined with last category below, 72 percent. There are broadly speaking two types activity this category: (a) intra hamlet, those in which requirements are generated, work is done, benefits received by, in, and for hamlets, and village people, and, (b) inter-village/district works where outside technicians, resources, etc. play greater role.

(d) Direct counterinsurgency, second part. Largest single segment program is supply of construction materials, signal, communications, and defense equipment for initia1 physical establishment strategic hamlets. Does not include “benefits”. These requirements calculated by MAAG on hamlet-unit basis, and, whether funded originally from AID or DOD sources, USOM plays only service role in programming, procuring, some warehousing; military take over thereafter for distribution; installation under jurisdiction local civilian authorities. Twelve-month requirement ($42 million) is tentative projection of probable rate of progress in setting up these hamlets (which, as Washington aware, in G-VN and Task Force view will become principal instrument in pacification effort). Thus, full-year requirement is order magnitude and lends itself to continuous refinement as time goes on. However, first $13 million tranche (part b below) is solid figure ready for urgent implementation in order get country commodity inventory in motion.

Military civic action (second item this category) has somewhat similar status, with military planning originals and USOM logistic collaboration.

6. Instruments and Procedures

Abbreviated listing follows of certain new aspects in program implementation. (a) As large dollar proportion of program is devoted to supply support of fluid campaigns (rather than fixed-schedule projects) anticipate that PA-PR procedure will account for nearly an procurement. Main exceptions occur in category (A) (para 5 above) standard projects.

(b) On piaster side, decentralization of budgeting (in which U.S. field reps to participate), expenditure control, and fiscal responsibility are counted on heavily in both counterpart and U.S.-owned piaster programs in order achieve necessary flexibility, timing in rural operations. Considerable progress already made in breaking ice, working out precedent-setting forms.

(c) In matter of allocation total piaster resources, Mission intends lay heavy stress on joint U.S.-GVN budget review; this should reduce problems re athition, and Pave way for broad counterpart piaster release agreements; would also relieve USOM of burdensome preoccupation with minor details (often generating friction). Such an approach to L/C budgeting would also be appropriate in connection with plans for negotiation broad, high-level agreements on main purposes mutual programs, priorities, organization, etc.

(d) Basic reorganization of USOM is in progress. Will have three main features: (1) redesign of channels, authorities, relationships in order increase capability operate in context of interdepartmental, semi-military, campaign-type programs as opposed profession-oriented project work); (27 to establish, support, and delegate operational authority to field stations, offices, representatives, in accommodation to fact that program will be directed to rural areas. In this connection, USOM urging unified regional representation of Country Team in most places, since all U.S. agencies often concerned with same operation in given locality; under this arrangement senior U.S. representative in programs of joint concern would occasionally be USOM man, more often MAAG sector advisor; and (3) to bring together under unified supervision in USOM functions of programming, economic and financial analysis, which will also be increasingly integrated with Embassy Econ. Section.

[Here follow sections 7 and 8, which give detailed listings for individual categories and sectors.]

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/8-362. Confidential, Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegrams 61 and 84 are Documents 242 and 245; none of the AID telegrams has been found.

3 See Document 248.

259. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 259. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, August 7, 1962.

Dear Fritz: I have just lunched with Mike Forrestal who, as you know, is assuming much of the responsibility as the Presidentʼs liaison man on the Far East. He regretted that he could not come to Viet-Nam after the Laos Conference and hopes to do so soon.

I will catalogue briefly the most interesting matters which we discussed, saving the most important item for the last: 1) He will smoke out Bill Trueheartʼs papers which have been moldering in the White House for some time.

2) Papers asking the Presidentʼs decision on mangrove destruction are now in the White House and the President has promised to read them today. A controlled approval is anticipated.

3) Crop destruction was shot down in State and the prospects are not good. However, I hope to get a paper to the White House which, while giving Stateʼs disapproval, will at least contain the pros and cons of this project. The matter will reach the White House since Defense is submitting a separate memorandum favoring the project.2 The objections are centered around the Governorʼs general feeling that destroying crops by helicopters, even though flown by Vietnamese, will be a dramatic and frightening demonstration of white manʼs weapons used against Asian food. And secondly, how can we be sure that we are destroying food for Viet Cong use only, at a time when it is important to not only bring the Montagnards over to our side but also to send them back to their homes or at least to areas where their patrols can be useful. I enclose a copy of the memorandum on crop destruction which has been disapproved by Messrs. Johnson and Harriman. I am going to slip a copy to Des FitzGerald this afternoon with a request that the CIA prepare a memorandum for the White House in terms of its effect on the Montagnards, having in mind their extensive programs with these people.

4) The Secretary is lunching with eleven NEA and FE Ambassadors next week and you will be glad to know that Governor Harriman feels very strongly that the Secretary should emphasize that the conference on Laos was in no sense a model for Viet-Nam. Forrestal thinks our best argument is that this is a Vietnamese war and we cannot presume to drag them to the peace table when they are fighting for their independence. This leads to the final topic.

5) There is here a general feeling from the President down that we must continue our effort to support Viet-Nam. This is coupled at the top levels with a sense that there is lacking evaluations as to how the war is going. In view of the number of reports which Task Force Saigon is sending in this seems hard to believe, but it was accurately reflected by Secretary McNamara at Honolulu. McNamaraʼs feeling is shared by the President, Rostow,3 McGeorge Bundy, U.A. Johnson, and Governor Harriman. There is also a growing feeling that possibly in October when the rains stop in Viet-Nam and Congress stops in the United States, the President should make a strong speech explaining our position in Viet-Nam to the American public and seeking to rally support behind our policy. Mike completely recognized the full and detailed reporting from Saigon. However, the large number of place names, statistics, and casualty figures, while invaluable to the experts and therefore necessary in Washington, appear to be somewhat confusing to the top level reader who only has a relatively short time to keep up with Viet-Nam. May I therefore most humbly suggest that you send in a telegram giving your own personal judgement on how the war is going, say once a month. This would ignore the reporting requirements of the various action programs. Mike is certain that if you, as a wise and experienced Ambassador, write such a Letter From Viet-Nam it will be most helpful to the President and the members of the Cabinet most immediately concerned. Among other things it would help him in thinking over the type of speech which he may be willing to give later on Viet-Nam.

I am going to try and take two other steps (on which more later) that may be of some use in meeting this problem: a) Bring in Tom Ainsworth, an FSO who knows Viet-Nam but is not immediately connected with this Task Force and will therefore not be suspected of being too ardently pro-Vietnamese. I hope he can spend ten days in our files and write up a paper based on material in them in order to give a stop-gap evaluation of the situation in Viet-Nam and incidentally to demonstrate that we do get a lot of reporting from Saigon.

b) If it is possible, we will try to arrange to send Bill Jorden and Ted Heavner to Viet-Nam for a month and, if you have no objection, it might be useful if they could cover as many provinces as possible and write a report for your approval on how the war is going in the provinces. I get the feeling that American officials in the field know an awful lot but donʼt have time to report it. They might also work out with you and Mel4 whether it would be possible to send another man to the Political Section in Viet-Nam in the hope that we could get two officers to travel continuously in the provinces and report back to you.

Excuse the long screed and please forgive if I appear presumptuous which is certainly not my intention.

In haste and with all best wishes,

Yours sincerely,

Chalmers B. Wood5

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 1-C-1, Off-Inf Lets,GVN 1961. Secret; Official-Informal. Sent as an enclosure to this paper but not found, was a draft memorandum for McGeorge Bundy, entitled “Viet-Nam: Project for Crop Destruction”.

2 Document 262.

3 See my letter of August 2 to Bill Trueheart. Rostow has since relaxed on the idea of a “political quantum jump”. [Footnote in the source text. The August 2 letter has not been found.]

4 Melvin F. Manfull, Counselor of Embassy in Saigon for Political Affairs.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

260. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 260. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 7, 1962—4 p.m.

126. In course conversation with Richardson and me yesterday, Thuan reported following items: 1. A meeting at Ministerial level was held August 4 on Montagnard problem, attended by all concerned GVN ministries and agencies. Definite decision taken to encourage by all means possible exodus Montagnard population from areas controlled by VC to areas control by GVN. Montagnards would be encouraged to come to nearest suitable government-controlled areas, generally within their own provinces thus minimizing distances of evacuation. They would be resettled to provide (a) maximum security, and (b) maximum economic advantages. Where these principles conflicted, security comes first. Already substantial migration, plus expected increase resulting from news government relief and rehabilitation activities, impose necessity cutting back on certain agreed uses of counterpart fund in order to provide for Montagnards. It had been agreed by GVN to seek US concurrence; also to seek such direct aid as US might be able to provide. I said we would be quite willing to discuss financing, since we heartily endorse principle of encouraging Montagnard exodus from areas where they could not defend themselves, against being used by VC. In this connection, Thuan said that migration of Montagnards had already left many growing crops available for VC harvesting and use, and current plan to encourage movement would augment this. He urged again a favorable answer re selective use chemicals for spraying crops, emphasizing that month of August is harvest time for many crops in certain areas. I told him that this matter was still under consideration in Washington and that I would do my best to get policy decision promptly.

2. Referring to recent GVN military successes, especially by 7th division, Thuan said that available information from POWʼs, documents, etc. strongly reinforced his conviction that VC concentrating, both by regrouping within country and by infiltration for major large-scale offensive in central Viet-Nam (precise area uncertain) in order establish bridgehead for puppet liberation government. I expressed view that such an attempt might well play into our hands, since our side should command great superiority in pitched-battle type warfare. Thuan did not seem particularly reassured by this observation.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-762. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Paris. and London.

261. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 261. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 8, 1962.

SUBJECT

Situation in the Far East

Yesterday you asked what the particular trouble spots were in the Far East now that the immediate crises in Laos and Indonesia have been toned down. In order of their urgency, I should imagine that the following are the current problems.

South Vietnam

I have a hunch that the six months beginning after the end of the rainy season in November will be critical in South Vietnam. It is during this period that we will have a clearer indication of whether the steps we have taken in that country are, in the long run, going to be productive. The level of military activity will undoubtedly increase and, as a result, there will be more casualties—including Americans. Public opinion in this country will probably support such casualties if on balance it seems that we are getting somewhere. If, on the other hand, it looks as though our attempts to improve the military, economic and social situation at village level in South Vietnam are being frustrated by our own inefficiency or Diemʼs recalcitrance, we will be in for real trouble.

At the moment I suspect that our pressures on Diem are a little too slow acting and need to be stepped up even at some risk.

[Here follow sections on South Korea, Indonesia, and Laos.]

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda, Michael V. Forrestal.

262. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President 262. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President1

Washington, August 8, 1962.

SUBJECT

Chemical Crop Destruction, South Vietnam

This memorandum recommends U.S. support of a pilot program for Vietnamese crop destruction operations against the Viet Cong. The direct operation itself would be carried out entirely by Government of Vietnam personnel using their own helicopters. President Diem has consistently advocated the use of herbicides, particularly for crop destruction. Ambassador Nolting stated at my Honolulu conference on July 232 that a major limiting factor on Viet Cong infiltrators into the country is how to keep them fed. On the basis of extensive evaluation, I am satisfied that crop destruction, even in sections of one province, could provide a substantial military advantage.

Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins have recommended, and Admiral Felt has concurred, in a proposal for the Vietnamese to conduct a trial program of chemical crop destruction in Viet Cong territory of eight target areas totaling 2,500 acres (located within the marked square on attached maps)3 in Phu Yen Province. This experimental program, which the Vietnamese are now capable of attempting from the standpoint of technology, would be integrated closely with the Hai Yen II clear-and-hold and resettlement operation now in progress in Phu Yen. The best available political and military intelligence indicates a considerable Viet Cong presence in the target area, and this data would be reevaluated against information collected up to the launching of the program.

On the basis of extensive briefing and their evaluation of the technical factors and GVN preparations, Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins are convinced that crop destruction should be undertaken and that the material and herbicides to be employed are technically effective. They are further convinced that the GVN methods of determining targets, based on the best available ground and air intelligence, take into account all necessary factors. The Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, staff is in a position to render adequate technical advice.

Many Montagnard tribesmen have abandoned this area in recent months, and they are being resettled or assisted as an integral part of the Hai Yen II operation. Their crops should not be left for the Viet Cong to harvest. The Viet Cong also have crop programs in their mountain redoubt areas. Denial of food supplies would assist in forcing the Viet Cong out of the target area, an objective of the overall clear-and-hold operation.

You have previously directed that food-denial operations would be undertaken only after a careful basis for resettlement and alternative food supply had been created. The operation in Phu Yen, which is similar to Operation Sunrise, meets these conditions. This would be the first trial of both the strategic hamlet concept and the complemental food-denial operations since the successful campaign in Malaya.

There is ample precedent for food-denial operations within Vietnam. Both the Government and Viet Cong have consistently engaged in crop burning as a routine part of operations for a number of years. The efficiency of chemical sprays delivered by helicopters is in marked contrast, however. A single helicopter can spray one acre in about five seconds with very effective defoliant chemicals. The inaccessibility by ground routes of much of this target area has been its primary defense in the past, so that large numbers of plots have with impunity been devoted to crops to support the Viet Cong.

The only possible drawback anticipated is in the psychological area. The proposed operation will doubtless give rise to Communist and some neutralist propaganda, but Ambassador Nolting believes that its effect will be relatively negligible. American participation would be as unobtrusive as possible and limited to technical advice and assistance. The U.S. and GVN have already sustained the brunt of this propaganda line without significantly affecting local or international audiences. The ICC Report on Vietnam of June 2, 1962,4 made no reference to experimental defoliation tests.

In seeking to determine the effectiveness of a GVN crop destruction program on an operational basis, I therefore recommend that a trial operation as proposed herein should be conducted and that you authorize the release of the appropriate chemicals and materiel to the GVN.

The Department of State is submitting its views on the proposed operation by separate memorandum.5

Robert S. McNamara6

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret.

2 See Document 248.

3 Neither found.

4 See Document 208.

5 Document 270. In a memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) to McNamara, also dated August 8, the following paragraph described the State Departmentʼs position:

“The Department of State has neither concurred nor non-concurred. A proposed memorandum to the White House has been forwarded to Governor Harriman and Deputy Under Secretary Johnson for approval. A memorandum to Governor Harriman from Mr. Roger Hilsman [Document 250] … concludes that a crop destruction program should not be initiated until a later date. Governor Harriman earlier had expressed his concern that the U.S., a food-surplus country, would suffer in the Asian opinion forum by being associated with an operation denying food to segments of an underdeveloped country.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

263. National Security Action Memorandum No. 178 263. National Security Action Memorandum No. 1781

Washington, August 9, 1962.

TO

Secretary of State

Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT

Destruction of Mangrove Swamps in South Vietnam

The President approved today the recommendation for initiation of an operational herbicide program for nine selected portions of the delta area of South Vietnam contained in the memorandum from the Secretary of Defense dated August 1, 1962 (SecDef Control No. 4654).2

The Presidentʼs approval is limited to the herbicide operation described in the above-mentioned memorandum, and he has asked that every effort be made to avoid accidental destruction of the food crops in the areas to be sprayed.

The President also desires to have a report on the results of this operation as soon as they can be evaluated.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Secret. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

2 Document 254.

264. Editorial Note 264. Editorial Note

Following the dispatch of the Draft Action Plan Vietnam (see the Enclosure to Document 235), Chalmers B. Wood received suggested revisions of the paper from members of the Vietnam Working Group, the Embassy in Saigon, and officers of the Southeast Asia Task Force. A second draft of the paper was discussed at the third meeting of the Southeast Asia Task Force on July 11, 1962 (Minutes; Department of State; S/S Files: Lot 66 D 219), but further work on it was postponed pending the Sixth Secretary of Defense Conference at Honolulu, July 23 (see Document 248), Wood completed revision of the paper (third draft) on July 30 and distributed it for final review by United States officials in Washington and Saigon. The final draft of the paper, dated August 14, noted the following: “The basic U.S. objective of keeping the Republic of Viet-nam an independent and viable nation requires an integrated plan of action, including political, economic, military, psychological … operations in Viet-nam. These activities, both U.S. and Vietnamese, should be focused on five key problems which must be solved in order to achieve our overall policy objectives.”

For text of this 9-page paper, see Declassified Documents, 1978, 113A.

265. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 265. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 16, 1962—1 p.m.

150. In conversation with Thuan Aug 15 during trip,2 we discussed at some length attitudes of various governments on subject of long-range outcome in Vietnam in relation to psychology of Vietnamese people. This discussion held in context rather optimistic assessment by Thuan of current developments here.

Thuan led into subject by mentioning report GVN had that GOF predicted as inevitable some sort of parley between North and South Vietnam “in a year”. He said Lalouette3 was extremely vague in describing this idea, but GVN definitely smelt a rat. (See also FVS-77994 for account of Nhuʼs suspicions.) I said I had not detected any such thought in conversations with Lalouette since his return from Paris. On contrary, he had told me GOF was firmly behind policy line which US pursuing in SVN and that GOF realized, as well as we do, that Laos-type settlement is not applicable to Vietnam problem.

We also discussed UK attitude, and agreed that UK policy vis-à-vis Vietnam is firm and realistic increasingly so.

Thuan then questioned me seriously on possible shift in US policy vis-à-vis SVN, mentioning inter alia a garbled report he had heard of Secretaryʼs talks with Barcroft [Barwick] at recent ANZUS meeting.5 I told him on basis all information available to me, including recent talks in Honolulu, US policy vis-à-vis SVN was firmly fixed on achievement of immediate objective here and we were not interested at this time in looking into distant future to try to formulate hypothetical ultimate solutions. The immediate problem is obviously to restore governmental control, law and order throughout SVN and to promote conditions in which people of South Vietnam could work towards their chosen social, political, and economic aspirations without intimidation. Many people inquired about the “ultimate solution” to Vietnam problem. I thought it wise to avoid being drawn into public speculation on this subject. To say that one is against ultimate reunification of the Vietnamese people is obviously bad politics; to say that one is in favor of reunification risks misinterpretation, and undermines will to resist in South. Thus, it seemed to me wise to fix attention on immediate objective and refuse to speculate about long-range future. This, I thought, was about essence of US position, and I saw no reason to suppose that it would change in foreseeable future. I added, that, in discussions with new Indian Chairman of ICC, as well as with his predecessor, I had tried to get across idea that best role for ICC also was to try to help promote restoration of peace in SVN in limited frame, without seeking overall or ultimate solutions to Vietnam problem—in other words, a “live and let live” objective.

Thuan said he agreed with this and President Diem did too, although he could not take a public position in favor of a divided Vietnam. He added that he frequently told his GVN colleagues that they had no reason to fear shift in US position provided GVN stuck to task at hand and made progress in pacification and development of country.

On subject of war-weariness as factor in VC success, I suggested to Thuan that we may be approaching time when a definite shift in GVN psychological line should be made. By end this year, GVN security forces in all categories will be developed and strengthened very greatly (two new divisions, trained and equipped CG and SDC, mobility, striking power, intelligence, etc.); clear and hold operations, coupled with strategic hamlets, would be well underway; Montagnard training for self-defense and/or resettlement well along. Perhaps GVN should begin to point to light at end of tunnel, which may be not far away. This line can be made credible and I suggested that he and President Diem should think seriously about fixing eyes of South Vietnamese people on achievement of peace and fruits thereof within relatively near future. Thuan agreed that President Diem should move in this direction and that we should work together to inject this note of hope into his public speeches.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-1662. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Hong Kong, New Delhi, London, and Paris.

2 Not further identified.

3 Roger Lalouette, French Ambassador in the Republic of Vietnam.

4 Not found.

5 During the ANZUS Council meeting at Canberra, May 8-9, Rusk told Foreign Minister Barwick that the United States would welcome Australian military personnel to work alongside U.S. forces in Vietnam. (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2105)

266. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to the Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 266. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to the Presidentʼs Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Defoliation

If we will win in Viet-Nam with defoliants, but lose without them, then we must use them. If we will probably win with defoliants and probably lose without them, then also we must use them. If we might win with defoliants, and might win without them, then we had better consider the implications before undertaking the project proposed by the Department of Defense for 2,500 acres in Phu Yen Province.

We have a tradition in this country of not using food as a weapon of war. Chemical and biological warfare are subjects which arouse emotional reactions at least as intense as those aroused by nuclear warfare, as witnessed by the publicity surrounding the recent accidental death of the British scientist, our Korean and East German experiences, and the recent Indian incidents. A series by Rachel Carson currently running in the New Yorker and soon to be published in book form sets forth with devastating impact the consequences of insecticides on insect-plant life balance and human health. The Agriculture Department is concerned about the implications of this book for our foreign crop marketing; if we launch a defoliation program in Viet-Nam our enemies and many of our friends will use this book against us.

Depriving the Viet Cong of their local food supplies and forcing them onto the open plain where they can more easily be dealt with is a legitimate and necessary military objective. But what are the alternative methods of achieving this objective? Have all been tried and have all failed? Given the relative predictability of the growing season, can not the Viet Cong be ambushed or otherwise prevented from harvesting these crops?

No matter how reasonable our case may be. I am convinced that we cannot persuade the world—particularly that large part of it which does not get enough to eat—that defoliation “is good for you.” Nonetheless, should the President decide to proceed with the project, it is important that we be given a brief period to explain to the world exactly what we are doing and why. This will reduce, to some extent, the impact of the inevitable Communist propaganda campaign.

Edward R. Murrow2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field—Far East (IAF). Secret. Drafted by Thomas C. Sorensen, Deputy Director of USIA.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

267. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Secretary of State 267. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, August 16, 1962.

Before leaving for Maine I would like to make a few comments regarding the proposed mission to Southeast Asia which we first discussed a month or so ago.2

I gather from our talk last Friday3 that the Far East Bureau is strongly opposed to the proposal, and that under the circumstances you feel that the mission should be abandoned or postponed.

Although I bow to any decision which you may wish to make I would like to offer a strong personal dissent from the reasoning that appears to have led the Bureau to oppose the core of my proposal: A speech by the President outlining U.S. political, economic and military objectives in the area.

The arguments as stated in a memorandum to my office on July 31 (a copy of which I am enclosing)4 strike me as specious in the extreme. If these views prevail I believe we will have lost our opportunity to recapture the political initiative in that part of the world, and for this reason I am anxious to have my own views fully understood. Let us first consider the Bureauʼs objections.

The memorandum argues that there is no point in the President asking the Southeast Asian nations to restate their opposition to the use of force since they are already on record through the U.N. Charter and because our Communist opponents cannot be expected to live up to whatever verbal commitments they might make for tactical purposes. If we adopted this view as national policy we would abandon the entire peace initiative to the Communists.

The memorandum then discounts the value of any “paper guarantees” that we might obtain from the U.S.S.R. or Communist China, in regard to overt aggression in Southeast Asia, and ridicules the suggestion that broader international inspection machinery might be effective in curbing internal subversion. While experience may prove their pessimism to be correct, this view is contrary to the assumptions on which the Laotian negotiations and the Geneva agreements have been based, i.e., that the Soviets in Southeast Asia as in the case of Austria may carry out whatever agreements they believe to be in their interest; and that if their interests in this area should coincide with ours there is some hope of curbing the more overt forms of internal subversion.

The memorandum also asserts that there is no hope now or in the foreseeable future that Southeast Asian nations may be willing to forego some degree of sovereignty in order to increase regional economic and political cooperation.

This judgment appears particularly defeatist in light of the new Malaysian Federation, the recent proposals by Macapagal, ASAʼs tentative early steps toward closer economic cooperation, and the support already demonstrated by the four riparian countries for the development of the Mekong.

Finally, the memorandum asserts that what the North Vietnamese really need is a good stiff military lesson and until we have given them that lesson we will be wasting our time in attempting to create a less negative U.S. posture in Southeast Asia.

On the basis of such reasoning Wilsonʼs Fourteen Points could be condemned as an empty gesture, Secretary Marshallʼs 1947 speech at Harvard viewed as a visionary bit of do-goodism, Trumanʼs Point Four proposals as unrealistic, the Alliance for Progress as a blatant case of international day dreaming, and The Ten Commandments as the ultimate in utopianism.

Let me again briefly state my position in regard to Southeast Asia: 1. My hat goes off to Averell Harriman for his brilliant performance in negotiating the Laos agreement. Had he been bound by the paralyzing inhibitions laid down in the attached memorandum, we would never have reached that agreement.

If the Soviet Union should choose to live up to its agreements (and Averell would be the first to agree that this is a crucial “if”) we may be able to work our way out of a miserable situation which we inherited from the previous administration and gradually to create a relatively stable Laos, neutral and independent.

On the other hand if the Soviet Union fails to live up to its side of the bargain it will be clear to everyone in Southeast Asia and throughout the world as to who wants peace and who wants trouble, and the stage will be set for whatever may follow.

2. At present we are faced with a most difficult security situation in South Vietnam. Although our military authorities appear hopeful about the outcome, qualified outside observers place the odds for a clear cut victory at less than fifty-fifty.

If, as many fear, the situation deteriorates we may be forced within the next year or so to choose between committing more and more American troops and material to what the Presidentʼs political opponents will describe as “another Democratic War” or withdrawing in embarrassed frustration.

For the U.S. Government to adopt the classic “letʼs wait and see” posture under such circumstances strikes me as not only sterile but foolhardy.

3. Since F.D.R.ʼs efforts to persuade the French to leave Indo China in 1945 and our efforts in 1948 on behalf of Indonesian independence, the U.S. has drifted into a singularly negative posture throughout Southeast Asia.

This has been due in part to our involvement with Chinese Nationalist troops in North Burma, to our strong military support for the French prior to their defeat at Dien Bien Phu, to our alleged effort to upset the Sukarno government in 1958, to our close association with the Nationalist Chinese government on Taiwan, and to our support of such right wing Southeast Asian leaders as Diem, Bao Dai, Sarit, and Phoumi.

Thanks to our role in negotiating the Geneva agreements and the near settlement in West Irian, our prestige is starting to rise. However, it still has a long way to go.

4. In these circumstances the most effective course of American policy, in my opinion, should be along the following lines: a. Continue to make it clear that we will massively oppose any overt Communist effort to take over Southeast Asia.

b. Continue our strong military support for the Diem government in its opposition to the Communists in South Vietnam, while pressing Diem more vigorously to broaden his political base and to institute essential administrative and economic reforms.

c. Discreetly keep our eyes open for an alternative to Diem who would provide a broader political base from which to oppose the Communists.

d. Insist on a firm but realistic enforcement of the Geneva agreements regarding Laos.

e. Give generous encouragement to the Souvanna Phouma government, being careful not to embrace him so fondly that he will be dismissed as a new U.S. satellite.

f. Encourage better relationships between the Souvanna Phouma government and its non-Communist neighbors.

g. Improve our almost non-existent intelligence capability in regard to Ho Chi Minhʼs attitudes and objectives.

5. Against this background of political action it is urgently necessary for the U.S. Government to clarify its overall objectives in Southeast Asia.

I believe that this can best be accomplished through a carefully conceived statement by the President of the United States, patterned on the concept of Wilsonʼs Fourteen Points, in which he would outline the kind of Southeast Asia we are striving to build once the fighting in Vietnam has been halted.

I believe that the proposed outline of such a speech which I attached to my June 13 memorandum to the President5 and the 15 points which were included in my July 18 memorandum6 to you are generally valid. They can be substantially improved, however, as a result of constructive discussions in the Department of State and White House.

In my opinion a visit by me to the area would be useful at some stage in this situation. However, it is in no sense essential to the speech or statement which I think the President should make on the earliest practicable occasion.

A personal note: As you know, I have been deeply concerned about many phases of U.S. foreign policy in Southeast Asia and indeed in all of Asia between Tehran and Seoul. To an uncomfortable degree I believe we still remain captives of actions by the past administration and of right wing associations and commitments which we inherited twenty months ago.

To base U.S. policy in Southeast Asia on the optimistic assumption that we are about to teach the Communists a hard lesson in Vietnam and that other matters can wait sounds perilously similar to the posture of the French in the early 1950ʼs. At best it is putting our eggs in a basket of questionable durability.

In a political sense an “American bastion” in Southeast Asia is a dead end street even if it were feasible militarily. Our best hope for stability in this area lies in the development of a buffer concept into which we can draw most elements of the non-Communist left and right with the neutral orientation which has effectively curbed Communism in India, Burma, Indonesia and Cambodia. (As Mike Mansfield recently suggested, the two Southeast Asian countries which have been least closely connected with us—Cambodia and Burma—have been the most free of Communist pressure.)

The prospects for a successful Laotian operation are moderately encouraging. The U.S.S.R. is far away and the harried Chinese Communists are steadily losing their capacity either to frighten or to persuade the nations of this area.

I believe that our national interests will best be served by disengaging ourselves from the SEATO concept and encouraging a buffer area approach—as a means of undercutting the position of the Viet Cong and as a basis for the regional development of the entire area when the fighting is over.

Even if this effort fails I believe that our overall position in Southeast Asia will be strengthened, and our objectives clarified before world opinion.

The several memoranda which I have written to you and the President on Asia in general and this area in particular are based on intimate study of and association with these countries and many of their leaders over the last decade.

On the basis of this experience, I was outspokenly critical of the negativism of U.S. policy in Asia during the eight years of the last administration. As the Presidentʼs Adviser on Asian policy I am troubled to see the same kind of thinking still deeply rooted at the operational levels of the Department as illustrated by this memorandum.

The Geneva settlement provides the basis for something more affirmative. Letʼs build on it.

A good place to start is with an affirmative statement by the President in which he boldly spells out U.S. political, military and economic objectives in Southeast Asia.

This could give us the initiative in Asia for the first time since Mao Tse-tung conquered China.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Special Correspondence, Bowles. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 See Document 241.

3 No record of Bowles' conversation with Rusk on Friday, August 10, has been found.

4 Not found, but see Document 253.

5 Document 214.

6 See the Attachment to Document 241.

268. Memorandum From the Former Political Counselor of Embassy in Vietnam (Mendenhall) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) 268. Memorandum From the Former Political Counselor of Embassy in Vietnam (Mendenhall) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice)1

Washington, August 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam—Assessment and Recommendations

I have prepared this memorandum in accordance with your request that I set down my views on the Viet-Nam problem. It is confined to fundamentals, and makes no attempt to deal with other aspects of relative importance.

1. Situation

1959-1962. The Viet Cong have increased their armed regulars in South Viet-Nam from roughly 2,000 in late 1959 to about 20,000 today. The latter figure has remained fairly stationary during 1962, but in view of GVN claims of heavy Viet Cong casualties each month the Viet Cong obviously continue to be readily able to replace large losses. Infiltration from North Viet-Nam is not to be belittled as a source of this strength, but the majority of VC forces have been locally recruited and continue to be so.

In late 1959 the GVN had effective control over almost all of South Viet-Nam (except for old Communist base areas like the Plaine des Joncs). One could travel, at least by day, almost anywhere in Viet-Nam without escort, and in Central Viet-Nam security was virtually absolute. Today the Viet Cong effectively control large areas of the countryside except when GVN security forces enter in adequate numbers, and much of the rest of the countryside oscillates between the two sides. Real government control is largely confined to the cities and towns.

Current Trend. While the rapid deterioration of September-October, 1961, especially in anti-Communist morale, was stopped by increased U.S. military aid and improvements in GVN military capabilities, the present overall security trend continues gradually against us. In the Central Viet-Nam lowlands provinces security has seriously deteriorated during 1962. The Central Viet-Nam highlands provinces are, on the other hand, in better shape than at the end of 1961, but this seems attributable, in part at any rate, to Viet Cong shift in focus from that area to the lowlands where ethnic Vietnamese recruits and food are available.

In southern Viet-Nam (the provinces south and immediately to the north of Saigon) the military situation is superficially a stand-off, but it is actually somewhat in our disfavor as Communist-initiated incidents continue at a high level and the populace is thus not getting effective government protection. Isolated areas (like Father Hoaʼs area at the southern tip of Viet-Nam) have improved, but they represent the exception rather than the rule.

Prospect. The future trend is likely to continue to be gradual deterioration, with perhaps an occasional dramatic large-scale Communist incident carried out for psychological purposes. There is no immediate prospect of Communist conversion of their guerrillas into conventional forces, but they may feel this will not be necessary for their take-over of South Viet-Nam. They may instead decide to depend upon war fatigue in South Viet-Nam and/or the U.S.

If the war drags on with gradual deterioration and no hope of victory, the danger will arise of a switch in political sentiment among the South Vietnamese educated class from strong anti-Communism to neutralism as the only way to stop the war. From the U.S. standpoint I believe this would be disastrous as neutralization of South Viet-Nam alone would shortly lead to Communist take-over from North Viet-Nam.

2. Why Are We Losing?

Fundamental Factor. President Diem and his weaknesses represent the basic underlying reason for the trend against us in the war. Under present circumstances his excellent qualities of intelligence and courage are outweighed by two great weaknesses: a) the organizational inefficiency of his government resulting from his failure to take decisions, refusal to delegate, lack of chain-of-command, refusal to permit errors and distrust; and b) his inability to rally the masses to his support because of his defects as a politician. To win against the Communists, the Government of Viet-Nam should be either efficient or popular, but the Diem Government is neither.

There is common agreement on the essentiality of support of the population if our side is to win the war. Since the GVN does not now have this support, it cannot get adequate intelligence from the people to rout the enemy, and the enemy continues to be able to maintain its strength through recruitment from the population.

To break this vicious circle, the government must win the support of the villagers by providing adequate protection and helping them improve their lot. This the strategic hamlet program is designed in theory to do, but the Diem Governmentʼs organizational inefficiency and poor political approach give little promise that the program will be effectively implemented by that government.

Despite frequent U.S. prodding over many months no real priorities for the establishment of strategic hamlets have been set up, and no systematic allocation of limited civilian and military resources has been made in support of the program. Instead prominent officials are pushing forth everywhere at once to complete the number which will satisfy the pressures from Saigon, even though in almost all essential respects many—probably the bulk—of these hamlets will be inadequate to achieve their purposes and the people will often have been forced to labor in vain.

The political approach used under Nhuʼs tutelage in the strategic hamlets (establishment of mass organizations and reliance on “self-help”, i.e., forced labor) is more likely to alienate than win the people, and the election of hamlet officials by secret ballot is likely in Viet-Namʼs atmosphere to be a sham. The economic and social component of the program—vital to gaining active support of the people—has received virtually no GVN emphasis to date except in a few model hamlets and the two clear-and-hold areas where we have been operating closely with the Vietnamese. For all these reasons there is a serious risk of compromising the strategic hamlet program in the eyes of the people.

There is no chance of changing Diem and Nhuʼs political ways or methods of organization and governing. Diem is too old and set in his mandarinal ways. Both he and Nhu are convinced they know Viet-Nam better than anyone else, and thus infrequently accept advice. Both likewise so basically distrust almost everyone outside the family that they are completely disinclined to change their “divide and rule” method of governing.

3. Conclusion and Recommendations

Conclusion: That we cannot win the war with the Diem-Nhu methods, and we cannot change those methods no matter how much pressure we put on them.

Recommendation: Get rid of Diem, Mr. and Mrs. Nhu and the rest of the Ngo family.

Alternatives: a. Vice President Tho and General “Big” Minh as a duumvirate, with Tho succeeding constitutionally to the Presidency and Minh, the most popular general, in charge of the armed forces. This would be the preferred alternative. Thoʼs qualities as a politician and flexibility outweigh his weaknesses. Equally important, while a government by him and Minh might per se not be much more efficient than the Diem Government, they would permit U.S. advisors to operate closely on the civilian as well as the military side, and thus give us the chance largely refused by Diem and Nhu of infusing efficiency into the GVNʼs operations.

b. General Le Van Kim and General “Big” Minh. If Vice President Tho refuses to cooperate in the overthrow of Diem (and no one can say whether he would until he is sounded), then a combination of Kim (the most intelligent of all the generals) and Minh would be the second alternative. At present Kim is Minhʼs deputy in the Field Command, and it would probably be acceptable to Minh for Kim to run the Government and Minh the armed forces.

c. Tran Quoc Buu, President of the Vietnamese Confederation of Christian Workers. Head of the only important organization in Viet-Nam not under government control, Buu has the qualities of a good politician, and knows how to influence the people. An early close colleague of Nhuʼs in organizing the Can Lao Party, he is no longer close to the Ngo family, but has not broken completely with it. What Buuʼs relations with the military would be are not known, nor could one be sure without sounding him of his willingness to head a coup effort.

Comparative Risks: The risk involved in switching from Diem to an alternative would be substantial because of possible Communist military gains in the attendant confusion (especially if the crisis were prolonged). But this can be counteracted, at least in part, by temporary U.S. military intervention during the crisis to prevent Communist seizure of towns.

There is also the risk of failure of a coup, with its adverse effects on our future relations with Diem. But Diem has no place else to turn except to the U.S. for support.

And the overriding risk is the likelihood of the loss of Viet-Nam to the Communists if we stick with Diem.

4. How the Coup Might Be Carried Out2

(I have never carried out a coup, and am no expert in this field. I am suggesting a possible means of doing it—the best that has occurred to me—but there may be better ways.)

It would be desirable to keep the U.S. hand in the coup concealed to the maximum extent feasible. We would want to avoid any public connotation that the new government was our puppet. However fear of exposure should not deter our discreet involvement. We shall always be accused by some of involvement (just as we were with respect to the November, 1960, coup attempt and the February, 1962, palace bombing).3 The cardinal rule would be not to admit involvement publicly.

The appropriate U.S. officials would quietly sound out a few carefully selected Vietnamese (such as Tho and Minh) about a coup possibility, and would if indicated make known its readiness to support a coup at the proper time. With this encouragement these few Vietnamese would contact other Vietnamese about participation. U.S. contacts would be kept very limited to restrict knowledge of our role. We would advise behind the scenes on organization, and let the Vietnamese do all of the implementing.

The aim would be immediate seizure of all of the Ngo brothers and Mme. Nhu and their immediate removal from Viet-Nam if they survived the process of seizure. The physical process of seizure would probably be easier when Diem and the Nhus are out of the palace traveling around the country. It would preferably be carried out when brothers Thuc (the Archbishop) and Luyen (Ambassador to the U.K.) are out of the country since they would be taken care of simply by preventing re-entry. Thuan (Secretary of State for the Presidency) and Tuyen (head of the secret police) would be detained to prevent counter-plotting, but could probably be released after the coup was over since it is doubtful they would pose any real danger to a new regime.

Since the armed forces represent the only real power force in Viet-Nam, it would be necessary to line up in advance in support of the coup as many of their key elements as feasible. Discretion would dictate caution in too wide an approach, but since plans for seizure of the Ngo family could miscarry at first, discretion should be balanced against the possible need to use the armed forces extensively and the desirability of denying the Ngo family the possibility of rallying a significant segment of the armed forces.

The U.S. should be prepared to introduce combat military forces into South Viet-Nam to prevent Communist seizure of provincial towns during the crisis. If necessary to execute this step, the U.S. should publicly announce its neutrality between the contending anti-Communist forces in Viet-Nam. We should not be deterred from the step by the absence of a request from the GVN.

Timing of a coup would be extremely important. Preferably the coup should be carried out when there is publicly clear trend against the GVN in the war with the Communists since many more Vietnamese would be psychologically prepared to support a coup under these circumstances. It would be preferable also to keep the interval between widespread planning and execution short because of the danger of leaks. This does not mean, however, that the U.S. might not discreetly work with selected Vietnamese on the development of coup plans well in advance of widespread contacts and execution.

American dependents should have been evacuated from Viet-Nam in advance of execution of the coup plans. Otherwise we might well find them hostages in the hands of the Diem Government which would not hesitate to use them to pressure us.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-1662. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Mendenhall.

2 Next to this heading is written: “(Sounds like a very complicated job and hard to keep secret beforehand. ER).”

3 Regarding the February bombing of the palace, see Documents 87-97; for documentation on the November 1960 coup attempt, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. I, pp. 631 ff.

269. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President 269. Memorandum From the Vice Presidentʼs Military Aide (Burris) to the Vice President1

Washington, August 17, 1962.

RE

Vietnam

The program for South Vietnam which you delineated in your memorandum to the President in May of last year2 continues to be the basis for U.S. effort in that area. Your program was modified only slightly by General Taylorʼs mission3 in three specific military areas, as follows: (1) improve intelligence, (2) improve communications, (3) provide air logistics. The net result of General Taylorʼs recommendations was to provide information as soon as possible on Viet Cong activities and to offer a means of transport whereby Government troops could move swiftly to attack the Communists.

In the economic field, your recommendations were augmented and amplified by the Staley Committee,4 with which recommendations you are familiar. The recommendations of Dr. Staley were generally accepted and the measures which have been implemented have been generally successful.

The specific measures in your program have therefore been proven to be sufficiently comprehensive. The goals which were set remain essentially unchanged, and constant surveillance is maintained in State and Defense on the degree of achievement or accomplishments in each specific point or area (see attached memorandum).

On the practical side, there has been concern as to just what these measures have contributed toward winning the war, or at least toward reversing the trend sufficiently in favor of Government forces to permit victory in the foreseeable future. While the conditions described in the recent Newsweek article5 are rejected by State and Defense, it is virtually impossible to elicit specific replies from either of those Departments as to the degree of success or failure, particularly in the military field. While confidence in eventual victory is generally accepted, only General Harkins has said that “we are on the winning side”. Mr. Wood in State assessed the situation by saying that the trend against the U.S. in South Vietnam was halted last November, but presently we are just about holding our own and an upward trend in our favor is not yet clearly in sight.

Politically, Diem is, if anything, weaker than he was when you met him, but the U.S. is determined to work with him in the absence of a reasonable alternative. Economically, progress is being made through the excellent cooperation of the Vietnamese on the principles set down by the Staley Committee. Socially, much progress has been made in health measures, agriculture credits and improvements, education, and information. Great emphasis is being placed on these social activities because of the recognition that the real strength of Vietnam lies with the peasants and the Army and not with the central Government. Certain achievements here, however, are going to be more gradual. Militarily, such statistics as incidents, casualty rates, desertions, loss and capture of weapons, frequency and size of attacks, border infiltration, etc., do not reflect such a favorable picture. We are now in a period where the impact of U.S. training, supplies, assistance, doctrine and technique should soon be felt and yield results.

Mr. McNamara has held six conferences in Hawaii with the Ambassadors and principal military people from the area. While the voluminous transcripts of those conferences reflect great attention to detail in providing for optimum success of American effort, there is also a repetition of Mr. McNamaraʼs philosophy that the United States must make an effective showing in Vietnam as quickly as possible or be misunderstood by the American people, Congress and indeed by the world. There is also motivation to avoid the charge of “too little, too late”.

With the settlement in Laos, great attention has been paid to the transfer of Viet Cong forces, but such an increase has not yet been detected. However, the border crossing problem, as it has long existed, remains practically unsolved. There have also been rumors that the Communists would seek a Laos-type settlement in South Vietnam, but such a settlement is currently ruled out because the South Vietnamese people will not willingly accept the kind of settlement imposed in Laos. While Mr. McNamara has pursued the military effort with a great sense of urgency, he has, for planning purposes, established a time factor to carry out the Presidentʼs decision last year to seek the settlement in Laos and to defend South Vietnam. In addition to the elements of urgency described above, he has also set forth the assumption that the present effort will be maintained for three years. This is not to say that the effort will be terminated or phased out in this period, but rather it is a realistic expression of a reasonable period during which success must be achieved or at least be in sight. Under present circumstances we appear to be just about turning the corner.

[Attachment]

Memorandum Prepared in the Vietnam Working Group6

Washington, August 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam—Current Status of Items Discussed Between Vice President Johnson and President Diem

The following points were discussed (some appeared in the Joint Communique of May 13, 19617 ). Each is followed by a description of its present status: 1. Agreed to infuse into our actions high sense of urgency and dedication.

Achieved on both sides, as evidenced by the American military build-up, improved Vietnamese morale, exchanges of messages between President Kennedy and President Diem, and the momentum behind the strategic hamlet program in Viet-Nam. President Diem told Ambassador Nolting last month that US-Vietnamese cooperation was excellent. Both sides are agreed on the importance of helping the peasants quickly by means of the strategic hamlet program.

2. Diem pleased US has approved MAP support for 20,000 force increase but pointed to problem of paying local currency costs for this increase.

The present regular armed forces level is now about 200,000, or 50,000 above the level in May 1961. The local currency problem has not been completely solved. However, GVN deficit financing, higher yields on US-financed imports, increased tax collections, combined with US assurances that we will provide resources needed to stem possible inflation, have been sufficient to move ahead with the buildup.

3. Agreed parallel political and economic action has equal importance with military measures but stated political and economic actions must be those appropriate to Viet-Nam as country which is underdeveloped and subject Communist subversion.

There has been political and economic progress since May 1961, although Diemʼs popular support has probably declined. This is counterbalanced by momentum achieved m the strategic hamlet program already underway, which shows great promise to reverse the trend as villagers get security, more local self government, economic benefits and a greater stake in the outcome of the war.

4. Agreed to increase in MAAG personnel.

A steady increase of U.S. training, advisory and logistic support personnel commenced in May 1961. The number has risen from 700 to 10,000, including those in operational units attached to the new Military Assistance Command/Viet-Nam (MAC/V), of which MAAG is now a component. MAAG advisers in each province are doing a terrific job.

5. Agreed to MAAG support and advice to Self-Defense Corps.

The training and rearming of SDC units is proceeding rapidly and they are giving a good account of themselves.

6. Diem pleased with MAP support for entire Civil Guard force of 68,000.

Training has been speeded up with a target of training and rearming all CG units by the end of calendar 1962. The strength target for FY 1964 is now 90,000.

7. Diem accepted offer of material support for the Junk Force.

Construction is underway to develop a force of 28 Divisions (20 junks per Division). Four divisions are now operational and performing their mission to harass VC seaborne communications and stop infiltration from outside.

8. Noted that we are prepared to consider the case for further increase in the strength of GVN armed forces.

We have established a force goal of 225,000 (an increase of 50% from May 1961) to be achieved by June 1964.

9. Agreed to further urgent joint study of border control techniques.

Plans and concepts for border control are still under study by RVNAF and U.S. advisors. Intelligence on infiltration is improving, especially as patrols of mountaineers are being rapidly formed. US planes and helicopters and improved radio communication now make it possible to bring Vietnamese troops quickly to any threatened point.

10. Agreed to consider establishment in southeast Asia of research and development facilities.

Combat test development centers have been established and are in operation in Viet-Nam and Thailand. Research has led to many improvements, e.g. better arms and armament for helicopters.

11. Agreed to use of US military specialists to assist Vietnamese armed forces in health, welfare and public works activities at village level. Stressed importance of tact of foreign officials in working in this field.

US forces are working in all forty provinces to train the Vietnamese Armed Forces in civic action and civil affairs, as well as mounting their own civic action programs.

12. Agreed to renew border control negotiations with the Cambodian Government.

In spite of repeated efforts by the US, joint Vietnamese-Cambodian control has not been effected and incidents are frequent, causing friction and helping the Viet Cong. Cambodia did, however, invite the GVN to send a military commission to visit border areas and determine the extent of Viet Cong activity on the Cambodian side. The GVN has accepted and will dispatch a team shortly. It might develop into a joint operation.

13. Agreed on desirability of using foreign non-American experts in counter-guerrilla field, but stressed it would be up to initiative GVN to request these experts and they would have to work under its control.

The British have sent a highly qualified advisory mission. Many of its recommendations have been accepted. Australia has sent thirty trainers to augment US MAAG activities. Other countries have sent survey missions or are being approached to provide help.

14. Agreed to proposal for sending US economic and fiscal experts to work out financial plan as basis for joint efforts.

A mission under Dr. Eugene Staley worked out a plan with the Vietnamese and completed its work in Viet-Nam in July 1961. The plan was adopted and embodied in National Security Action Memorandum 65, August 11, 1961.8 As a result the Vietnamese have added import taxes so that aid dollars now generate more piasters.

15. Agreed we should work together on a longer range economic development program.

The GVN has announced a formal 5-year plan, but it is more in the nature of a catalogue of projects than an integrated plan. The ongoing AID program is continuing to contribute to long range development, but conditions in Viet-Nam have required a shift in emphasis to programs with an early pay-off which can help win the war sooner.

16. Diem presented memo to Vice President on need for additional commodity aid and for relaxation of “Buy American” policy on aid to Viet-Nam.9

The amount of assistance which could be absorbed by Viet-Nam was a matter of dispute in May 1961. The Staley Mission subsequently established criteria which have proven workable for that portion of commodity aid channeled through the private sector. In addition, commodities and equipment procured directly for the public sector (e.g. materials for strategic hamlet construction), which are not affected by the absorptive capacity of the private sector, have been increased significantly.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, Colonel Burris Reports. Secret.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 59.

3 For documentation on Taylorʼs visit to Saigon, October 18-25, 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 169 ff.

4 The Staley Report on South Vietnam is not printed, but see the letter transmitting the report, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 93.

5 Presumably a reference to Francois Sullyʼs article in the August 20, 1962, edition of Newsweek.

6 Drafted by Wood and C. Richard Spurgin.

7 For text of this communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 1043-1045.

8 Not printed, but see the editorial note in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 118.

9 Transmitted as an enclosure to despatch 519 from Saigon, May 16, 1961. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-JO/5-1661)

270. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President 270. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President1

Washington, August 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam: Project for Crop Destruction (Secretary McNamara has submitted a memorandum recommending approval of this project.)2

Description

About six Vietnamese operated helicopters with Vietnamese air support would spray herbicide on 8 areas of land totaling 2500 acres as a part of the successful Hai Yen II operation now taking place in Phu Yen province. These fields are in the mountains. On the basis of ARVN intelligence Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins believe that these crops will, unless destroyed, nourish local Viet Cong. However, there is no first-hand evidence to prove that this riceland is primarily for Viet Cong use (Tab A3 ). Because of this operation there are resources in the province to care for any Viet Cong or Montagnards who may flee the area.

It is not feasible for ground troops to enter this area and destroy the crops.

If the operation is to be carried out, it should, to be effective, be done in August.

Disadvantages

(a) Although conducted by Vietnamese, there would be Communist propaganda attacking the use of U.S. aircraft and techniques for the destruction of Asian peopleʼs food.

(b) The way to win a guerrilla war, basically, is to win the people. Crop destruction runs counter to this basic rule. The problem of identifying fields on which the Viet Cong depend is hardly susceptible to solution so long as the Viet Cong and the people are co-mingled. The Government will gain the enmity of people whose crops are destroyed and whose wives and children will either have to stay in place and suffer hunger or become homeless refugees living on the uncertain bounty of a not-too-efficient government.

Other people, who merely sympathize with them, will also hate the government for crop destruction. The use of strange chemical agents, to destroy crops, strikes at something basic implanted in human beings (even if the people do not—as many will—fear that the chemical agents are also directly harmful to people).

(c) Use of United States aerial spraying techniques to destroy crops in Viet-Nam may give rise to Communist propaganda that the United States is embarking on chemical warfare in Asia. This could give rise to increased charges of use of poison gas and perhaps even of biological weapons against Asian population.

Advantages and Other Considerations

(a) We have already carefully limited our supporting role in Viet-Nam. We should not voluntarily deprive ourselves of the use of new techniques unless we are sure the Vietnamese can subdue the Viet Cong without them.

(b) The most effective way to hurt the Viet Cong is to deprive them of food. Food is scarce in their mountain strongholds and food destruction there can be most effective.

(c) Neither the method nor the concept are new. The British destroyed some crops from the air in Malaya. In Viet-Nam, both sides are destroying each otherʼs food. The Vietnamese have been burning Viet Cong crops with air-dropped napalm for some months. Napalm damages the soil for several years; defoliants do not.

(d) The GVN is very anxious to undertake this program and is looking into purchasing the chemicals in Hong Kong, Taiwan or Tokyo. If the GVN does this, it will be more difficult for us to control and delimit the operations.

(e) We have already absorbed some Communist propaganda accusing us of destroying crops in connection with our earlier defoliant tests (Tab B).4 This propaganda did not arouse major international repercussions. The Communists may continue these charges even if we stop all defoliant and do not engage in crop destruction operations. Communist charges of germ warfare in Korea were not withdrawn consequent to the fact that, being untrue, they could not be proven.

(f) With available techniques and chemicals the crops can be killed (Tab C).5

(g) Earlier limited defoliation experiments in Viet-Nam are reported to have had the following effects: a. Viet Cong leaders issued orders which showed concern (Tab D).6

b. According to Ngo Dinh Nhu, defoliation appeared to the Montagnards as a powerful weapon, suggesting that the GVN is the more powerful side which they should join; he has asserted it also made the Viet Cong put more pressure on the Montagnards to ensure adequate food supplies, and contributed to their leaving Viet Cong areas.

c. In neighboring Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk did not show concern.

Conclusions

Destroying crops will inevitably have political repercussions. Intelligence is not yet reliable enough to assure that the crops destroyed are those controlled solely by the Viet Cong. Some innocent, or at least persuadable, peasants will be hurt and the Viet Cong will make the most of this in their propaganda and recruiting. Internationally, there will undoubtedly be greater reaction to a program of crop destruction than there was to defoliation.

Since food in South Viet-Nam is plentiful, it is not likely that a program for destroying crops would be effective enough to produce starvation among the Viet Cong, but two realistic strategic goals do seem possible. First, an effective program might be able to cut down food supplies enough to prevent the Viet Cong from stockpiling, thus making it difficult for them to concentrate large forces and sustain them in combat. Second, an effective program would force the Viet Cong to spend an increasing proportion of their time on acquiring and transporting food, rather than fighting.

It seems clear, however, that such results could be achieved only at a later stage in the counter-guerrilla campaign, after the Viet Cong have been isolated from the peasants and driven into well-defined areas of concentration. To be effective, the program would have to be extensive, and it is doubtful whether the government could carry out an extensive program while the Viet Cong are as widely dispersed as they are at present. An ineffective or premature program would only force the Viet Cong to intensify their efforts to penetrate or destroy nearby strategic hamlets, and the strategic hamlet program is in its present nascent state still extremely vulnerable.

Recommendations

I recommend that we make the foregoing conclusions known to Ambassador Nolting and ask that he seek to dissuade President Diem from now embarking independently on a crop-destruction program which would be at least premature.

I further recommend that the program under immediate consideration be disapproved.

Dean Rusk7

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. According to another copy, this memorandum was drafted by Rice and Wood on August 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 851K.23/8-2362)

2 Document 262.

3 Telegram 129 from Saigon, August 8; Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-862.

4 Telegram 145 from Saigon, August 15; ibid., 751K.23/8-1562.

5 Tab C was a six-line extract from an operational program on vegetation control.

6 Tab D was a three-paragraph extract from a review of the defoliation program in South Vietnam.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

271. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, August 24, 1962, 11:30 a.m. 271. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, August 24, 1962, 11:30 a.m.1

Washington, August 24, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

[Here follows the beginning of the memorandum, which dealt with Laos.]

Crop Destruction—Viet Nam

General Lemnitzer said that the JCS were being urged by General Harkins, Ambassador Nolting and the SVN Government to agree to a program of crop destruction in the north. If this program is to be effective, it must be undertaken quickly before the crops ripen and are harvested by the VC. General Lemnitzer asked Mr. Johnson how State felt about the proposed program. Mr. Johnson said that State has not agreed to it and that State has received the views of Secretary McNamara and the JCS which support the program. Accordingly, in view of the importance of the matter and the differences in the positions taken by State and Defense, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara will have to decide the issue. General Lemnitzer then asked Mr. Johnson to cover the basis for the State position. Mr. Johnson said that the State position is contained in a memorandum to the White House which had been approved the previous evening.2 He noted that he had given a copy of this memorandum to Mr. Rowen of ISA (Rowen was present at this meeting). Mr. Rowen then passed his copy of the memorandum to General Lemnitzer. After reading the memorandum General Lemnitzer remarked that the matter will have to be decided at a higher level. However, he stated that he personally disagreed with the State memorandum. He said that he desired to proceed with the destruction of VC food stocks and this program was a good way to accomplish the objective. Mr. Johnson said it was doubtful that we could destroy VC crops without destroying Montagnard crops at the same time. The crops are in the same area and are not readily identifiable as belonging to one or the other of the two groups. General Lemnitzer said that this is not a problem because the VC have driven the Montagnards out of the area and thus all crops will be harvested and consumed by the VC. Mr. Johnson said that the crops were not planted and raised by the VC but by the Montagnards. Mr. Rowen said that the SVN program called for dose control and that the operation would be conducted on a careful basis right down to the village level. Mr. Johnson noted that the proposed program posed great psychological problems even though the chemicals to be used were obtainable at a hardware store. They were in fact similar to materials we use on our own lawns. The proposed destruction using aircraft had psychological drawbacks. General Lemnitzer remarked that the program would have great military advantages. Mr. Johnson said that there is no precedent for this type of action except in the case of British employment of a similar program in Malaya. General Lemnitzer said that it is strange that we can bomb, kill, and burn people but are not permitted to starve them. Mr. Johnson noted that food may be destroyed in storage dumps.

[Here follows a section on Latin America.]

1 Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings: Lot 65 D 172. Top Secret. The source text bears a notation that it was a Department of State draft that was not cleared with the Department of Defense. The meeting was held at the Pentagon.

2 Document 270.

272. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 272. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 24, 1962—5:45 p.m.

201. Department requests Embassyʼs views on line U.S. should take if Communist nations should launched concentrated campaign for conference on Viet-Nam at some future time.

Our present objective in Viet-Nam is to help GVN to achieve the strength necessary to exercise predominant and continued sovereignty over that part of its territory which lies below the demarcation line. There is nothing to negotiate until this minimum objective is achieved.

Having this policy objective the U.S. would, if there were a call for a conference, base itself on the position most recently set forth in Presidentʼs letter of December 142 and in Secretaryʼs press conference statement of March 1.3 (President Kennedy: “Our primary purpose is to help your people maintain their independence. If the Communist authorities in north Viet-Nam will stop their campaign to destroy the Republic of Viet-Nam, the measures we are taking to assist your defense efforts will no longer be necessary.” Secretary Rusk: “the United States is always prepared to talk about situations which represent a threat to the peace, but what must be talked about is the root of the trouble; in this case it is the Communist aggression against Viet-Nam in disregard of the Geneva Accords.”)

The following additional points could be made if necessary to meet a Communist campaign for a conference. However, the decision on whether and how to use them would depend on the circumstances since we will not voluntarily enter a lengthy public discussion on Viet-Nam.

1. It has been suggested Lao settlement provides model for Viet-Nam. International settlements, like forms of government, must be carefully tailored to situation of a particular country or they cannot be effective. The situations in Viet-Nam and Laos are certainly not the same. While the U.S. was willing to join in guaranteeing a policy of neutrality which was generally desired in Laos, it will not seek to impose neutrality on a nation which is fighting off aggression to keep its independence. The source of this aggression has been indicated in the most recent report of the International Control Commission for Viet-Nam.4

2. What can be gained by a conference on Viet-Nam now? Viet-Nam will not and cannot negotiate its freedom. Neither a man nor a nation can be asked to bargain for independence while facing an uplifted knife. Until aggression against Viet-Nam stops, all international actions should be designed to help this nation maintain its independence. Can other nations make peace for Viet-Nam? The United States is helping Viet-Nam fight for its freedom; we will not seek to persuade Viet-Nam to abandon its freedom at conference table. This is a Vietnamese war; there can be no lasting peace unless it is freely accepted by the Vietnamese.5

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2462. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Wood and cleared by SOV. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Not printed, but see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 322.

3 See Document 94.

4 See Document 208.

5 In telegram 202, August 27, the Embassy in Saigon concurred with the lines set forth in this telegram. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2762)

273. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 273. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 25, 1962, 1 p.m.

191. Reference: Departmentʼs telegram 181.2 Both Embassy and MACV consider as encouraging those indications of VC hardships in highland areas reported MACV message mentioned reftel. While we have had many reports that VC are short of medical supplies and are having growing difficulties in obtaining food in highland areas, MACV report referred to records first real indication health conditions of VC may be sufficiently serious to affect operational effectiveness. Therefore, believe it premature attempt now assess significance this report. As follow-up reference telegram, MACV requesting Senior Adviser II Corps to follow matter closely and to report regularly on reliability and numbers prisoners giving this kind of information. (Since above written, we have received from Thuan translations of captured VC letters, et cetera, strongly reinforcing evidence. These being analyzed and summary will be sent separately.)

Existing evidence sufficiently impressive to conclude VC in highland areas having real difficulties obtaining food and medical supplies. This evidence shows that such operations as Haihyen, combining “clear-and-hold” and Strategic Hamlet Programs, plus the Montagnard flights, are beginning pay concrete dividends. All these indications reinforce our conviction that carefully conceived crop destruction programs in clearly VC areas (see Embtel 1713 and previous) can be important weapon against VC. These operations must be mounted quickly if to be effective.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2562. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Telegram 181, August 22, reported that a MACV message to the JCS on August 20 had stated that the VC in II Corps area were suffering from shortages of medical and food supplies. (Ibid., 751K.00/8-2262)

3 Telegram 171, August 21, reported that General Harkins had received a letter from Thuan requesting the release of 5,000 gallons of defoliant for an operation against VC crops in Phu Yen province. (Ibid., 751K.00/8-2162)

274. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 274. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India1

Washington, September 5, 1962—11:33 a.m.

913. Reference: Embtel to Dept. 401, Saigon 2, Ottawa 2, London 63, Vientiane 5.2 Under instructions from GOI Ambassador Nehru called on Harriman August 30 discuss Viet Nam. In addition, wide range other subjects covered in relaxed, cordial but exceptionally candid exchange:

Viet Nam: Referring to Galbraith-Gundevia conversation (reftel) Amb raised question Viet Nam and said GOI uneasy about continuation and intensification US activities in SVN. GOI hoped after Laos conference3 there would be slowdown but there such obvious breaches of agreement by GVN, e.g., introduction US helicopters, that ICC will be forced issue citation and GOI cannot prevent it. Said M.J. Desaiʼs view is “Indian cannot apply different standards to each ICC”; the Laos agreement must be enforced and this means the same ICC treatment for SVN. Ambassador continued that with escalation conflict SVN GOI worried that ChiComs will intervene. He asked if ChiComs assisting Viet Cong.

Harriman replied we have no indications yet that ChiComs moving into Viet Nam since they preoccupied with own internal problems and Indian border dispute. We know ChiComs are building road near Phong Saly (Laos) and have combat troops this area, but there no way by which they can move easily into SVN. Said it was DRV rather than ChiComs who assisting Viet Cong in SVN. In Laos Soviet had supplied most equipment and transport, DRV the troops.

Harriman said our position SVN as stated by President has not changed. We providing mil aid at Diemʼs request for self defense; if DRV aggression stops our additional mil aid would no longer be needed. Harriman had made three efforts with Pushkin in Geneva and also with DRV Foreign Minister to talk about DRV “calling off dogs” and had got nowhere.4 Both had maintained that Viet Cong entirely local operation and Pushkin had contended that US backing unpopular tyrant. They seem believe Viet Cong can win in SVN with support of North by disrupting country. They would take over country but for our assistance. This much easier for ICC to see than is covert assistance given other side. Yet new Viet Cong offensive may come after end of wet season. ICC should look under the rug and not report only what is visible.

In answer questions from Amb if we satisfied with political/military progress SVN and how future looks, Harriman said we would like broader based government which would gain more support among intellectuals in Saigon; however we believe people in villages responding favorably to provision arms by GVN and ready to fight in defense. We believe villagers primary concern is security against Viet Cong. As to future we see guerrilla war might extend for years unless North decides it has had enough. Our objective is to help SVN get Viet Cong out of their country. In view very unhappy situation there we would welcome any constructive ideas which Indians can offer as friends.

Amb replied he wished India could help; GOI had made approaches both sides without success. His reason for coming in see Harriman was to warn us there may be ICC reports which very displeasing to US. Harriman answered we have left it to our Embassy in Saigon to discuss this problem with ICC. Situation is different in Laos since under terms 1962 agreement5 ICC reports to co-chairman who have responsibility to see that agreement is carried out. Harriman said he did not wish to interfere with Saigon talks nor transfer them to Washington.

Laos: Harriman noted that ICC not really enforcing agreement re withdrawal of troops in Laos although we very gratified at efforts Indian Chairman to make Commission effective. Problem is refusal of Pathet Lao permit ICC move about and inadequate number of ICC checkpoints. Souvanna helpful but Souphanouvong refuses admit Viet Minh presence in Laos though they have been observed by many reports. It ridiculous have only three check points; at least three required each zone. Our people are moving out of Laos on schedule in accordance with agreement that departure be checked by ICC; VM not doing same however. Harriman said we hope ICC will be vigorous and active in enforcing Laos agreement. Amb replied it will be.

Cambodia: Harriman said our Amb now exploring with Sihanouk means assuring integrity, neutrality Cambodia and we now in process drafting Presidential reply Sihanouk letter.6 Said we hoped Sihanouk would accept as substitute for conference of Geneva powers series letters in which each power would give bilateral assurances. Said US taking Sihanouk letter seriously since he man with many good qualities and laudable objectives despite his emotional approach to certain issues. Amb did not comment on Sihanouk letter except to say GOI also working on reply.

ChiComs: Harriman mentioned having met Chen Yi socially in Geneva although nothing of substance discussed between them. Found Chen trying hard project himself as pleasant and reasonable but found no evidence ChiComs prepared yield any material points. Amb said Chen not quite so affable with Indians in Geneva. Said news of Krishna Menon and Chen dining together, and picture of Menon clinking glasses with Chen and Gromyko had caused strong public reaction in India. Noted Indian public very much worked up over border issue.

Meeting concluded with agreement that Harriman and Amb should consult whenever problems of common interest arise.7

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/8-362. Secret. Drafted by Barnard and cleared with SOA.

2 Telegram 401, August 3, reported that Commonwealth Secretary Gundevia had asked the United States to go slow in its visible introduction of material into Vietnam lest it prejudice the utility of the ICC both there and in Laos. Galbraith suggested that Indian Ambassador Nehru call on Harriman for a full explanation of U.S. policy. (Ibid.)

3 The International Conference on the Settlement of the Laotian Question, which met intermittently May 15, 1961-July 23, 1962.

4 Regarding Harrimanʼs conversation with Foreign Minister Mau see Document 246. Regarding Harrimanʼs conversation with Pushkin on September 13, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 133, footnote 2. The other two efforts have not been identified.

5 For text of the Declaration and Protocol on Neutral Laos, July 23, 1962, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1075-1083.

6 For text of Sihanoukʼs letter, August 20, and the Presidentʼs reply, August 31, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1002-1004.

7 The following sentence at the end of this telegram was deleted before transmission: “General tone entire meeting leads us hope Ambassadorʼs report will give accurate and sympathetic interpretation US position.”

275. Letter From the Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 275. Letter From the Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, September 5, 1962.

Dear Fritz: There has been increasing interest in Washington in recent days in the political component of the effort against the guerrillas in Viet Nam. I know that this is, of course, also very much on your mind and I have been greatly encouraged to read the reports of the progress you have been making in this area as well as in other areas. We have also been encouraged by recent talks with Rufus Phillips about his explorations and activities relating to this problem.2 At the same time I am sure that you would agree that we ought to canvass all possible avenues for improving the rate of progress.

While I have no illusions about the possibilities for ending the war quickly, I do have the personal feeling, based upon the indicators I have seen, that we may in the next few months be approaching the real turning point of the struggle. If this is true, it becomes particularly important that we explore every possible measure that makes any sense and that might help get us over the hump. Guerrilla wars—like battles for air supremacy—tend to come to a peak and spiral in one direction or another. I do not feel that this one is likely to spiral against us in the next six months; but it could—as seen from a great distance—spiral for us if the hamlet program, and all it stands for, takes hold. It is for that reason that those cheering your team on from Washington, may appear to be straining under circumstances which otherwise represent a very great accomplishment over the past nine months or so.

Bob Johnson, a member of the Policy Planning Council, several weeks ago completed the attached study3 on the subject of central government relationships with the countryside. I believe that you were given an earlier draft of the paper at the time of the last Honolulu meeting.4 Necessarily our information on the subjects covered was somewhat incomplete at the time the paper was prepared and there have been further developments since that time. In particular the description of US programs in Section VI is out of date.

We realize that at this distance from Viet Nam we cannot possibly have the feel for the situation that you and your colleagues in Saigon have acquired. I am sending you the paper solely with the thought that the analysis and the suggestions in it may be of use to you as a further source of ideas in your daily work on these problems. I am also enclosing with this letter a list of additional suggestions which we obtained when we sought reactions here to the paper. This list, too, may contain ideas that you can use.

If the paper were to be revised today we would need to take account of the following major points bearing upon the recommendations contained in it which have emerged from informal review of the paper in Washington.

1. We get conflicting information here as to which are the weakest links in the GVNʼs administrative relationships with the countryside where improvement in training and use of new training techniques may be most needed. Possibly we have not identified the highest priority targets. It is our understanding that there is much more information in Saigon on the status of training programs than is available here. (A recent airgram (Toaid A-513),5 for example, contains information on provincial training centers which was not previously available in Washington.) We believe that our suggestions on the character, general priority and organization of training programs have merit, however.

2. The recommendation that appointive councils be continued at the village and hamlet level and that elective advisory councils be created and given major functions (Recommendation 6) was based upon two assumptions. One was that, under present circumstances, it would be very difficult to get genuinely free elections of hamlet officials who would be bearing the main burden of administering the government programs at the hamlet level. We assumed—and some of the available GVN instructions on the program seemed to support this assumption—that province and district officials would assure that their candidates would be elected. We also had some doubts, based also in part upon GVN instructions, as to whether the GVN intended to give these elected hamlet councils real authority over constructive programs that would have genuine popular appeal instead of limiting them solely to control of the rural population and to the imposition of onerous-seeming burdens on the population. We are still not certain whether these assumptions are incorrect but some reports seem to suggest that really free elections are being permitted and that there might be plans for giving continuing constructive tasks to the hamlet councils. It is obviously important that this should be the case.

3. It is our understanding that you are now using the provincial military advisers as temporary provincial AID advisers as the paper suggested (Recommendation 8) independently of any knowledge that such a proposal was under consideration. It is, of course, obvious that this must be a stop-gap measure until we have the people and have made the arrangements with the GVN for AID personnel to handle such jobs. It seems important that installation of AID advisers at provincial levels proceed with some speed.

4. We have been greatly encouraged by recent progress with respect to the Montagnards (Recommendation 11). As we understand it the government has just embarked, with our help and support, on a country-wide Montagnard program directed not only toward immediate urgent relief requirements for those that have come out of the hills, but also toward longer-range welfare and economic needs. I have also been delighted to hear of the progress that is being achieved in making the Montagnards into a significant military factor and of the GVNʼs apparent enthusiasm for this program.

I hope that Bill Trueheart may get back to Washington in the near future and that I can get together with him to discuss political aspects of counterinsurgency in Viet Nam. I know that his activities as chairman of the Committee on Province Rehabilitation have brought him into intimate daily contact with the problems involved. As a purely personal thought I have been wondering recently whether there might not be real utility in devoting some significant portion of one of the Honolulu meetings to the political component of our effort in Viet Nam. Obviously such a discussion should be carefully prepared in advance and it would also be necessary to include some additional top-level people from Washington and Saigon. I might informally discuss such a possibility with Bill if he comes to Washington.

In closing I want to say again that we are most impressed with the job you are doing and with the momentum that is, as a result, beginning to develop in Viet Nam.

With warmest greetings to you both and the children. Practice your ping-pony for my next visit.6

Yours,

W.W. Rostow7

[Enclosure]

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, undated.

ADDITIONAL SUGGESTIONS FOR POSSIBLE ACTION

1. Scholarships as Rewards. The Government ought to be encouraged to search for additional means of satisfying the desires of rural youth for increased status and upward mobility which they may otherwise seek to satisfy through participation in Viet Cong activities. For example, education is the key to vertical mobility for many Vietnamese and consideration might be given to providing scholarships to young Vietnamese as a reward for active participation in hamlet defense units, heroism under fire, etc. Perhaps these youth should be selected by popular secret ballot or by hamlet councils (where they are elected by truly free electoral process). Their training might be in subjects useful to them personally (e.g., higher education that would qualify them for Government service) or to the hamlet itself (e.g., education in health or mechanics).

2. Land Reform. The GVN now holds 260,000 hectares of land acquired from former French landlords and about 125,000 hectares from Vietnamese landlords which is still undistributed. This land might, wherever possible, be distributed free to young people who distinguish themselves in building or defending strategic hamlets. This again would help satisfy the desire for vertical mobility on the part of such young people. It might also be possible to distribute some of this land to the strategic hamlets themselves as common land, the income of which would be used for the support of hamlet officials or local facilities such as hamlet schools. Finally, some of this land might be distributed to families of Viet Cong victims. If such actions were exploited effectively by information media (along with an exposition of Communist land policy in North Vietnam) they might help nullify the appeal that Communist land reform seems to have for the peasant in Vietnam. Finally, we ought to encourage the GVN, as part of the strategic hamlet program, to make it the responsibility of elected hamlet officials to enforce provisions of the land reform act.

3. National Strategic Hamlet Congress. We might encourage the GVN to hold a national strategic hamlet congress in Saigon in the near future with elected representatives from each strategic hamlet. Such a congress could study the program, compare notes on experiences and advise the GVN. An important part of such a Congress might be the honoring of bona fide strategic hamlet heroes. Perhaps the distribution of land and/or scholarships to some of these people by President Diem could be the principal event of the congress. Such a congress would help foster a sense of national identity, giving the rural population some feeling of participation in the national government, and could provide some useful ideas on the organization and administration of the program. Information media could play all of this back to the countryside.

4. Employment of National Assembly Deputies in the Strategic Hamlet Program. National Assembly deputies are, for the most part, loyal, intelligent and talented people and in many cases their abilities are badly under-employed. We might consider suggesting that some of them could play an active hamlet-level role in the strategic hamlet program. At a minimum, they might be attached to appropriate regional strategic hamlet committees as special advisers and inspectors.

5. Provincial Administration. Some reports suggest that one of the weak links in the administrative chain is at the level of the provincial bureaucracy. We should encourage the GVN to continue to prune the provincial bureaucracy of corrupt or abusive officials and to improve training programs, perhaps along the lines suggested in the paper.

6. Reunification. The government might gain some increased popular support by a carefully-designed and well-publicized policy statement on this issue.

1 Source: Department of state, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Robert Johnson. copies were also sent to Rice, Harriman, Cottrell, and Wood.

2 In June 1962, Rufus Phillips had gone to Vietnam as a consultant to AID to make a survey of the insurgent war and recommend a program for counterinsurgency support. A copy of his 21-page report is attached to a note from Lansdale to William Bundy, September 10, in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 6214, Vietnam-Reports, Studies.

3 See Document 249 and footnote 3 thereto.

4 Presumably the July 17 draft referred to in footnote 3, Document 249.

5 Not found.

6 Attached to the source text was Noltingʼs reply, October 10, in which the Ambassador stressed that he hoped greater political expression would arise in Vietnam as the military pressure was reduced, and noted that, while much remained to be done, he was optimistic about the outcome.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

276. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 276. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)1

Washington, September 6, 1962.

Dear Mr. Secretary: In the attachment to your August 27 memorandum to Mr. Johnson2 (who is on leave), you outlined the assumptions on which the Secretary of Defense had based a recommendation to the President3 that he approve a trial program of chemical crop destruction in Viet Cong territory in Phu Yen Province. One of the two assumptions was that the Montagnards had abandoned the target area in recent months. Actually, our Embassy at Saigon has reported that very few refugees had come out of the mountains of Phu Yen, that most of those requesting assistance were ethnic Vietnamese, and that indications were lacking that they were from the proposed target area (Saigonʼs telegram 129, August 84 ). Since this appears to negate a basic assumption underlying the DOD recommendation, you may wish to reconsider it.

We nevertheless posed to Ambassador Nolting the two numbered questions you listed, as well as the additional question as to whether the time is not passed when the operation could be successfully carried out against this yearʼs rice harvest (Deptel to Saigon 212, August 275 ). He has replied that it has indeed already passed (Saigonʼs 233, September 16 ). In replying to your numbered questions, he indicated: (1) that the crops in question would importantly benefit the Viet Cong, but will still help support the Montagnards in the area, as the Viet Cong rarely confiscate the entire crop of any one plot; and (2) it is assumed that loss of its share of the crop would hurt the Viet Cong, but that not enough is known in detail about the Viet Congʼs planned operations to say that this proposed crop destruction would have seriously set them back.

You will note, from Ambassador Noltingʼs reply, that he would like us now to consider authorizing the working out of an alternate target area, and that the question of authorizing release of chemicals for use in ground operations, in place of more laborious methods of crop destruction, has been raised.

It is our view that it would be inappropriate to approve Ambassador Noltingʼs proposals, at least at this stage when Viet Cong and the general populace are closely intermingled. We propose to prepare and seek DOD concurrence for a reply in that sense.

Sincerely,

W. Averell Harriman

1 Source: Washington National Records center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Vietnam 1962, 370.64. Secret.

2 The attachment to the August 27 memorandum of transmittal is a one-page memorandum from Gilpatric to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also dated August 27, along the lines summarized here. (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.8158/8-2762)

3 See Document 262.

4 Not printed. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series)

5 The two questions were: 1) would the rice land benefit primarily the Viet Cong? and 2) would the denial of food seriously upset their operations? (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-862)

6 Telegram 233 reported that the crop target areas were controlled by the Viet Cong, but that any crop destruction in Vietnam would cause temporary hardship to the population. (Ibid., 751K.00/9-162)

277. Memorandum for the Record 277. Memorandum for the Record1

Saigon, September 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting held at Gia Long Palace, Saigon, Vietnam, 7 Sep 62

ATTENDANCE

His Excellency Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam

General Paul D. Harkins, Commander, Military Assistance Commands, Vietnam and Thailand

Mr. William C. Trueheart, Deputy Chief of Mission, American Embassy, Saigon

After the usual exchange of amenities, during which President Diem extended a particularly cordial welcome to his guests, General Harkins expressed to the President his pleasure with the splendid results of ARVNAF aggressiveness during the preceding month—especially in the III Corps area. He attributed these successes to the excellent cooperation of the various fighting arms: the Army, the Air Force, the supporting helicopter units and the River Forces. He said that, not only was he personally delighted, but that he was sure that General Taylor would be pleased with the progress which has been made since his visit to Vietnam in October of last year,2 while the Delta area was in the throes of the flood disaster. Mr. Trueheart said that he had personal experience of the remarkable progress that had been made, since he had arrived in Vietnam at about the time of General Taylorʼs visit. General Harkins added that this progress was not restricted to the III Corps area but was evident throughout the country. He then told the President that the purpose of his visit was to present to him the concept of a plan which he thought that the President would like. He said that, the fact that so much progress had been made was the best of all arguments that no stop should occur now. In two or three months, said the General, would come the fruition of most of the efforts which have been made up to now. If all resources were used to the fullest, there could be no reason why one could not push on to victory. General Harkins then started to enumerate for the President the assets which were held by Vietnam. First, he said, the intelligence net which has been in place since May was now producing good results. Even the people were volunteering information—a good, healthy sign. Next, continued General Harkins, the communications system within the country was improving rapidly. The Tropo-scatter system was installed and beginning to work well. On the preceding Tuesday, he said, he had held a conference call with the Senior Advisors of Da Nang, Pleiku and Saigon and reception had been excellent. In reply to President Diemʼs question as to whether the system provided communications security, General Harkins explained that, as in all other systems where transmission was in the clear, there was danger of compromise. He added that there would soon be incorporated a teletype system which would provide security. General Harkins then went on to list, as the next asset, the great increase in mobility of the armed forces. He said that, in addition to all that had already been accomplished there would soon be two more helicopter companies arriving in Vietnam. October would see the beginning of the arrival of one hundred and twelve more M-113 armored personnel carriers. In November, the first of 95 M-114 armored vehicles would arrive. He explained to the President that the M-114 is a new armored reconnaissance vehicle which carries four men, reputed to be very good, and so new that it had not yet been used by the armed forces of the United States. The General pointed out to the President that the assignment of this new equipment to Vietnam was evidence of the great interest placed by the United States in the struggle which was going on here. General Harkins then went on to list as additional assets the 15 armed HU1A helicopters which were to arrive in the very near future. Added to these, he said, would be a half dozen new armed Mohawk aircraft, which he described as well equipped with communications equipment, capable of carrying out reconnaissance missions, of taking aerial photographs, and of providing armed escort and fire support. In answer to a query from the President he explained that they could operate from small airstrips. Next in the recapitulation of assets, said the General, was the fact that the 9th Division had completed training and the 25th Division would complete its formation in January. By December, he added, the Civil Guard would have been trained, as well as most of the Self Defense Corps. Added to all this, he went on, there would be sixteen more Special Forces Training teams (four of which had arrived), consisting of two officers and ten men per team. Already, thirteen Montagnard Scout companies had been trained. As additional assets, the various youth groups of the country had been trained by the thousands and an untold number of women had undergone some sort of indoctrination in the use of weapons. With a smile, the President said that, on a recent visit to an Agricultural Development Center he had noticed that all the guards in the area were women. It had been explained to him that the men were away to attend a course of instruction on Strategic Hamlets—but he added—the women obviously took their guard duties seriously. General Harkins commented that he had seen in the newspapers that some 3,000 more women were about to undergo paramilitary training. The President confirmed this and added that among the women were three Doctors of Medicine and a number of other professional women—all volunteers. Then to complete his summation of the assets on the side of the government, General Harkins mentioned the Catholic Youth Groups operating under the guidance of Father Hoa and Father Bosco and the large number of people enrolled in the Forces Populaires. To this must be added, he said, the Ranger Companies, the four Special Ranger Battalions and the Marine Battalions. The Air Force, he went on, had greatly increased the number of sorties and, by the end of the year, the Vietnamese Navy would have markedly increased strength and would be appreciably more active, with greater capability in coastal and river operations. In all, concluded General Harkins, there would be some 450,000 people under arms, not counting the youth and the women. With all this in a concentrated, integrated effort it should be possible to do something within the country. Perhaps it would not be possible to kill all the Viet Cong—but it should at least drive them underground. Even this would not be bad, because it would permit the continuation of the construction of Strategic Hamlets and the economic development of the country. If, eventually, the Viet Cong should try to come out in the open again the forces would be there to push their heads down again.

Saying that this, then, was the aim—General Harkins showed President Diem a notebook containing the principal elements of the concept according to which an operational plan could be built.

General Harkins then explained to the President what the purpose of the plan should be. He showed that implementation should be in successive phases—the formulation of the plan, preparation, the explosion and then the follow-up. Before continuing his explanation he showed the President a chart3 which indicated the VC strength in each province of Vietnam. On examination of the figures the President protested that those indicated for the I Corps and II Corps regions were too low and said that his national intelligence people had much higher holdings in those areas, particularly in Quang Nam, Quang Ngai and in the mountains and high plateau areas extending from these provinces down to Kontum. General Harkins pointed out that, according to the compilation of all intelligence from Vietnamese as well as American sources there was a total of slightly over 20,000 hard core VC in the entire country. Added to these there could be another 100,000 local guerrillas and an unknown number of sympathizers. The guerrilla companies were composed of a handful of cadres and expanded to 50 or 100 men, many or most of whom were impressed local people. The comparison of strength, the General indicated, was very favorable to the government. General Harkins then told the President that, since his idea was still only the concept of a plan, a great deal of detailed planning remained to be accomplished. He had spoken of this only to Secretary Thuan, he explained, since he had not yet received the Presidentʼs approval to discuss it with others. Detailed study, he continued, could very easily indicate the need for some redeployment of forces so that the sudden explosion everywhere at the same time would be most effective. He cited as examples the provinces of Ba Xuyen and Tay Ninh. Even with actions such as these it might not be possible to accomplish all at once because of such considerations as the varying weather conditions in different areas of the country at any given time. Of prime importance in the development of a workable plan to implement his concept, said General Harkins, was the establishment of a single chain of command, starting with the President as Commander-in-Chief, descending through the Assistant for National Defense through the Joint General Staff down to the lowest operational levels. Only thus could directives be gotten to all areas to ensure that all troops and supplies would be used most effectively. General Harkins next showed the President a chart4 which indicated the areas of Vietnam which could be supported by helicopters after the arrival of the new companies. He added that CINCPAC had spoken of the assignment of an airplane carrier from which a battalion of Marines, paratroopers or regular ARVN troops could be transported by helicopter to any area along the coast. The General then said that joint command centers and combined operations centers would have to be established at different echelons and explained briefly why they would be needed. He said that the detailed plan would be Vietnamese and that the role of the United States would continue to be to assist and to recommend. Decisions, he emphasized, would be for the President to make. Overall command, he went on, would have to be at governmental and JGS level since elements other than the military would be included in the all-out effort. Operations would be conducted through the command centers to provide for all eventualities, such as the possible requirement for redeployment of, say, five Ranger companies which normally would be kept under Province Chief control. There could also be a need for increased logistical support, entailing the need to prestock essential supplies such as ammunition, equipment and food. There would certainly be a need for intensified, accelerated training—much of it on a geographical basis—by troops such as marines, rangers and special forces designated to operate in specific areas. It would be necessary to work hard, and at night, and the work would have to be continued until all preparations were completed. Contact would have to be made and maintained with the enemy. Communications would need to be established on a continuous basis throughout the system from the top down to battalion, company and platoon level. Of great importance would be the participation of civic action teams to provide all essential services, such as police, administration, medical. In preparation for an all-out operation—from now on—all possible means of identifying and fixing the enemy should be employed. Complementary to this, should be a good psychological warfare program which would include both the military and the civilian segments of the population. Maximum surveillance of routes to control infiltration across borders and to locate enemy installations would have to be set up. People, such as the Special Battalions, the Montagnard Scout Companies, Special Forces, as well as regulars would have to be put into the field to find the enemy. Whenever possible, where government forces were in sufficient strength the enemy should be killed at once. If conditions would not permit this, they should be marked for later destruction. Wherever appropriate targets could be pinpointed, immediate bombing operations should be carried out against them. General Harkins, at this point, assured the President that, when warranted, massive bombing operations such as those which the President had requested for the VC infested foothills of Quang Nam and Quang Ngai could be carried out. Above all, the General stressed, preparations would have to begin as soon as possible. One of the first steps should be to bring existing units up to strength. There might be need to call up reserves or to increase conscription. Of prime importance was the adequate staffing of the many units which now had only 50 or 60% of their officer and non-commissioned officer strength. General Harkins then said that nothing that he had suggested in the presentation of his concept should be construed to mean that what was now being done should be discontinued. On the contrary, what he proposed would amount to nothing more than an expansion, an acceleration. He considered the Strategic Hamlet program, he said, to be one of the highlights of any plan for total victory and added that a pipeline had been set up to guarantee the orderly, timely flow of materials for this program. After once more stressing the great importance of obtaining all possible intelligence from all possible sources—including the military, the use of agents, the exploitation of civilians and the means available to province and district chiefs, General Harkins suggested to the President that, in each Corps, there should be a special “Quick Reaction Strike Force.” This force, which would consist of a battalion of Airborne or Regular ARVN troops, or perhaps Rangers, would be provided with a half-dozen helicopters and a number of C-47 or C-123 aircraft. They would be on constant alert and able to intervene rapidly wherever needed. They would, in a sense, constitute the Corps reserve force. In summary, said General Harkins, the concept which he had presented could be the basis for a bold plan to destroy the VC with one massive, integrated all-out effort. The Supreme Commander of the operation would be the President himself with command going directly from him in a single chain down to the lowest level.

General Harkins then reemphasized the fact that, if the Viet Cong should go underground, the government could continue its strategic hamlet program and to work toward the economic growth of the country. It could afford to wait and, if the enemy should attempt to rise again, the necessary force would be available to crush them once more. With good intelligence, he said, they would not be able to come back. He then stressed the fact that what he had presented to the President was a concept only. There was no elaborate plan as yet—no details worked out. What was needed first of all was the desire to accomplish the destruction of the Viet Cong—and the will to do it. He was sure, he said, that the Vietnamese people wanted to do it.

President Diem then asked General Harkins what he thought the time required to do this would be—and what results could be expected. General Harkins said that he thought the plan should be prepared for implementation shortly after the first of the year. He reiterated once more that the result might be to drive the Communists underground, but—he underlined, this would be O.K.—since it would permit freedom of action to the government in its plans for defense in the strategic action program, and for offense through the economic growth of the country. He said that he was perhaps optimistic—but that he always was. He felt that one year would be enough to achieve victory. Secretary McNamara had not agreed with him and it was somewhat difficult to find others who would—but he could not see, he insisted, why with all the assets that he had listed—amounting to more than 450,000 people, success could not be achieved. He was convinced that it could be. He then cautioned the President that some of his leaders, even the military, might not approve—in which event he suggested, others must be found that would. The plan, General Harkins continued, would require a considerable amount of training—including schools for senior officers to give them the entire background, to familiarize them with the plan itself and to instill in them the will to accomplish it. The General then showed the President a number of pages in his notebook which listed the proposed training courses at various levels.

The President (obviously intrigued), then said that he thought the plan, in principle, to be very good. He added that it must be examined in the light of all forces presently available—and he added, the political aspect must be considered. As a first impression, he said that one had better look to three years instead of one. To reduce the Viet Cong like this—he mused—would be better to think in terms of three years. The VC, he thought, would not accept a defeat of this kind. In answer to General Harkins' remark that they were going to have to accept it, the President protested that the viewpoint of the enemy was unknown—no one knew what the reaction would be. General Harkins then said that his philosophy in war was not to worry about the enemy but, rather, to let the enemy worry about him. The President agreed that this was good, in principle, but added that, since we did not know what to expect we should consider the situation not only in the light of what both sides now have, but also from the viewpoint of what the enemy can do. Since the VC cannot accept a crushing defeat it should be expected that they would reinforce. For example, in the field of logistics they could start using air supply. General Harkins replied that they couldn't, we would destroy them. President Diem then said that, in the mountains of Quang Ngai the VC are reported to have anti-aircraft sites prepared. General Harkins reminded him that we have radar and intercept aircraft which fly every night. These planes operate from Tan Son Nhut and fly out to meet every aircraft that is not properly identified. Any effort on the part of the communists to use air supply would be crushed. Also, continued the General, if the Viet Cong bring in more forces there will be more of them for us to defeat. He reminded the President that during the past two months 2,500 VC regular and paramilitary personnel had been neutralized. Three battalion headquarters had been destroyed in the III Corps area and another had been hit in the I Corps area. If, for the next five months, all efforts could be concentrated on the gathering of intelligence-military units, penetration agents, civilians and all the rest, the enemy could be pinpointed and hit everywhere at once. If all could not be killed—they would at least have to go into hiding and government operations could continue unhindered—with the populace convinced that the average VC is not twelve feet high. General Harkins then suggested that a system of rewards be instituted to stimulate reporting of VC identities in the villages. If the morale of the people were lifted to the point where all desired the elimination of the VC there would be no reason why this plan should miss. As an example of the already raised morale of the people the General cited the example of the latest volunteer class of officer candidates at Thu Duc, for which four hundred more applied than could be accepted. The President agreed that this had been a very good sign and added that, during the war, a similar appeal for volunteers had met with no response.

President Diem next pointed out to General Harkins that the timing of his proposed plan coincided with the target date for the completion of i/2 of the Strategic Hamlet plan. General Harkins agreed that this was so and mentioned the fact that machinery had been set up to provide much of the needed materials for the execution of this plan—on a recurring three months basis. He added that he did not feel that all hamlets had to be provided with the same physical security. The President agreed and said that the philosophy behind the entire plan was to set up and teach basic democracy as a countermeasure against the teachings of the North and against those who were pressing for neutrality. He said that, with the means which were now available to the government, the enemy had been disturbed and that this was why they had recently started to cry for international conferences on neutrality. General Harkins commented that they would cry louder if—based on the concept which he had presented—a resultant plan were to be implemented and carried out. The President once more expressed his doubt that the communists would accept defeat in this way and referred vaguely to political maneuvers which they might adopt. Mr. Trueheart commented that these maneuvers would not bother him. The President then, stating that his remarks were made in confidence, said that there had been recent evidence of subversive activities—such as the extension of their espionage net—by the French. This he interpreted as evidence that they were attempting to pursue the same policy in Vietnam that they had followed in Laos. Mr. Trueheart assured him that the United States policy in Vietnam was not at all the same as that which had been followed in Laos. The President then said that he was not happy with the position which the United States had adopted with respect to Laos. He felt that the United States could have stated that they favored a government of “National Union” and that there could be no question of helping one part of a coalition. Further, he said, there should have been a statement that the United States was not in agreement with “Neutralism”. Mr. Trueheart said that, in Vietnam there was no question of “Neutralism” and that the policy of his government was one of total war aimed at the destruction of the Viet Cong. General Harkins added that he wanted to destroy the VC in order that the people of Vietnam might enjoy their country and see its beauty as he had—mentioning the wonderful attractions of Cap St. Jacques, Dalat and Nha Trang. He deplored the fact that the people of Saigon could travel no farther than Tan Son Nhut—where they gathered in crowds each Sunday. President Diem replied somewhat wryly that General Harkins was indulging in flights of imagination. He said that, not long before, he had attended a graduation ceremony at Thu Duc. He had heard that American advisors had planned to travel to the site by helicopter because they considered road travel to be too dangerous. They had changed their minds when they learned that the President was travelling by road. He added that his British advisors, in their report on the Strategic Hamlet program, had explained that the VC, since they could no longer safely attack the villages, had concentrated their attacks on the more vulnerable roads and the railroad. He added that, in the same report, it had been pointed out that, the VC, facing the loss of part of their control over the countryside, had begun a program aimed at exciting students as a first step in their activities on a political plane in Saigon. General Harkins commented that if the VC were attacked and killed they could not do this. He pointed out that there were now some 500 incidents per week—in which an average of 700 VC were killed and 100 Vietnamese soldiers and civilians lost their lives. If the plan were implemented the VC would be destroyed and all this would end. Mr. Trueheart explained that, on the one hand, the civilian strength of the country should be mobilized to support the plan. The Strategic Hamlets would constitute part of this mobilization. What General Harkins proposed, he added, was the simultaneous total mobilization of the armed forces. General Harkins commented that he felt that the VC were now off balance. They were losing much of their force and it would be very difficult for them to bring in more either by land or by sea. With the Montagnards—the Rhade, the Bahnar, the people around Aschan and Aloui—on our side, large scale infiltration of VC was becoming increasingly difficult. President Diem pointed out that one of the most critical areas was still the Annamite chain in the Center, particularly the province of Quang Nam and Quang Ngai. Their plan was still to push from the foothills down to the coast in order to obtain the supplies which they needed badly. Recent helicopter operations in this area had helped considerably because it had caused the VC to hesitate in carrying out their plan. As long as they stayed in this redoubt they were safe and even had caves and tunnels in which they could hide. Because of the helicopter operations they were beginning to fear that if they left their bases the areas would be seized and they would not be able to return. General Harkins commented that the answer was to go in and get them in their tunnels. He then told the President a story which he had heard on two occasions, once in Bac Lieu and once in Saigon. An ARVN Commander had taken up a position with his battalion along the banks of a river. Someone pointed out to him that the area on the other side of the stream appeared to be a better bivouac and asked him why he did not go there. His answer was that the area was occupied by the VC. When he was asked why he did not go after them he replied, “as long as we donʼt bother them, they won't bother us.” The President said that this commander was a lazy man and admitted that there were areas where his commanders hesitated to attack. Normally the Viet Cong do not attack government forces where they have infiltration routes or in the areas where their headquarters are located. In these areas very little activity occurs. General Harkins protested that this was not right and was certainly no way to win. The President said that he had spoken strongly to General Don, telling him that there could be no war without men being killed or wounded. Reports from I Corps had shown few if any ARVN casualties. Also, said the President, he could not see a commander preserve his forces while Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps members were being killed. General Harkins commented that if commanders did not want to fight they should come to the President and tell him so, and the President could find others who would. President Diem agreed with the General and spoke of events which had taken place in Kien Hoa Province. There the VC had assembled their “brains” for three years and there were no reports of activities. The President had warned the Province Chief that he was due for a rude awakening and that he was in fact cooperating with the enemy by failing to take aggressive action against him. He then gave the opposite example of the situation in the Plaine des Joncs where there is much action because Colonel Cao provokes the VC to combat and tries to select his own battleground. General Harkins remarked that the same thing should be done in other areas. Mr. Trueheart commented that it should be done in all areas at the same time. The President then pointed out the difficulty of operating in certain areas where the people are dispersed in tiny groups. One such area lies near the Cambodian border close to the trails used by the VC to travel back and forth across the line. He spoke of the necessity of regrouping these people into “combat hamlets” but said that it would be more difficult than in Binh Duong because of the necessity of building foundations for their houses. General Harkins told the President that he could show him an “open gate” and indicated on a map,5 a road which crossed the border close to the point where the Mekong flows from Cambodia into South Vietnam. In this same area, he added, there was a “common market” which operated every night. The President then pointed to a second area (Tay Ninh) where he indicated that the people were dispersed like specks of dust. He said that the District Chief in the area had announced publicly that the people would be regrouped. In fact he did not have the means to do it but his announcement caused the Viet Cong to send reinforcements into the area. General Harkins commented that it would be good if they could be provoked into gathering together. It would then be easier to destroy them.

General Harkins then told the President that he had recently visited the provinces of Vinh Long, Vinh Binh, Phuoc Thinh and Phuoc Long. The President spoke highly of Lt. Colonel Vien, the Province Chief of Phuoc Long, saying that he was a “guerrilla” fighter who spent most of his time in the woods on small scale operations against the VC. General Harkins said that he was aware of the manʼs activities. He agreed with the President that Lt. Colonel Vien knew where the VC were and added the comment that Vien had good Montagnard agents. He suggested that it might be a good idea to give him some help—a battalion of troops and some helicopters. If he could knock out the VC it would be easier for him to continue his strategic hamlet program. The President replied that it was hard to catch VC in this area on the edge of Zone “D” and close to the Cambodian border. General Harkins told the President that Lt. Colonel Vien did not believe that there was much border crossing activity. He added that Lt. Colonel Vien kept the VC moving so much that they rarely slept in the same place two nights in a row. The President commented that Lt. Colonel Vien was accomplishing as much with a company as was being done in other areas with two battalions. He agreed with General Harkins that the VC were permitted no rest in this area. General Harkins remarked that the government had enough troops to keep the VC moving everywhere, all of the time. If they were kept moving constantly for two weeks they would be so tired that they would have to rest and they could all be killed. The President then referred once again to the vast mountainous areas of the coastal provinces saying that only helicopters could penetrate into them and that when attempts were made to send troops in it took four or five days to reach their objective and they had to come out after a week or less. General Harkins pointed out that the VC were in the areas and asked why government troops couldn't do the same. They could be supplied by helicopters. The President replied that, for two years, he had been telling his people that they had to go to the heart of the enemy. He then added that the British had advised him that areas like Tay Ninh, where people were widely dispersed demanded much patience. A great deal of money and time would be needed before they could be regrouped and controlled. Priority, according to the British, had to be given to the Delta. General Harkins pointed out that we have communications, mobility, regular forces and the Civil Guard and Self Defense Forces as well as the Montagnards. Mr. Trueheart asked why both could not be done at once. General Harkins reminded the President of the successes attained in the Delta during the past month and expressed his desire to see the same thing done all over the country.

The President, illustrating his remarks by referring to a large map6 then spoke at some length about the difficulty of containing the Viet Cong threat in the center of the country. He pointed to infiltration routes, safe areas and remote valleys in which the VC raised the crops which sustained them. He spoke of the need for the construction of roads to cut across the VC axis of communications and to permit access to their safe areas. He pointed to the new province of Phu Bon which he had established in the area surrounding Cheo Reo in order to provide closer local control and spoke of the need to apply massive bombing to certain areas in order to make them untenable to the Viet Cong. General Harkins assured him that bombing would be one of the elements in the plan which would evolve from the concept which he had proposed. He again reviewed very briefly the many assets available to the government and told the President that he need only say “go” and work could begin immediately on the plan for a sudden, explosive effort to destroy the Viet Cong. The President replied that he was convinced that the principle of the concept outlined by the General was good, but that he was still of the opinion that it would be better to expect that three years would be needed to complete the job. If it were tried—and failed, he added with a smile, people would charge General Harkins with inefficiency. When the General responded that he was more than willing to run this risk, the President, said that he did not believe that the Viet Cong was a worm which could be crushed under oneʼs heel. They had many resources available to them—including Communist North Vietnam. General Harkins then asked the President if he had his permission to start work on the plan. The President replied “Yes” and added that he would discuss the proposal with Secretary Thuan. General Harkins said that he would see General Ty immediately and arrange for their staffs to get going on the preparation of detailed plans.

As the meeting ended President Diem asked General Harkins if there were any particular subjects which he thought should be discussed with General Taylor. It was agreed that it might be profitable to speak of the situation relative to Cambodia and Laos, and about operations in South Vietnam. Also there might be an exchange of views on press relations. General Harkins reminded the President that General Taylor was on a world tour with the object of bringing himself up to date prior to assuming his new job as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In reply to the Presidentʼs question as to the accuracy of newspaper speculation on General Taylorʼs views on the emphasis to be given to conventional vs nuclear forces in Europe, General Harkins replied that he was sure that General Taylor felt that forces should be balanced to include appropriate nuclear, conventional and special forces elements. He assured the President, in closing, that if he became aware of any specific questions, he would inform him.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 A 5159, Sgn(62)42 Taylor Visit. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record of the meeting.

2 For documentation on Taylorʼs visit to Vietnam, October 18-25, 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 169 ff.

3 Not found.

4 Not found.

5 Not found.

6 Not found.

278. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to Congressman Odin Langen 278. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to Congressman Odin Langen1

Washington, September 8, 1962.

Dear Congressman Langen: I want to thank you for your letter of August 28, 1962, concerning queries by Mr. Richard S. Anderson, Box 69, Alexandria, Minnesota,2 on our policies in South Viet-Nam.

The military operation in the Ca Mau Peninsula mentioned by Mr. Anderson was not a U.S. venture. It was conceived, planned, and executed by the Vietnamese Armed Forces. As in other operations, U.S. military personnel served as advisers and provided logistic and technical support which the Vietnamese lack. The operation should not be described as the brainchild of General Harkins. We would emphasize that the Vietnamese are planning and fighting their own war in defense of their independence.

Our military advisers do not regard the Ca Mau operation as a failure. Although it was so described in some press reports, we consider it an encouraging success. The Ca Mau operation was carried out in an area long under Communist control, large stores of food and equipment were destroyed, and the Communist forces were dispersed.

The objective of the Ca Mau operation was to frustrate large scale offensive actions by the Viet Cong into other areas which the government is now trying to secure permanently by different kinds of programs. Vietnamese strategy is designed to clear and hold the countryside step-by-step. This is accomplished by coordinated military, economic, and social programs which give the peasant population the means and the will to defend themselves. Because resources are limited, these permanent clear and hold operations cannot be carried out simultaneously in all parts of the country. But the Viet Cong must be kept off balance in those areas where coordinated clear and hold operations are not yet underway. The Ca Mau operation was such a “spoiling attack.” Given the object of the Ca Mau operation and the nature of guerrilla warfare, the casualties inflicted on the Viet Cong are in fact considered quite heavy. Moreover, according to our reports, which are still incomplete, the figure of 124 killed indicated by Mr. Anderson is low.

Because this is also a war for menʼs minds and allegiances, we have matched our military effort with a corresponding increase in our information program. Today the magnitude of our information program in South Viet-Nam is second only to Japan in the Far East. We do not have our own radio station broadcasting in Vietnamese, but we do work closely with the Vietnamese Information Service providing advice, scripts, tapes, and technical assistance in broadcasting.

We also assist the Vietnamese Information Service in the preparation of various newspapers and pamphlets which serve to explain to the people their stake in winning this war. Most provinces now have a daily or weekly provincial newspaper which is distributed in the villages. Special newspapers are prepared and distributed for the clear and hold operations described above. The armed forces distribute pamphlets as part of all operations. With our assistance, a net of six radio stations covers the country with government information. Large village receivers and low cost transistor radios have been widely distributed to receive these programs. The effort to improve the Vietnamese information program continues to occupy a high priority in our assistance efforts.

Economic assistance is also geared to the political need for providing the peasant population with a stake in the fight. The clear and hold operations include increased economic assistance to the countryside in such forms as village schools, dispensaries, and cheap agricultural credit.

American economic aid to Viet-Nam in fiscal 1961 was $127.9 million under the Mutual Security Economic Program. It is $124.5 million for fiscal 1962. Until the present Communist attack forced us to increase military assistance, about three-quarters of all our aid to Viet-Nam was primarily economic in nature. The amount of military assistance is classified for security reasons.

An outline of the Viet-Nam situation, our program and some of its accomplishments may be seen in the enclosed documents. The nature of the Communist threat is treated in the attached State Department document, “A Threat to the Peace.”3

If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to let me know.

Sincerely yours,

FGD

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/8-2862. Drafted by D.A. Diefenbach of the Vietnam Working Group.

2 Neither printed.

3 None printed.

279. Memorandum for the Record 279. Memorandum for the Record1

Saigon, September 14, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Special Advisor to the President of Vietnam, 11 September 1962

ATTENDANCE

Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu, Special Advisor to the President of the Republic of Vietnam

His Excellency Frederick E. Nolting, Jr., American Ambassador to Vietnam

General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chairman-Designate, Joint Chiefs of Staff

General Paul D. Harkins, Commander, Military Assistance Commands, Vietnam and Thailand

After an exchange of greetings General Taylor told Mr. Nhu that he was much encouraged by the progress which has been made in Vietnam since his visit to this country last year. Mr. Nhu said that he also was pleased with what had been accomplished and expressed the hope that much more would soon be done. Ambassador Nolting interjected a remark that in a few years he and Mr. Nhu should be able to resume their hunting trips. Mr. Nhu then said that the target date for the completion of the first phase of the Strategic Hamlet Program was the end of the year and that he felt that by that time it would be possible to plan for the exploitation of the gains which would have been made. General Taylor remarked that this situation resembled that which usually exists during any war. There is a period during which an impasse exists, and then, suddenly, a sudden surge to victory. Mr. Nhu then said that he wanted to explain to General Taylor what his ultimate views were concerning the value of the Strategic Hamlet Program and to review the general situation with him. He foresaw that the completion of the Strategic Hamlet Program would permit the government to switch from a counter-guerrilla concept to a genuine guerrilla operation against the enemy. At the moment the atmosphere is not set for aggressive guerrilla tactics. Until the Self Defense Corps and the Youth Movement become completely functional much assistance from the Americans would still be required. Ultimately, with the realization of the entire program, the Viet Cong would be expelled from the villages and they would then be compelled to wage a counter-guerrilla war. General Taylor remarked that if the accepted average of 20 to 1 is true it would certainly be better to be the guerrilla instead of the person obliged to fight against him. Mr. Nhu explained that once the Viet Cong are expelled from the hamlets it will then be possible to set up special guerrilla forces to hunt them down, to terrorize them and to ambush them, as they are now doing. General Taylor commented that President Kennedy lays great importance on the lessons to be learned from the struggle which is going on in Vietnam. Mr. Nhu then said that with the establishment of the Strategic Hamlets many people are rallying to the support of the government because they no longer fear reprisals. He added that if the project is well done this support of the government can lead to a favorable atmosphere for government operated guerrillas and would constitute a solution for the problems of all under-developed countries. It would mean a strategy without fear. To further explain his theory Mr. Nhu pointed out that what is going on in Vietnam was in fact a political and social revolution. Counter-guerrillas do not feel the need for revolution, it is only when an aggressive spirit oriented toward a system of democracy, by stages, exists that the revolutionary spirit necessary for a guerrilla mentality can be developed. Ambassador Nolting then asked Mr. Nhu if at the lower levels of government—the Province Chiefs and the District Chiefs—there was a better understanding of governmental aims. Mr. Nhu said that their understanding was increasing a little more each day and explained that there was a special training program for functionaries which required them to come to Saigon every three months for indoctrination. He pointed out that one of the difficulties in implementing his theory of converting the Vietnamese effort from a counter-subversive movement to a straight guerrilla war against the enemy was the question of how to wage a real democratic revolution with cadres who are engaged in anti-revolutionary activities. He hoped that the successful completion of the Strategic Hamlet Program would result in the banishment of fear and would make it possible to instill the revolutionary spirit in the people who were in support of the government. He added that his concept had to be expounded with a certain amount of care because many people within the government might be frightened by it and oppose it. General Taylor then congratulated Mr. Nhu on the rapid progress which had been made in the Strategic Hamlet Program. Mr. Nhu thanked him and remarked that some people thought that it had been done too rapidly and were a little afraid that, consequently, it might be badly done. He went on to say that the Communists could not win the battle against the Strategic Hamlet Program. They could continue to launch attacks against isolated posts and win or lose the struggle to overrun them, but to take over a hamlet they had to kill civilians. For this they were hated and therefore were compelled to realize that it was impolitic to do it. General Taylor then asked how the rhythm of construction of Strategic Hamlets would continue. Mr. Nhu answered that, with his American friends, a program of priorities had been set up. General Taylor asked if the Province Chiefs were closely involved in the construction of the hamlets and if a general plan had been set up for them to follow. Mr. Nhu replied that the Province Chiefs and the District Chiefs received thorough orientation in the program and that in fact special courses had been organized to train them in their role. Reverting to his original theme Mr. Nhu added that efforts were being made to change the attitudes of these government representatives from their orientation towards a counter-guerrilla aspect of their efforts. It was hard for them to understand the difference which exists between counter-subversive activities and direct guerrilla warfare, which is total in nature. The guerrilla counts on no one but himself. Those who have been oriented towards the counter-guerrilla concept have had the benefit of American aid including arms, equipment and all types of supplies. They have been sheltered and when they were sick they were cared for. The guerrilla has no hospital, no supplies and depends only on himself-a reversal of mental attitude. Ambassador Nolting commented that this was a hard philosophy and hoped there might be some way in which it can be softened. General Taylor asked how Mr. Nhu thought it would be possible to change the thinking of the people from one concept to the other. Mr. Nhu explained that the Strategic Hamlet concept was, in fact, a concept which consisted of a series of phases. The security of the hamlet offered protection for the people, the Province Chief with the forces available to him was charged with the destruction or dispersal of battalion sized enemy units. The District Chief had the capability of breaking up small regular units. Each echelon dilutes the strength of the enemy until, at hamlet level where the individual Viet Cong could be expelled, it would be possible to wage guerrilla warfare. General Taylor asked how this could be done. Mr. Nhu said that the most dangerous Viet Cong were the small groups of terrorists and assassins who came to the hamlets to extort, kill and kidnap. Within the defended hamlet the people are protected from such activities. Although this was not yet guerrilla warfare it was approaching it. The village defenders, Self Defense Corps are given arms. The next stage, guerrillas on the side of the government will be given only a method and an ideology. They will be loaned a weapon, their ideology will be freedom vs slavery, their purpose to hunt down and destroy their enemy. If we could succeed in this, we could give a step by step political strategy which would be valid for all of the under-developed countries who, lacking this ideology, are obliged to seek neutralism in order to reduce the tension which is placed upon them. General Taylor then asked what political measures would be taken. Mr. Nhu replied that in the Strategic Hamlets people, little by little, would be able to see the democratic system in action. He added that, of course, up to this time there had been hamlets and hamlets. Some of them had, as in olden days, became oligarchic. Most of them, however, operating under the principle of liberty and justice as the basis of progress, and administered by a locally chosen committee were becoming more and more aware of the advantages of democracy, such as the increased yield of their rice crops, better methods of cultivation, and improved methods of distribution. General Taylor commented that this was a deep-level thought and asked if he felt that the people in the hamlets really understood what was going on. Mr. Nhu said that he was sure that the people not only understood but were beginning to develop a true democratic spirit. As evidence of this, he had received a number of letters from villagers protesting that their rights had been violated and asking him to come and personally intercede in their behalf. He was fully aware of the fact that some of these letters might have been originated by Communists. He felt, however, that it was his duty to comply with the requests in order that the people might realize that the government was in sympathy with their claims to political rights. He said, in addition, that great strides had been made in gaining the support of the people by amending the procedures for loans to the peasants. Until recently, whenever a rice farmer had asked for government support to buy additional land, he had been asked to present titles as guarantees of his economic stability. Of course, only those people who were the most comfortably situated could present such guarantees and the course of complaints from the less favored was always the same: “If we ask for loans it is because we are poor and do not have titles to present as guarantees, if we were rich we would not need loans.”

General Taylor then asked how many hamlets were projected for the entire program. Mr. Nhu replied that he foresaw a need for all 16,000 of them, in addition to the extra protection which would have to be given to the resettled Montagnards. He spoke of the system of “Jumelage”—a plan whereby certain areas of cities would be responsible for the adoption of poorer hamlets in the most dangerous areas—as a sort of less favored twin. One-third of the hamlets would be completed by the end of the year. The final total would amount to some 16,230 protected communities. He explained, however, that the overall success of the Hamlet Program would be based on the so-called two-thirds concept—meaning that if two-thirds of the populace of any given area could be assured security the other one-third would automatically fall in line. General Taylor then asked Mr. Nhu what he thought would be the time required for the completion of the entire program. Mr. Nhu said that he had paced himself on a period of three years, however, he felt that with the progress which would have been made by the end of the year the concept which had been proposed by General Harkins might effectively be applied. General Taylor then asked if the hamlet concept did not, in fact, amount to the establishment of a feudal state. Mr. Nhu replied that he did not think that this was necessarily true. He said that there were certainly certain aspects of the “ville forte” idea but that, within the hamlets there would be established democratic principles which would teach the rights of the individual such as the right to work and the right to own and exploit land, as well as the duties of a democratic people, such as their obligation to respect property and to mutually defend their rights. Up until this time, he added, the government had been reluctant to speak of matters of immediate interest to the individual. The President had stressed the ideas of duty and sacrifice. Meanwhile, the Communists had been left the monopoly of promising reforms in the field of private interests. Now, the trend has been reversed, and there is, in fact, no contradiction to the reversal because the general mobilization and the construction of Strategic Hamlets has become a matter of individual interest. The basic support of the guerrilla has been in the villages. If village support is denied them, the maquis die of hunger. If the people become sincerely interested in sociological and economic reforms there must result a democratic revolution which will force the Viet Cong to go underground and to wage a war of counter-revolution. It is this concept, explained Mr. Nhu, that he thought would provide the world with a workable basic strategy against Communism. It was the only concept, in his opinion, that could be valid for people who do not want either nuclear or conventional war, or who do not want to bow under by adopting a form of neutralism. Ambassador Nolting commented that there would probably be a certain amount of opposition to such a concept. Mr. Nhu agreed that this was true as for any theory which might be presented anywhere. Mr. Nhu then reverted to his thought of the two-thirds which could be sufficient to sway the total. He explained that for each village which might consist of four to five hamlets the idea was to provide protection for two-thirds of them with the knowledge that the others would automatically go along. General Taylor then asked how many people there were in each hamlet. Mr. Nhu replied that the total varied from one to two or three or more thousands of inhabitants. He added that it was only last year that the government had realized that it was not the villages, consisting of four or five hamlets, which was the most important element but rather the individual hamlet itself. Ambassador Nolting commented that the hamlet had as its origin the family group. Mr. Nhu agreed and said that it was in the hamlet that traditions were founded and where the family roots and the spirits of the ancestors could be located. The administration of the villages was sometimes artificial in that outsiders were brought in to supervise the activities. In the hamlet, committees were selected from the local inhabitants.

At this point Mr. Nhu digressed to say that he felt that something should be done to relieve the tension exerted on American military personnel assigned to Vietnam. He thought that there should be a regular rotation every two months for rest and recreation in Manila or some other area outside of Vietnam. He pointed out that there was little if any distraction for these people in Vietnam and emphasized the point that, not only would it provide a different atmosphere which would permit relaxation for the Americans, but it would lighten the burden on the Vietnamese who had nothing to offer as distraction to the American advisory personnel. He referred vaguely to the implications which might follow the progression of the Vietnamese effort from counter-subversive to all out guerrilla activities, implying that this might be bad for the Americans. He then added that Americans in Vietnam should be provided with sources of information other than the American books and the Stars and Stripes newspaper. He said that unfortunately many of them understood nothing of the problems of the country and that it would be valuable if they were given access to information concerning the Vietnamese viewpoint of the war which was going on. They might, perhaps, not be in sympathy with Vietnamese views, but at least they would be given the opportunity to understand them. Ambassador Nolting said that the American Embassy published a daily synopsis of the Saigon newspapers and that it might be worthwhile to distribute this to all American personnel.

In summary, Mr. Nhu repeated that he thought that his concept would be useful for all underdeveloped countries and would assist greatly in enabling them to progress to a state of democracy. He pointed out that the Communists have clear cut, long ranged plans for their designs on these countries and that no basic concept exists to combat these plans. He added that there could be 200 changes in the government of Saigon but, if no workable concept were offered to them, there would be no effect on the peasants. He concluded by saying that his theory of a revolution for democracy could not be implemented without a war. The people of Vietnam were becoming more and more aware of the fact that this was their war and that, with it, they would gain democracy, new ideas, political and social freedom—in fact a complete reversal of values.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: 68 A 5159, Sgn(62)42 Taylor Visit. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record of the meeting. Taylor was in Vietnam September 10-13 as part of a tour of the Far East, August 31-September 21.

VIII. General Taylorʼs Visit to Vietnam, September 10-13, and Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency Thuanʼs Trip to the United States, September 11-25VIII. General Taylorʼs Visit to Vietnam, September 10-13, and Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency Thuanʼs Trip to the United States, September 11-25

280. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 22, 1962—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/9-2262. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

281. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell)

Washington, September 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962. Secret. Copies were also sent to Trueheart, Rostow, Wood, INR, CIA, and DOD/ISA.

282. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, September 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Vietnam Correspondence. Confidential. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text.

283. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, September 18, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. Drafted by Forrestal.

284. Editorial Note

285. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1962, noon

Washington, September 19, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-1962. Secret. Drafted by Wood, approved in S on October 4, and initialed by Harriman.

286. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Southeast Asia Task Force, Washington, September 19, 1962, 2:30–4 p.m.

Washington, September 19, 1962, 2:30–4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 219. No drafting information is given on the source text.

287. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) and the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan), Department of State, Washington, September 20, 1962, noon

Washington, September 20, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.51K11/9-2062. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Harriman on September 21. Copies were sent to FE, INR, EUR, Saigon, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC.

288. Paper Prepared by the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, September 20, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-22-69. Top Secret. A 4page draft of this paper, September 14, is ibid.

289. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 21, 1962—12:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/9-2062. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cottrell and cleared in substance with Harriman. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, London, and Paris.

290. Memorandum of Conversation, United States Information Agency, Washington, September 21, 1962, 5 p.m.

Washington, September 21, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306,USIA/IAF Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam General and Personal. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Moore on September 25. The meeting was held at the U.S. Information Agency. A “Talking Points” memorandum for this conversation, dated September 20, is ibid., USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field Far East (IAF), 1962.

291. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 22, 1962—10:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.51KII/9-2262. Secret. Drafted by Wood. Repeated to CINCPAC.

292. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan), Washington, September 25, 1962, 10:10–10:45 p.m.

Washington, September 25, 1962, 10:10–10:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-2562. Secret. Drafted by Wood and approved by the White House on October 16. Copies were sent, inter alia, to S/S,S/P, FE, SEA, TF/SEA, WG/VN, DOD/OSD, and Saigon. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to Saigon in telegrams 364 and 375, September 25 and 27. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series) In a memorandum dated September 24, Forrestal stressed that the President should impress Thuan with the strong views that the United States had on Diemʼs breaking diplomatic relations with Laos. Copies of the memorandum and another dated September 22, which suggested topics that the President might raise with Thuan, are in Declassified Documents, 1977, 108E and 247A.

293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 25, 1962—3:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/9-2262. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Cottrell and cleared with Harriman, Heavner, and USIA. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

294. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 26, 1962—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-2662. Secret; Niact. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

295. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, October 1, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, Thuan Visit, September 62. Secret; Official-Informal.

296. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 4, 1962—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/10-462. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Vientiane, Phnom Penh, CINCPAC, Bangkok, London, and Paris.

297. Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Confidential. Drafted by Heavner and Wood on October 5. The source text was attached to a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, dated October 8, which stated that it had been prepared in response to a request by the President.

280. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 280. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 22, 1962—1 p.m.

337. Reference: Departmentʼs telegram 327.2 Below is summary General Taylorʼs conversation with President Diem September 11. Memo of conversation being pouched.3

In his opening remarks President Diem said that inability to form a valid estimate and pessimism prevalent in some circles, particularly the press, was result of failure to keep entire picture in mind at all times. Ambassador Nolting called his attention to recent objective New Yorker article by Shaplen. President next told General Taylor that VC had been forced revise their plans to overrun SVN and that present VC general plan is, in order of priority: Disrupt Strategic Hamlet Program, intensify propaganda vis-à-vis military, and give all out support to neutralist movement. In response query from General Taylor, President said he recognized value of helicopter support but stressed importance of artillery, pointing out role of his road building program to permit its deployment. The President next spoke of his recent directive to strike at heart of enemy, keep him on move and to plot and destroy all remote areas where VC could grow food or find safe havens. General Taylor agreed enemy must be pressed constantly. President mentioned long-range—to 1966—air support plan, saying that perspective of additional air power raised morale of people, gave impression of governmental stability and carried implication that program could be stepped up in emergency. President then mentioned VC buildup in Tchepone and Attopeu and said that possibility of Hitler type “folly” could not be discounted. As evidence that Strategic Hamlet Program was beginning to dry up VCʼs revenue within Vietnam he said that his Consul in Hong Kong had uncovered evidence that large amounts of piasters were being purchased there by Communists. Some of this money was to buy betrayal of SDC and CG members.

In answer to General Taylorʼs question, President said that all 16,000 strategic hamlets would be needed, in addition to a certain number for protection of Montagnards. He said he considered that support of Montagnards trained and equipped to go back to their native haunts would constitute permanent advantage to government. He expressed doubt that, by themselves, they could be entrusted with defense of borders and spoke at length of their child-like nature and lack of initiative and leadership qualities. General Taylor emphasized that if Montagnards could be made into border guards, this would help considerably in solution of border problem.

General Taylor asked if President was happy with progress made since earlier Taylor visit.4 President replied in affirmative, stating Vietnamese were geared to idea of rational progress toward ultimate victory. He added that two of most important gains since General Taylorʼs last visit had been acquisition of thorough knowledge of terrain and emergence of competent military leaders. In economic field, President said, loss last year of 300,000 tons of rice, exportable part of harvest, had been low, but of course, it had not been publicized in order not give comfort to enemy. He produced charts showing good progress in production other crops, particularly in production of textiles, cotton, sugar and kenaf. He emphasized that his aim was to develop an industry which could be supplied from locally produced raw materials and that he had no interest in “prestige” assembly plants constructed by foreign capital in return for long term contracts for purchase of raw materials.

At end of meeting, President Diem said that he asked British Embassy to confirm arrangements with Phnom Penh for expedition of military mission to Cambodia.5

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 120.1590/9-2262. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Dated September 15. It asked the Embassies visited by General Taylor to transmit summary cables on the substantive discussions at each capital. (Ibid., 120.1590/9-1562)

3 The meeting took place at 5 p.m. at the Gia Long Palace. A copy of the 11-page memorandum for the record of this conversation is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, Sgn(62)42 Taylor Visit.

4 For documentation on Taylorʼs visit to Vietnam in October 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 169 ff.

5 Next to this paragraph in the source text was the handwritten note “Oh Lord”.

281. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell) 281. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell)1

Washington, September 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

Measuring the Extent of Progress in the Countryside in Viet Nam

This follows up on our conversation of somewhat over a week ago in which I discussed with you Mr. Rostowʼs and my ideas with respect to devising an objective means of measuring the trend of events in the countryside in Viet Nam. We are particularly interested in measures of the state of the relationship between the central government and the rural population. Our interest is stimulated by several factors. Perhaps because the populationʼs sense of who is winning can be such an important factor in determining its attitude toward the struggle, once the tide begins to turn, there tends to be a multiplier effect. If this is the case, it is particularly important to obtain some measure of the way the tide is moving as a basis for pacing our own effort. Even more important, we need such information, of course, as the basis for adjusting U.S. and GVN activities to the changing situation.

We have also been impressed by the great disparities in impressions of observers as to the state of progress on attitudes and the state of government progress in the countryside. Probably much of this variation is caused by the fact that different observers see different parts of the country or different aspects of what is going on. It would be desirable, if at all possible, to establish a system which would regularize observations. Our thoughts on the subject seem to me to complement and carry forward the suggestion that you and Ben Wood have been developing for improving political reporting from the provinces.2 Our suggestions are as follows: 1. Mr. Rostow has suggested that we adopt sampling techniques as the basis for a reporting system. We might carefully select a number of hamlets which are reasonably representative of the area in which they are located, develop regular contacts within them and attempt to report regularly on a series of indicators relating to them. Over a period of time we could build up a body of comparable data that would give us some idea as to trends.

There are some obvious difficulties with sampling under present circumstances in Viet Nam. For example, there would be difficulty in obtaining access to hamlets which are under even partial VC control and probably even greater difficulty in obtaining accurate information on such hamlets. Moreover, if the central government (or district and province chiefs) became aware of the fact that certain hamlets were being made the subject of regular observation, they would probably devote particular effort to improving the situation in those hamlets and might also see that the reporting officer was given the “right” answers to his questions. It should be possible to get around at least this last difficulty, however. For example, it might be possible to select a group of, say, three hamlets which were generally representative of an area and report on them alternately.

2. It would be desirable to devise indicators which could be made reasonably objective. Where possible they should be quantifiable or measurable against some kind of rating scale with descriptive statements identifying each point along the scale. Such rating scales are, of course, familiar devices and have been developed, for example, by intelligence officers to measure extent of VC control of villages. The following are some suggested possible indicators of the scale and the effectiveness of the US-GVN effort: A. Does hamlet have an elected council? Was it elected by secret ballot? In attempting to get at answer to the question of whether the council election reflected true sentiments in the hamlet it would be desirable to analyze background of members elected. Are they from traditional local oligarchy? (The fact that they are or are not would probably have different significance in different areas of the country.) To what extent are they different from previous appointed councils in composition? How old are members? Were they at the time of their election, or had they previously been, government officials? Is membership on the hamlet or village councils actively sought or is it viewed primarily as an undesirable political and economic burden?

B. Are people in the hamlet (or village) clear as to where real authority rests within the hamlet (village)? Are there perceptible differences in attitude toward Council members and other village leadership groups between the older and the younger generations of the rural population?

C. How many hamlet council members (or other local officials) have received training in the past year? (If we can identify particular training programs that we consider particularly useful, this indicator would obviously be much more significant if it could be related to such programs.)

D. How many times has the district chief visited the hamlet during the past month (or other time period)? Similarly for other provincial and district officials. How long did they stay? Did they talk to anyone but village or hamlet officials?

E. How do officials learn of popular grievances? Is their any regular channel through which such grievances can be transmitted without significant risk of retaliation? How effective? How are grievances dealt with? Is there any machinery for this purpose?

F. Has the local military commander issued instructions on dealing fairly and sensitively with the local population? What are civilian attitudes toward local military and para-military forces and vice versa?

G. If this is an area in which the Cao Dai or the Hoa Hao are a significant factor it would be useful to know answers to such questions as: (a) Are there members of the sects on the hamlet council? Are they district chiefs? Province or district level officials? (b) Were (specified) sect religious celebrations held during the past year? (c) Does there appear to be discrimination against the members of the sects in the administration of government welfare programs?

H. What is the lot of the poorer farmers? What evidence, if any, of improvement or retrogression in his condition? (Perhaps specific indicators could be devised to measure progress and retrogression.)

I. What is the relationship between the farmerʼs costs and market prices for his product? Is this relationship a source of discontent? Has production increased or declined? For what reason? Does supply and cost of credit seem satisfactory?

J. Is there an active civilian and/or military civic action program in the hamlet? Does the hamlet council formulate the hamletʼs social-economic developments plans? If not, where is plan formulated? If so, what changes were made as a result of higher level reviews? Do such programs bring economic benefits to the hamlet from outside, or are their benefits all self-generated? (In other words, do they appear to rural populace to be simply another form of corvee labor?) Do they reach the poorer farmers? More directly, do hamlet-dwellers view civic action programs as improving their welfare and do they relate any improvement to government (district, province or central) activities? Are taxes collected? How?

K. How many actions were taken in the last six months (year) by officials to enforce land reform legislation? (Would obviously need to be related to relevance of land reform in a particular area.)

L. How many defections from the hamlet to the VC and how many re-defections? From what age, occupational, and economic groups did the defectors come? It would be desirable to attempt to correlate figures on defection with such other indicators as status of village guard, SDC and CG forces in the area, hamlet council electrons, etc.

M. How many acts of terrorism by the VC against hamlet or village officials during the reporting period? Against other parts of the rural population? Was terrorism, where it occurred, selective? What was the basis of selection (e.g., economic class; unpopularity of officials; interference with government welfare program)?

N. Has the hamlet been under pressure from the VC to supply food? What success has such pressure had? Has there been any change in this regard and, if so, to what factors is this change related (e.g., state of hamlet defenses)?

O. What is the capability of the civil guard, local self-defense corps, and village or hamlet guard forces? (A rating scale for capabilities would be desirable.) How many weapons (by type) have been lost to the VC in the area in the reporting period? What is the status of defensive works (fences, moats, etc.)?

P. Has a radio been installed in the hamlet? Has it been used to call for help? With what effectiveness?

The above list is very long. It would probably be desirable to develop a reporting list in which items were ranged in order of priority, selecting for the highest priority those which are considered most representative and critical. As you will note, I have attempted to make the answers to as many questions as possible quantifiable.

It is obviously much easier to outline a series of questions or indicators of this type than to get continuing, reasonably reliable, information on them. I realize, of course, that an outsider will have difficulty establishing the kind of relationship to hamlet-dwellers that is necessary to obtain this information although a skilled interviewer could obtain much information by indirect questions as well as by observation.

It might also be useful in this connection to devise several general lines of questioning that could lead into these more specific questions. Ted Heavner pointed out, for example, that beginning a discussion with talk about crops and prices was often the best way to draw out villagers on their feelings about their economic situation, government programs, etc. Similarly, inquiries which begin with a question about how U.S. aid could help the hamlet better deal with its most pressing problems may lead to an exposition of unmet hamlet needs and the effectiveness of government programs.

The above list does not adequately deal with one critical problem area—the attitudes of military and civilian officials in dealing with the rural population. For example, it would be desirable to devise a question which would provide meaningful reliable information on the subject of GVN treatment of persons suspected of VC sympathies. It is obviously difficult to develop questions which can be meaningfully reported upon in this area.

3. As a final suggestion, we ought to encourage the GVN to set up regular reporting procedures which would cover as many of these matters as can be made the subject of reasonably objective reporting procedures. What I have in mind is not strengthening of the intelligence services, but rather the establishment in a government department or departments which provide services at the hamlet and village level of reporting systems that would provide regular reports on such matters. Alternatively, a central statistical and reports office might be desirable. In particular, those questions that can be answered in a quantifiable way might be made the subject of regular reporting. This reporting would, for a number of obvious reasons, be imperfect. But, over fume, it could provide some indication of trends just as present figures on casualties can provide a kind of index number indicating trends even though the absolute figures on casualties are highly unreliable.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962. Secret. Copies were also sent to Trueheart, Rostow, Wood, INR, CIA, and DOD/ISA.

2 I have had the benefit, since talking with you, of suggestions by Ted Heavner. Although this memo has benefited from his comments, he was not asked to comment formally on it. [Footnote in the source text.]

282. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 282. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, September 11, 1962.

Dear Fritz: Ed Rice, having a very inquiring mind and conceiving it part of his job to question all operations in the area, has listed a number of questions which he says bother him. He asked me the other day what the answers were and I told him based on reports we have from the field. I do not have complete answers for all of them so I told him I would fire them out to you for complete answers. I hate to add to the burdens of your staff but if someone could dig out the replies it would serve the useful purpose.

The following are the questions asked by Ed: 1. What has been the effect on the Governmentʼs base of support of aerial bombing and strafing of Viet Cong-occupied villages, and most especially of the use of napalm? (I have seen reports that the French are skill hated in areas of Laos where they used napalm bombs.)

2. How closely is the arming of villagers being timed with their assumption of responsibility for their own local defense, as symbolized by the building of village defenses? (We have heard of cases in which they do not get guns until they have beaten off an attack without them—a test no sensible man would want to be put to.)

3. In what per cent of cases are village electrons really free? We hear conflicting reports on this, and doubt that the villagers will really support men they do not choose themselves.

4. Is it true that the poorest villagers, who must live primarily by wages, are bearing the brunt of unpaid work on village defenses?

5. Does the Government have an inspection service adequate for identifying and dealing with official corruption in the Provinces?

6. Is it wise or necessary forcibly to move villagers into new strategic hamlets to the extent that is being done?

7. What more should be done to minimize extortion, stealing, rare, indiscriminate violence and other misbehavior by the ARVN and Civil Guards? (TDCS-3/520/576)2 Should the SDC, which is considered the worst of all, receive the same pay as the Civil Guards, in order to reduce its exactions on the people?

8. To what extent do high crop rents skill create conditions favorable to the Viet Cong (TDCS 3/520/576) and inhibit full production? Would free distribution of fertilizer to the respective tenant farmers be an appropriate remedy? Are more basic reforms not needed?

9. How can we best minimize the extent to which we give the impression we are replacing the French in their colonial role? Has the American presence reached a counter-productive level?

10. To what extent is the GVN handicapped by Diemʼs use of northerners, Catholics and the Can Lao?

11. Where is the trend of support for the GVN upward, where downward, and why?

Sincerely,

Sterling J. Cottrell3

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Vietnam Correspondence. Confidential. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

283. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 283. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, September 18, 1962.

SITUATION IN SOUTH VIETNAM

A recent cable (Saigonʼs 283 to the Department, attached)2 contains a somewhat bullish review of the political and military situation in that country.

Several indicators of progress are given in the cable which, taken together, give us some hope that the various measures we have undertaken are beginning to prove effective.

A. The month of August saw the highest enemy casualty totals since September 1961: 3,297 total casualties, of which 2,284 killed in action, 379 wounded and 634 captured. Total Viet Cong losses for the first 8 months of 1962 are reported to be 19,404, of which 12,791 were killed in action. GVN losses for the same period totaled 8,634 of which 2,984 were killed in action. I do not believe that one can rely entirely on these figures, although I am assured by State Department that there has been considerable improvement both in the accuracy of casualty reports and the degree of checking done by our own people. These figures suggest a 2-to-1 ratio in over-all casualties and almost a 4-to-1 ratio in the number of troops killed in action in favor of the GVN. If these ratios are sustained they will inevitably have an important adverse psychological effect on the enemy. I have asked the State Department to re-check these figures with the field in an attempt to get their most pessimistic estimate.

B. Minister Thuan also reports that for the first time in 15 years the price of rice is dropping between two crop harvests—a time when it usually rises. He accounts for this phenomenon by referring to increased deliveries from the Delta where clearing operations have recently been more successful.

C. The British, who have historically been most bearish on the success of our efforts in South Vietnam, have recently expressed “cautious optimism” for the future, and have spoken favorably about the progress we have been making;

D. Although the evidence is still somewhat spotty, the results of an improved civic program are beginning to show up in terms of an uplift in village morale in some areas. The same is also true of the strategic hamlet program, which is now being conducted more nationally and in such a way as to minimize the unfavorable reaction which the villagers originally had to being forcibly removed to new locations.

The attached cable gives somewhat more detailed information on the above, and you may wish to peruse it yourself.

While we cannot yet sit back in the confidence that the job is well in hand, nevertheless it does appear that we have finally developed a series of techniques which, if properly applied, do seem to produce results. Furthermore we seem to have developed a group of Americans both in the field and in Washington who are capable of carrying these techniques forward with increasing effectiveness. Lastly there is evidence that the GVN is gradually coming to understand and agree with us on the importance of winning over the villagers to their side.

There is reason to be concerned about domestic reaction to our policies in South Vietnam. There has been a considerable amount of bad publicity emanating from Saigon in recent months. Part of this is due to the fact that the newspapers and news magazines have not sent top drawer people to the area, and partly due to the attitude of the GVN toward the press in general. I think an effort should be made both here and in Saigon to correct both of these faults, and I am pressing the Department to give more attention to the problem. Should you have the occasion to discuss Southeast Asia with the editors or publishers of any of our larger news media, you might refer to this problem in general terms. Perhaps Ed Murrow could also give a hand.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret. Drafted by Forrestal.

2 Not found attached. Dated September 11, it transmitted Task Force Saigonʼs weekly progress report that featured an account of a conversation with Thuan on September 7. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-1162)

284. Editorial Note 284. Editorial Note

At the end of August 1962, Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency Thuan informed the Embassy in Saigon that he would be in Washington for the meeting of the International Monetary Fund, beginning September 17. By August 27, the Department of State realized that Thuan was coming to the United States chiefly to discuss Vietnam with United States officials. (Memorandum from Heavner to Harriman, August 27; Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, Thuan Visit)

Subsequent exchanges of telegrams between Washington and Saigon revealed that Thuan would be accompanied by Buu Hoan, Head of the Research Department of the National Bank of Vietnam; Yu Quoc Thuc, Dean of the Saigon University Law School; and William Trueheart. Following a meeting with Admiral Felt at Honolulu, Thuan arrived in Washington on September 16, attended the Fund opening session on the following day, and met with various Senators and Representatives on September 18. On September 19, he discussed the Vietnam situation with Dean Rusk and U. Alexis Johnson at noon and then went to the White House for conversations with Michael V Forrestal and Carl Kaysen. The following day, he spent the morning at the Central Intelligence Agency, then met Averell Harriman at noon, before completing his talks with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Lemnitzer and Secretary of Defense McNamara. On September 21, he talked with Walt Rostow, Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, before discussing the press situation in Saigon with Don Wilson, Deputy Director of the United States Information Service.

Thuan spent September 22-24 in New York before returning to Washington on September 25 for meetings with the President and Attorney General. Documentation on the scheduling for the trip is ibid., Central File 033.51K11; and Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series.

Memoranda of Thuanʼs conversations with Rusk, Harriman, Wilson, and President Kennedy are printed here. A report on the conversation with Admiral Felt, largely devoted to the Vietnamese war effort, was transmitted in telegram 190056Z from Honolulu, September 19. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series) A brief memorandum of Thuanʼs conversation with the Attorney General is in Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-2562. For a brief summary of several of the other meetings, see Document 295.

285. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1962, noon 285. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1962, noon1

Washington, September 19, 1962, noon.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet Nam with Special Reference to Relations with U.S. press, and GVN-RKG relations

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Nguyen Dinh Thuan, Secretary of State for the Presidency, Republic of Viet-Nam

The Secretary

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary

Mr. W. Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary

Mr. William C. Trueheart, American Embassy, Saigon

Mr. Chalmers B. Wood, WG/VN

In opening the conversation the Secretary referred to the prospective serious cut in the AID program emphasizing that this was an annual battle which was not always understood overseas. As to Viet-Nam he said that we were moderately encouraged and pleased by the initiative shown by the Vietnamese Government and its troops. Mr. Thuan replied that the progress was much greater than reported by the press. Whereas morale was very low a year ago there had been tremendous progress in the last six months. The Vietnamese plan to break up large VC units was successful even in Camau which had been under Viet Cong control for fifteen years. Priority was assigned to this area and to the delta since it was heavily populated and supplied so much food. The situation in Zone D was more difficult due to the jungle terrain and the fact that one division had to cover nine provinces. Vietnamese commanders feel good progress will be made right through until the end of the dry season in May. As in the previous two years the VC had attempted to take the offensive and knock the Vietnamese out during the rainy season. In 1960 and 1961 they had made big attacks in August and September. This year they were unable to do so since their main formations were broken.

The migration of the Montagnards away from the VC has been most important as it deprives them of food and labor. The VC are not pushing them away because they need them as porters and to cultivate the land. The VC have strongly emphasized the cultivation of food by the Montagnards and that is why the GVN believes it is so important to kill crops in these areas. If the VC canʼt get food they canʼt live there.

The Secretary inquired what effect crop destruction would have on the Montagnards. Mr. Thuan replied that the GVN had set up a large program to care for all Montagnards who may come over even if this cost more than the 50 million piasters in counterpart which had been originally set aside. A nationwide campaign to help the Montagnards is being carried out. Crop destruction will not hurt the Montagnards since they are leaving their villages. The food situation for the VC is difficult. The province chief of Phuoc Thunh province told Mr. Thuan recently that they are limited to seven cups of corn daily. He explained that crop destruction would speed up GVN success and assured Mr. Thuan that he could distinguish between VC rice fields and those of innocent people. The VC put a small hut in the middle of their rice fields. The number of Montagnards in each province is known and new rice fields are easy to spot.

The Secretary turned to the question of relations with the American press stressing the importance of not giving the impression that Americans were being prevented from reporting. Adverse press reports would be less harmful than news that reporters were not being allowed to report. A hostile feeling should not be allowed to grow between the press and the Vietnamese Government. Sometimes the Americans can help quietly. Mr. Thuan replied that the GVN fully understood the importance of this matter and that he was trying to see as many members of the press as possible on his visit to Washington. In Saigon the Vietnamese Government simply could not understand occasions on which the press deliberately twisted the facts in a manner unfriendly to the Vietnamese Government. He cited the report by Bigart2 to the effect that President Diem was limiting the distribution of radio receivers to Vietnamese who were friendly to him, pointing out that distribution had actually been limited temporarily in the Ban Me Thuout area in certain places where only Radio Hanoi could be received. Governor Harriman said we face the practical problem that Sully would write a series of very bitter articles and said that it would have been much better if our Ambassador had been asked to have officials in Washington discuss this problem with Mr. Graham, the publisher of Newsweek, who is a very reasonable man. Mr. Harriman understood that certain French citizens in Viet-Nam (of course not the French Government) feel bitter about success of the American help to Viet-Nam because of French failure. Men such as Fall3 were using U.S. press. The fact remained that it was unfortunate to have Sully write these articles at a time when there was such a difficult struggle to obtain foreign aid.

The Secretary turned to Vietnamese relations with its neighbors, pointing out that hostility between Southeast Asian nations was a barrier to achieving international support. He inquired about the military mission to Phnom Penh.

Mr. Thuan replied that the GVN was prepared to send such a mission, that the question had been delayed due to a new government in Phnom Penh and that Prince Sihanouk had asked that a cabinet member and a general be sent to Phnom Penh preliminarily to discuss the question. The GVN was prepared to do this. Although it had few illusions about the success of such a mission it considered it the first step. The GVN did not wish to worsen its relations with the Cambodians since it had enough problems at home.

The Secretary spoke of rumors in Phnom Penh to the effect that the Vietnamese Government was planning to overthrow Prince Sihanouk and said that these rumors did not make it easier to steady an emotional leader. He asked what could be done.

Mr. Thuan replied that the GVN was doing absolutely nothing and reiterated three times that the rumors were completely untrue.

Mr. Thuan pointed out that the reports of frontier incidents were usually very vague, that the French maps did not delimit the border dearly, that when incidents would occur the GVN apologized and offered to pay reparations.

The Secretary inquired about a joint boundary commission.

Mr. Thuan said a joint mission had been proposed for some time. But that the Cambodians would never accept.

Mr. Harriman in reply to the Secretaryʼs question as to whether the U.S. might suggest a joint boundary commission suggested that the most important step at this time was to get military representatives of the two countries together so that each could see how the situation looked from the other side.

Mr. Thuan said the Cambodians were principally interested in settling the complex financial problem. He hoped to discuss this and the sending of a military mission to Cambodia further with Governor Harriman.

The Secretary summed up by saying that it was of the very greatest importance to world peace that the battle be won as quickly as possible, that the U.S. had demonstrated its very strong support and the American government wished to emphasize its hope that the time would soon come when the Vietnamese could return to more peaceful ways.

Mr. Thuan concluded his remarks saying that there had been two trends in Viet-Nam, those who believed in the French static method of defense (judging by early remarks to the reporting officer Thuan was probably referring to Vice President Tho), and those who support a war of mobility. The latter view was now dominant. The Vietnamese Government thanked the American Government for its assistance which was most useful and was one of the reasons why the Vietnamese were winning. He emphasized that America had made a good investment in money and men in Viet-Nam. It should not be thought that the war was over, the Communists would try to win either by big massive attacks—which would not be successful—or they would use political methods to seek to neutralize Viet-Nam. The Secretary commented that we did not believe that any effort from the Communist side to follow the pattern of Laos should be allowed to succeed. For example, the Lao had been allowed to commence an airlift. The time to stop an airlift was when the first plane came over.

The Secretary was then called away. Afterwards Mr. Thuan commented to the reporting officer that he felt there had been very clear mutual understanding throughout the conversation.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-1962. Secret. Drafted by Wood, approved in S on October 4, and initialed by Harriman.

2 Homer Bigart, The New York Times reporter.

3 Bernard Fall, author of Street Without Joy, who had just visited Saigon and was quoted as saying that the Vietnamese lacked adequate leadership.

286. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Southeast Asia Task Force, Washington, September 19, 1962, 2:30–4 p.m. 286. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Southeast Asia Task Force, Washington, September 19, 1962, 2:30–4 p.m.1

Washington, September 19, 1962, 2:30–4 p.m.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Deputy Director—Mr. Cottrell

2. State—Mr. Koren, Director of Working Group on Burma, Cambodia, Thailand and Laos

3. CIA—Mr. Fitzgerald

4. JCS—Brig. Gen. Clay

5. Defense—Rear Adm. Heinz

6. Treasury—Mr. Diehl

7. AID—Mr. Ellis

8. USIA—Mr. Moore

9. Budget—Mr. Weems

William Trueheart, Minister at Saigon, and William Fippin, Deputy Director of USOM, Saigon, reported to the Task Force on the situation in South Viet Nam. Following are summaries of their comments:

Comments by Mr. Trueheart

Mr. Trueheart said he was tremendously encouraged by developments in South Viet Nam. The military progress had been little short of sensational and the intelligence capability had been greatly improved. Training for the Civil Guard units had begun to pay off, but more training was needed for the Self-Defense Corps. Mr. Trueheart noted that the Viet Cong have not yet made any large scale attacks even though the rainy season has begun and that this is evidence of the improved military situation. He said the Strategic Hamlet program has transformed the countryside and that he did not think the Viet Cong could now destroy the program. South Viet Namʼs government organization to implement the program has improved and the plan is now better understood both in Saigon and locally.

He said the biggest political move by the government was to convince the people that Montagnards were equals. He said the exodus of these people will hurt the Viet Cong and that the Montagnards have demonstrated they will fight to defend themselves. He noted that the way to destroy infiltration is to make it impossible for the infiltrators to support and maintain themselves on the plateau. Mr. Trueheart said that all these developments have taken place since last Christmas.

Commenting on U.S.-Viet Nam relations, he said the government was now more willing to accept our advice. He thought that interagency relations in the U.S. mission at Saigon were excellent.

In response to a question about the border situation in Cambodia, Mr. Trueheart said that, since there is no question that the Viet Cong are down along the border, there are bound to be incidents. He thought the two governments should try to develop some kind of informal cooperation between their respective military establishments.

The one gloomy spot in the picture, he noted, was the missionʼs relations with the U.S. press corps. He asked for suggestions as to how to deal with this problem. The press, he said, believes that the situation in Viet Nam is going to pieces and that we have been unable to convince them otherwise. This matter was discussed briefly by the working group and Mr. Cottrell suggested that it be brought to USIA, Ed Murrowʼs, attention.

Comments by Mr. William Fippin

Mr. Fippin said he had been in South Viet Nam for five and one-half years. He stressed the cooperation among the U.S. agencies in Saigon. He noted that counterinsurgency was a new field of U.S. effort and that funds had first been shifted to this work in fiscal year 1962. It was only possible to begin funding properly in fiscal year 1963. He estimated that 25% of the missionʼs 62 budget had gone to this purpose and 2/3 or 3/4 of it would be used this year.

He said that the GVN was beginning to shift its emphasis from creating an urban infra-structure to matters of rural concern. The mission is now able to work at the local level, instead of only through the central government. About 1,200 radio sets had been installed and the program was proceeding well. He thought the supply situation was steadily improving.

Mr. Fippin noted that the Strategic Hamlet program was directed primarily by the government of Viet Nam and that our support was limited.

Mr. Fippin wanted to show some films on the Strategic Hamlet program next week, which had been produced by the Viet-Namese government.

Next Meeting

The next meeting will be held on Wednesday, September 26.2

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 219. No drafting information is given on the source text.

2 The minutes of this meeting are not printed.

287. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) and the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan), Department of State, Washington, September 20, 1962, noon 287. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) and the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan), Department of State, Washington, September 20, 1962, noon1

Washington, September 20, 1962, noon.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet-Nam and Diplomatic Relations with Laos

I saw Thuan alone. He told me of his talk with FOWLER HAMILTON.2 He said he wanted to use the piastres which are normally used to repay our old MSP loans for a local development bank. He hopes Viet-Nam will be able to use our local currencies in Japan and elsewhere. This will be considered by Hamilton, but he thinks it will require legislation. He hopes we will help in getting a loan from the IDA. He feels this is very important because of our “Buy American” policy. This would give him some money to buy things that are essential in other markets.

He pointed out that we had given 160 million dollars in aid last year of which they could only absorb 140 million on account of the lack of availability of American products.

He spoke of a triangular arrangement whereby the French would purchase rubber from our stockpile and release francs to Viet-Nam for aid purchases from France. He was sorry that Spain was off the prescribed list as they had been buying iron, steel and medical supplies from Spain. The addition of Hong Kong did not help very much, particularly on account of the certificate of origin problem.

Thuan said that he felt sure we would agree that the main measures recommended in the Staley Report3 had been carried out. He pointed out, for example, that the construction of schools in Saigon were of barracks-type construction, rather than permanent, and that the savings thereon would be used in the countryside. He said the village political situation had improved. The election of local officials had helped create better feeling. The Viet Cong were having difficulty in recruitment, more so than at any time in the past. He said that he thought the villagers were generally fed up with the Viet Cong.

He gave me some complicated figures about the officers training school. He said that this year they had the largest number they had ever had. There were two thousand spaces but 2300 had volunteered.

He pointed to the fact that for the first time in 15 years the price of rice had gone down at this time in the rainy season.

I asked him about the amnesty plan. He said they would try to get it through shortly, perhaps the latter part of October or November. He recognized it would have to be done carefully, at a time of success, rather than of setback.

Thuan thought the direction of their psychological warfare was working out better in agreement with the U.S. advisers. He was generally more optimistic now than he had been for some time.

We discussed the question of the press. I asked him what they were doing to get a better atmosphere. He said that the information setup was being reorganized for the press and they were having group trips for the foreign press to see what was going on in the country. He expressed suspicion of the reports of the visit in Hanoi of the Indian Ambassador, Head of the ICC.4

I spoke to him about Laos in vigorous terms. “We are trying our best to help you—now itʼs up to you to cooperate with us.” I said we couldn't give him any guarantees, but their pulling down their flag in Laos set us back. We did not expect them to retain their Ambassador; they could leave their Charge. I said that if they had been realistic in the beginning, they could have found some way of having a representative from the North, rather than an Ambassador in Laos. He appeared to agree and said he would telegraph strong recommendations to Diem.

We talked about Cambodia at lunch. Thuan said it was pretty hard to take the insults which Sihanouk was piling on Diem—that he was a stooge for the Americans. I said that if President Kennedy could take it, I didnʼt see why Diem couldn't. The important thing was to come to an understanding on the border problems in connection with the Viet Cong. I could not guarantee anything, except I believe if they sent an intelligent military officer to Phnom Penh he would get more cooperation on the Viet Cong border problems. Sihanouk had promised us that the Vietnam Mission could go “anywhere at any time.” If that promise were not carried out, we would certainly go to bat.

Sihanouk believed that both Vietnam and Thailand were conspiring against him. Thuan denied it. I replied that right or wrong, Sihanouk believed it, and that was part but not all of the reason for Sihanoukʼs explosions. Sihanouk had no intention of putting himself in the hands of the communists. I said Thuan could not neglect the fact that Sihanouk had only French and American military advisers.

Thuan told me when I spoke to him privately that General Harkins and the Viet-Nam military were getting along extremely well and so were their relations with Nolting. He thought the differences of judgment and opinion had been worked out to the satisfaction of both sides.

I had a word to say about improved political action, and he countered by saying that support of the peasants would come with security and the program for village improvement. He said it was impossible to buy much U.S. fertilizer because it was too expensive and the peasants could not afford it. I told him I thought the political and economic program for the villagers should keep pace with the military and hoped that would be kept in mind.

He said that Diem was not afraid of plots against him at the present time. There was no group behind the two Air Force officers who had bombed the palace.5 There had only been 13 people questioned. They were satisfied that the bombing involved only the pilots. He thought that with the changes in the constitution which were contemplated that some of the intellectuals would feel a bit better about the government.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.51K11/9-2062. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Harriman on September 21. Copies were sent to FE, INR, EUR, Saigon, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC.

2 No further record of Thuanʼs talk with AID Administrator Hamilton has been found.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 93.

4 On September 6 the Embassy in Saigon reported that the ICC had returned on September 4 from a 4-day trip to Hanoi during which the Indian Chairman, Goburdhan had been received by Ho Chi Minh. (Telegram 252; Department of State, Central Files 751G.00/9-662)

5 Regarding the bombing of the palace on February 27, see Documents 87 ff.

288. Paper Prepared by the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor) 288. Paper Prepared by the Presidentʼs Military Representative (Taylor)1

Washington, September 20, 1962.

IMPRESSIONS OF SOUTH VIETNAM

1. General Impression

Much progress has been accomplished since my visit in October 1961. The most notable perhaps is the snowballing of the strategic hamlet program which has resulted in some 5,000 hamlets being fortified or in process of fortification. Improved training of the Army, the Civil Guard, and the Self-Defense Corps has resulted in freeing many more Army battalions for mobile, offensive operations. The clarifying of the channel of command between Saigon and Army units in the field has been improved, but is still spotty. In some cases, the Province Chief can not intervene in the command channel, but in others he still retains prerogatives, depending upon his personal relations with Diem.

The refusal of the Montagnards to accept Communist domination and their preference to give up their homes and move out of the mountains is another encouraging indication of growing popular support for the Diem Government. Finally, the statistics—for what they are worth—indicate improvement in comparative casualties, in the reduced loss of weapons to the enemy, and in the freeing of a larger segment of the population and of the national territory from VC domination.

2. The Infiltration Problem

Unresolved remains the problem of closing the frontiers to infiltration through Laos and Cambodia. The exact amount of infiltration is still unverified but there is no doubt that important reinforcements in men and matériel reach the VC across these frontiers. On the other hand, the improved patrolling of the coastal waters leads us to believe that very little is coming in by water.

The only current plan to meet the overland infiltration problem is the proposed organization of tribesmen in the border areas to watch the trails and to report infiltration to reserve units in rear. It will be sometime before this program is established to any significant degree. Eventual effectiveness is uncertain.

3. National Plan for Eradicating the VC

There is still no coordinated national plan establishing priorities for operations against the VC. General Harkins has proposed the concept of a national levee en masse of loyalist forces to attack simultaneously the VC strongholds throughout the country. He has offered this concept to President Diem who has apparently accepted it. It remains to be seen whether a feasible plan can be produced to execute the concept. If it proves feasible, presumably it will be incorporated in the 3-year plan which General Harkins is drawing up at Secretary McNamaraʼs direction.

4. Proliferation of Para-military Forces

At the present time, or in the foreseeable future, there will be the following para-military forces in SVN, in addition to the Civil Guard of 72,000 and the Self-Defense Corps of 65,000, supported wholly or in part, directly or indirectly by the U.S.

Force Populaire Program 8,000

Republican Youth Program 6,000

Civic Action Cadre 2,600

Catholic Youth Program 2,675

Montagnard Commando Program:

Commandos 8,100

Civic Action 1,950

Civilian Irregular Defense Program

Mountain Commandos 12,000

Buan Enau 965

(This applies to the STRIKE forces only)

Father Hoa 560e

43,8502

While each of these organizations has considerable justification for existence, their number raises a real question as to whether they should not be amalgamated and their direction centralized.

5. Press Attitude

The local Saigon press, particularly the American component, remains uninformed and often belligerently adverse to the programs of the U.S. and SVN Governments. Both Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins need help at home to improve the press coverage of SVN events, and to obtain the support of publishers in obtaining responsible reporting. The GVN must play a major role in improving the Saigon environment for the press in order to gain such support.

6. Improvement of Intelligence

A great deal has been done in the last ten months to improve the quality of intelligence emanating from SVN…. The current impression is, however, that much remains to be done. On the encouraging side is the improved efficiency of direction finding techniques to locate VC radio sets.

7. R&R Requirements

General Harkins reports concern over his inability to send his personnel on R&R leave to such places as Hong Kong and Manila. JCS authority limits him to providing transportation for such purposes on a space available basis. He points out that he has no legitimate reason for sending his available aircraft to Hong Kong or Manila; hence in point of fact, there are no R&R possibilities.

8. The U.S. Command Set Up in Southeast Asia

We seem to be establishing a deeply layered command structure in Southeast Asia. My initial impression is that for both SVN and Thailand we intend to have a typical unified command structure with General Harkins at the top of each. This matter must be investigated further, to include the stated requirement for a 3-star Air Force Deputy for General Harkins.

. . . . . . .

10. How Are We Doing?

I was encouraged to find that there is a more methodical reporting system to check than I had realized, utilizing American personnel in the field to report indicators of progress in the campaign against the VC. This system consists of a listing of pertinent questions, which are revised periodically, and sent to the MAAG advisors in the field on a monthly basis. A comparison of the most current set of answers with those which have preceded it leads to a judgment within each Province as to the change in control of the areas concerned. From this information it is possible to analyze the relative progress of the GVN in extending its influence throughout the country. The accuracy of the system depends on the framing of the questions and on the perceptivity of the advisor observers. The question listing which is now in use is to be passed to other members of the Country Team so that in the next revision its content will reflect “in put” of all interested agencies. Up to this time this has been a MACV project exclusively.

11. Outstanding Questions

a. How best to organize the U.S. military command in Southeast Asia?

b. How to improve the reporting system on progress?

c. How to accelerate the socio-political program in support of Diemʼs Government?

d. How to lift the country in an enthusiastic victory drive when the preparations are ready?

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-22-69. Top Secret. A 4page draft of this paper, September 14, is ibid.

2 These figures do not include personnel devoted to training forces which involve, U.S., SVN and Australian Nationals. [Footnote in the source text.]

289. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 289. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 21, 1962—12:50 p.m.

349. After receipt Embtel 3262 Cottrell called on Thuan and made following points: 1. He was sure that Thuan must have received clear impression in his talks in Washington that USG officials were solidly in support of Viet-Nam and our commitments to GVN. Thuan confirmed this.

2. It is a fact that USG is just as firmly determined to have commitments to Laos fulfilled.

3. This is why GVN statement it obliged revise its whole diplomatic position and international commitments to Laos is received here as a shock. It means that a western power is threatening to pull the support props out from under the international structure so painfully erected. It is imperative that western powers fulfill their obligations to the letter and that any breakdown in Laos not be caused by western powers.

4. While understanding GVN frustration and anger over an RLG action which touches a sensitive fundamental GVN national issue at the same time we understand GVN has a commitment not only to Laos but to 12 other signatories including the USG.

5. The British have undertaken to see that the accords are observed by the western powers and the Russians have assumed a similar responsibility for the Bloc. Therefore the GVN contemplated action would constitute a blow against the British as well as to the other western signatories.

6. Cottrell reviewed the possible subsidiary effects outlined Deptel 3483 but emphasized that the central point was that GVN action to carry out revision of its commitments to Laos would produce a head on collision with a firm determined US policy on Laos.

7. Cottrell requested Thuan convey above to his government. Thuan agreed. Said he himself did not understand last para Embtel 326 and had no firm ideas how to solve this impasse but would transmit immediately US views expressed above.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/9-2062. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cottrell and cleared in substance with Harriman. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, London, and Paris.

2 Telegram 326, September 20, transmitted the text of a statement issued by the Government of Vietnam on that day deploring the Laotian Governmentʼs decision to exchange ambassadors with North Vietnam. The last paragraph stated that because of this the Government of Vietnam was “obliged to revise its whole diplomatic position and all its international commitments regarding Laos.” (Ibid.)

3 Dated September 20. These effects dealt largely with Communist and Soviet undertakings to support the Laotian settlement which might cease if Saigon appeared to have broken the agreements. (Ibid.)

4 Nolting saw Foreign Minister Mau on September 21 and 22 to reiterate Washingtonʼs concern about Diem breaking relations with Laos. At the latter meeting Mau agreed to try to convince Diem that if the Laotian Government did not accept the credentials of the North Vietnamese Ambassador, the Republic of Vietnam would leave its mission in Vientiane. (Telegrams 336 and 338 from Saigon, September 22; ibid., 751J.51K/9-2262)

290. Memorandum of Conversation, United States Information Agency, Washington, September 21, 1962, 5 p.m. 290. Memorandum of Conversation, United States Information Agency, Washington, September 21, 1962, 5 p.m.1

Washington, September 21, 1962, 5 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary of State for the Presidency Nguyen Dinh Thuan of Viet-Nam

I—Mr. Wilson

State: FE—Mr. Wood, Director, Working Group/Viet-Nam

IAF—Mr. Moore

Secretary Thuan paid a brief courtesy call on Mr. Wilson in the course of his Washington visit. The tone of the discussions was set by the nature of the call, but Mr. Wilson did take the occasion to press several points about the situation in Viet-Nam of interest to the Agency.

Foremost was the relationship of the GVN with the international press corps. Mr. Wilson emphasized the necessity of improved relations and the value of organized and regular press briefings to accomplish this. Thuan replied that he was fully aware of the problem as was President Diem, and that such press briefings would hopefully start next month. On the general subject, however, Thuan launched into a lengthy justification of the GVNʼs reactions to recent events arising out of the Sully case (although Sully was not mentioned by name).2 He quoted chapter and verse against the correspondents, citing each instance as proof of their irresponsibility, unreasonableness and immaturity (average age: 24).

Mr. Wilson countered by again stressing the fact that the GVN had nevertheless to live with the international press which created a public image of the country, the situation and the countryʼs leaders world wide. Positively, he made the suggestion that more use be made of press exploitation of Viet Cong defectors. Thuan replied that this was already being done, though only the local Vietnamese press was using these opportunities to best effect. (IAF will follow up on this.)

Mr. Wilson introduced the subject of Thuanʼs general assessment of USIS operations in Viet-Nam. Thuan ducked discussions of this question by talking about U.S. support of mass communications in general. He praised the completion of the 50 kilowatt radio station, saying that with it the GVN hopes to reach Hanoi which had been impossible with previous equipment. Thuan made passing reference to difference in policy with the U.S. over jamming. The GVN had on its own (and particularly before the new 50 kilowatt capability) tried to jam Hanoi; for this, they used former French equipment. Hanoiʼs strong signal often previously drowned out the GVNʼs voice even on some community sets provided by the government, especially in remote and mountainous areas.

Thuan referred to the importance of film production to support this effective visual medium, but went on to make a plea for U.S. support of television for Viet-Nam, which, he said, would bring national events (and Diem) immediately to the attention of the people without the delays necessitated by film processing. Mr. Wilson recalled his discussions with President Diem in Saigon on the subject of television and said that he would make further inquiries about support for television.

After a further exchange of amenities, including Mr. Wilsonʼs assurances of continuing USIS information support for the GVN effort, particularly that affecting the rural population, Secretary Thuan took his leave for another appointment.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 306,USIA/IAF Files: FRC 68 A 1415, Vietnam General and Personal. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Moore on September 25. The meeting was held at the U.S. Information Agency. A “Talking Points” memorandum for this conversation, dated September 20, is ibid., USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field Far East (IAF), 1962.

2 Francois Sully, a correspondent with Newsweek, who was expelled from Vietnam on September 4.

291. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 291. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 22, 1962—10:45 a.m.

355. Thuan visit thru September 20. During his calls on US officials thus far following points were stressed to Thuan: 1. Assurances of continuing US support and guarded optimism re progress in Viet-Nam.

2. Serious US concern on question GVN representation Laos.

3. Probable drastic Congressional cuts in aid bill repeatedly brought to Thuanʼs attention. However, no suggestion that Viet-Nam program will suffer.

4. Hopes that GVN would make every effort alleviate tensions with RKG with as first step visit of GVN Cabinet Minister or General to Phnom Penh.

5. Importance avoiding serious frictions between GVN and US press reps.

6. Agreement with Thuan that International Development Association be encouraged make funds available to SOFIDIV.

7. Awareness of financial sacrifices and reforms being made by GVN, assurance that US would keep close watch on GVN financial situation, but clear indication that a) AIK charges on GVN could not be reduced now and b) third country counterpart funds could not be made available to GVN without US legislation which not now feasible.

8. Importance finding all means using US agricultural surpluses.

Among points emphasized by Thuan were: 1. Provided adequate US support continues DRV can probably not defeat GVN by increased military effort and hence likely apply more and more political pressure for conference on Viet-Nam. (In 1959 Ho hoped defeat GVN in one year, his estimates have now risen to 15-20 years and he has allegedly indicated to Indian Chairmen that DRV prepared negotiate with GVN.)

2. GVN successes in delta and importance of Montagnard swing to GVN.

3. Importance of crop destruction program. (He received scant encouragement and was questioned closely as to whether it would be possible destroy VC crops without hurting Montagnards.)

4. GVN compliance Staley recommendations, particularly currency reform, increased tax collections and deficit financing. This connection sharp fall in GVN foreign reserves stressed.

Thuan has received sympathetic hearings on the Hill and from high level officials Executive Branch. He will see as much as possible of press during remainder his visit.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.51KII/9-2262. Secret. Drafted by Wood. Repeated to CINCPAC.

292. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan), Washington, September 25, 1962, 10:10–10:45 p.m. 292. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Vietnamese Secretary of State at the Presidency (Thuan), Washington, September 25, 1962, 10:10–10:45 p.m.1

Washington, September 25, 1962, 10:10–10:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in Viet-Nam

Mr. Thuan opened by underscoring to the President the improvement which had occurred since General Taylorʼs first visit to VietNam,2 and urged that the momentum of the joint US-GVN effort be maintained. The President agreed that recent reports from Saigon were somewhat more encouraging.

Turning to Vietnamese representation in Vientiane the President said that when he learned that President Diem desired to break off relations with the Lao Government due to its recognition of the DRV he had sent him a message through Ambassador Nolting explaining that such an action would give him a good deal of concern.3 The President emphasized that the abandonment of the Geneva Accords before they had been tried would allow the Soviets to take the position that they had been violated by the United States. This would be disastrous. While understanding the feelings of President Diem that he did not wish the Lao Government to recognize both the Government of Viet-Nam and the Hanoi regime, President Kennedy stated that to abandon the Lao Government in this way would play into the hands of the Communists, would endanger the situation and increase the chances of military action. Noting that the Vietnamese Ambassador had been called home the President expressed the hope that the Embassy would be left open in Vientiane. He pointed out that although the U.S. did not recognize Communist China, we had sat down with them at Geneva and that there were many other things which we had not liked about the Geneva Conference.

Mr. Thuan replied that having discussed the question with Messrs. Johnson, Harriman and Forrestal4 he had sent a telegram to his government. Unfortunately the first consequences of the Geneva Accords had been the recognition by the Lao Government of the DRV which presented an internal problem for Viet-Nam.

The President said that the Geneva Accords of 1954 had in a sense constituted recognition of the DRV. Mr. Thuan acknowledged this but said that the present case involved diplomatic recognition. Having sent a telegram to Saigon he had received an answer stating that President Diem agreed to keep a Charge in Vientiane provided that the arrival of the DRV Ambassador was delayed and that the DRV did not have the same rank as the Charge from Saigon. The President pointed out that the GVN must have expected Souvanna to recognize the DRV. He realized that the GVN did not like the Geneva Accords, but said that if they failed our common efforts and his own efforts for the last year would fail. A treaty had been signed with the Chinese Communists and it would be a great mistake to have the burden for the failure of the Geneva Accords fall on the Vietnamese Government. If these accords failed, it would then be very difficult to get the Communists to pull out their troops. There were three choices in Laos, to fight for the country, to withdraw from the country or to do what was being done. If we were to undertake the present solution, we should not stop 1/3 of the way down the road. The GVN could not ask that the Hanoi delegate be given a lesser position than that of the GVN. It would not work, and it would mean that the Lao Government would have relations with only Hanoi.

The President concluded that while the present arrangement had not been satisfactory from the beginning, he strongly desired that breaches of the Geneva Accords, to which Khrushchev was publicly committed, should come from the Communist side and not from the Free World side. He hoped that Mr. Thuan would explain this to President Diem.

Turning to Cambodia the President asked what both the Americans and the Vietnamese should do to ease the present situation.

Mr. Thuan replied his government was ready to ease the tension, that it had said nothing even when Sihanouk had publicly called Diem an American valet, that the Vietnamese Government was ready to send a military mission which had been already chosen by President Diem, but that the “versatile” Sihanouk had changed his mind and now wanted a Cabinet Minister sent first. He also wanted the Vietnamese Government to pay the Cambodian Government 1 billion riels based on the 1954 Paris Accords. However, since the burden of the 1954 war had been borne by the Vietnamese they could not accept in addition to pay the Cambodian Government this money. On the other hand the Vietnamese were prepared to ask that the French unfreeze the Indochina franc account. This would mean that the Cambodians would get about 3 billion old francs and that Viet-Nam would get about the same amount. Viet-Nam would only agree to this unfreezing if it were done simultaneously for the three countries of Indochina.

There was no doubt in Mr. Thuanʼs mind that Cambodian territory had been a safe haven for the Communists. In Zone D, for example, there had been found huge stocks of medicinal cotton. The packages showed that this cotton had transitted Cambodia. Captured Viet Cong maps showed that they used routes passing through Cambodia. No one knew the location of the border. When the Cambodians accused the Vietnamese of crossing the frontier, the Vietnamese replied that they are willing to set up a commission and pay damages.

Mr. Thuan then raised the subject of crop destruction, saying that this was vital for Viet-Nam; that if they were to shorten the war by controlling their frontier, they would need both Montagnard intelligence units and the means of destroying Viet Cong food supplies. The manpower for the Montagnard intelligence units were forthcoming as the Montagnard deserted the Viet Cong. The Viet Cong in the mountains were already short of food.

The President asked how it was possible to distinguish between Viet Cong and Montagnard fields.

Mr. Thuan replied that the Viet Cong fields were in inaccessible areas not inhabited by innocent people or local tribes. These are areas which have been used by the Viet Cong for 15 years. Montagnards from the Kontum area have petitioned the GVN to start their crop killing program.

The President again inquired how it was possible to differentiate between Viet Cong crops and Montagnard crops. Mr. Thuan replied that the Montagnards habitually build a hut in the middle of their rice fields. The Viet Cong did not. Also the province chiefs had intelligence which enabled them to pick out fields used by the Viet Cong. The Viet Cong food situation in the mountains was becoming serious.

The President replied that the Viet Cong could easily build huts in their fields. The United States was concerned that the distinction between Viet Cong and Montagnard crops be clearly made and secondly that the U.S. was concerned lest it be accused of conducting food warfare. Mr. Thuan proposed that crop destruction be carried out by hand in a few provinces, pointing out that the October harvest was approaching. In reply to a question by the President, he named the provinces of Phuoc Long and Phu Yen, suggesting that after the crops had been destroyed in specific areas the results could be assessed.

The President asked when the next harvest would occur. Mr. Thuan replied that it would be in May. The President indicated that he was willing to reconsider the matter both in terms of hand spraying and aerial spraying. Thuan suggested that the Vietnamese might also need some C-123s which they did not have. The President promised to get in touch with Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins and to let the Vietnamese Government know by the end of the week.

The President inquired as to the status of the amnesty program, to which Mr. Thuan replied that this would be undertaken by the Vietnamese Government. He continued that there were more and more Viet Cong defectors, that the improved equipment and training made available by the U.S. was most helpful. He was particularly pleased with the improved intelligence now available to the GVN and with the aggressive and competitive attitude of the younger Vietnamese officers.

He had explained political progress to Mr. Wiggins of the Washington Post and to the editors of the New York Times saying that a recent constitutional amendment required cabinet ministers to come to the National Assembly and answer questions of the deputies. He had also told them about elections in the strategic hamlets. They had not been aware of these developments.

Economically Dr. Staleyʼs recommendations had been carried out with successful results. The Shell Oil people were now able to reach areas where they had not been for two years and for the first time in 15 years the price of rice was dropping between harvest seasons.

A swing in the pendulum was also shown by the fact that whereas there had been 700 volunteers for officers training in 1960, there had been 2,300 volunteers in 1962.

The GVN hoped to make real progress by the end of the dry season (May 1963).

As to North Viet-Nam he said that the carefully planned RVNAF air strikes were having such an effect that Ho Chi Minh had requested the Chairman of the ICC to ask Diem to stop them as a gesture of good will. Ho had taken the line that the U.S. was trying to make Diem a puppet by the use of air strikes since these were completely under U.S. control and their increasing use made Diem more dependent on the U.S. Thuan said Hoʼs own predictions for the future of the war were changing. Whereas in 1959 and 1960 Ho had undertaken to win the war within one year, his prediction for 1962 was 15 to 20 years. Also, the DRV, which had previously never agreed to negotiate with Diem, was now willing to do so. Thuan said that since the DRV was “losing the waR&Rdquo; it was increasingly anxious for a political settlement.

The President commented that this brought the conversation back to his original point on Laos. Although newspaper correspondents had predicted the worst in Viet-Nam, things were now better. Similarly in Laos it should not be forgotten that there were strong factors on our side, and it was for that reason that the U.S. wished to carry through on the present policy.

Thuan then turned to the question of aid, saying that his government understood the reasons for the “Buy American” policy. He suggested that it might be possible to make counterpart Japanese Yen now in U.S. accounts available to the GVN. The President promised to look into this.

Mr. Thuan said that the Presidentʼs speech at the IMF meeting was a masterpiece.5

The President concluded by expressing U.S. admiration for the progress being made in Viet-Nam against the Communists and urged the GVN not to be too concerned by press reports. He assured Mr. Thuan that the U.S. Government did not accept everything the correspondents wrote even if it appeared in the New York Times. He emphasized that if the Vietnamese Government was successful, the public image would take care of itself. In reply to Thuanʼs expression of concern at inaccurate press reporting, the President asked him not to worry. This occurred every day in Washington.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-2562. Secret. Drafted by Wood and approved by the White House on October 16. Copies were sent, inter alia, to S/S,S/P, FE, SEA, TF/SEA, WG/VN, DOD/OSD, and Saigon. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to Saigon in telegrams 364 and 375, September 25 and 27. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series) In a memorandum dated September 24, Forrestal stressed that the President should impress Thuan with the strong views that the United States had on Diemʼs breaking diplomatic relations with Laos. Copies of the memorandum and another dated September 22, which suggested topics that the President might raise with Thuan, are in Declassified Documents, 1977, 108E and 247A.

2 For documentation on Taylorʼs visit to Vietnam, October 18-25, 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Documents 169 ff.

3 In telegram 331, September 15, Nolting was instructed to convey Kennedyʼs concern and disappointment about Diemʼs decision to break relations with Laos. (Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/9-1562) Nolting had already met with Diem and Mau for 2 hours on the question on September 15 and met again with them on September 17 to present the Presidentʼs views. (Telegrams 305 and 309, September 15 and 17; ibid.) By the end of September, North Vietnam had agreed to Chargé-level representation only in Laos and Diem did not break relations.

4 See Documents 285 and 287. Forrestal reported briefly on a conversation along these lines, which he had with Thuan during a lunch at CIA on Saturday, September 22, in the memorandum to the President described in footnote 1 above.

5 For text of President Kennedyʼs address to the Board of Governors of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, September 20, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 691-694.

293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 25, 1962—3:54 p.m.

363. To preclude GVN taking one more ill-advised action outlined Embtel 3492 which will further sour press relations and cause serious adverse reaction here in many quarters, you should make following points at highest levels. Suggest Counselor Nhu be included.

1. It would be great mistake for GVN to ban Newsweek giving clear impression GVN not strong enough to stand criticism and must resort to news blackout.

2. Impression in U.S. will be that GVN attempting to cover up. This will shake confidence in our present policy of strong support to Vietnam and bring into debate question whether U.S. policy is sound or unsound. As GVN knows, many are unconvinced and will seize this opportunity.

3. GVN can ill afford this reaction in U.S. and, on balance, it is perfectly clear from here that GVN best interests served by ignoring distasteful news stories and taking it in stride.

4. If GVN indulges its feelings of anger and bans Newsweek, they should clearly understand consequences described above. U.S. policy is firm in supporting the principle of a free press and we cannot overlook damage to this principle no matter how irritating or unfounded certain press reports frequently are.

5. Newsweek is sending Ken Crawford to Viet-Nam for approximately one month to survey situation. Crawford is former Washington Bureau Chief, is a senior seasoned reporter now a columnist, who can be expected do objective reporting. This may provide opportunity put GVN-Newsweek relations on better footings.3

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/9-2262. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Cottrell and cleared with Harriman, Heavner, and USIA. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Telegram 349, September 25, transmitted a summary of a Vietnamese Information Directorate communiqué that criticized Newsweek and threatened to limit its future entry into Vietnam. (Ibid., 951K.6211/9-2562)

3 On September 29, Nolting discussed the possible banning of Newsweek with Mau and “bore down on counter-productive and harmful effects” it would have. (Telegram 363 from Saigon, September 29; ibid., 951K.6211/9-2962)

294. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 294. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 26, 1962—8 p.m.

352. Deptel 364.2 After careful study over past months (Embtels 302, 2333 and previous) General Harkins and I have jointly recommended approval of limited crop destruction operation in Phu Yen Province by spraying from air and in Phuoc Long Province by hand in conjunction ground operations. We are not yet prepared to recommend broad-scale crop destruction program until trial operations give basis for evaluating conduct such operations and results vis-à-vis Montagnard population and VC. Under GVN plans, spraying would be directed only against specific target areas which best intelligence available pinpoint as VC-cultivated or VC-controlled area. We have recommended test program in Phu Yen primarily because of obvious advantages in support operation Hai Yen II and Phuoc Long because crop destruction program currently being carried out by physical means-cutting and uprooting (Embtel 233). Admittedly there may be indirect impact on Montagnards as total food supply reduced but believe impact will be much greater on VC and Montagnards affected can be taken care of through other programs. Moreover, Montagnard letters described Embtel 302 provide evidence that at least some Montagnard groups would welcome destruction their crops in order deny assistance to VC. General Harkins and I continue be convinced by mounting evidence of VC food shortages in highlands that crop destruction can be effective weapon against VC. Without carrying out test operation we will never be able fully confirm efficacy this weapon or ability GVN to utilize it with limited indirect US assistance.

Regarding differentiation between VC and Montagnard crops, it possible pinpoint with considerable degree of accuracy highland areas under VC control.GVN in fact has provided us with maps showing specific target areas they wish to hit. These proposed targets would be checked out beforehand by MACV and we could restrict use chemical agents to verified VC targets. We have never envisaged using USAF aircraft and continue believe we should not concur use USAF 123ʼs. If trial program approved and assessed as successful, we might consider providing VNAF with suitable spray equipped aircraft.

Feel sure however that, if ARVN carried out operations with only such limited and indirect US assistance, any resultant VC propaganda would still be largely directed against US.

We can provide ARVN with capability for hand-spraying operations if authorization given.

Regarding psywar aspects: FBIS reports indicate Hanoi has sporadically been accusing US of conducting or aiding GVN in crop warfare in highlands usually lumping these charges in long list heinous crimes and without special emphasis. Thus, we already being accused to some extent. On other side of coin, we have detected no VC or DRV effort propagandize mangrove defoliation operations. We have seen no public or private VC or DRV references to this operation.

At same fume, mangrove defoliation operations have shown that ARVN has adequate psywar capability. After somewhat erratic start, it has conducted ground and air leaflet program with credible themes. It is also able employ loudspeaker planes and demonstrate “sprayed ARVN soldiers” to show that chemicals do not harm humans or animals, for mangrove defoliation program, GVN has also instructed Province Chief forward any claims for crops deshroyed to Saigon for action and payment.

In summary, General Harkins and I favor proceeding with the program along the following lines: A. GVN initially proposes targets for attack with no U.S. advice or assistance, and

B. MACV reviews and approves, with Embassy coordination, only those which can definitely be verified as VC and have reasonable chance producing tangible results.

C. MACV provides technical assistance and advice as to chemical agent to be used, time and method of attack and other purely operationa1 advice, and

D. MACV assist GVN in preparation and implementation of concurrent psywar effort, and

E. Chemicals to be released only as required for attack of specific targets, and

F. Chemicals to be applied by hand by ARVN with equipment presently in country, but now held by U.S. Agency only, and

G. Chemicals to be air delivered only by VNAF helicopters, and

H. MACV-Embassy make joint evaluation of effects and provide appropriate recommendations to State and JCS as to whether program should be continued on an expanded basis or abandoned.4

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-2662. Secret; Niact. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 See footnote 1, Document 292.

3 Dated September 15 and 1, respectively. The former described letters from Montagnard leaders asking for destruction of all crops in certain areas of their districts. (Ibid., 751K.00/9-1562) Regarding telegram 233, See footnote 6, Document 276.

4 On October 2, the President authorized the crop destruction program in South Vietnam under the conditions and terms set forth by the Embassy. (Memorandum for the Record, October 2; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. According to a memorandum from Forrestal to McGeorge Bundy, October 4, the President “did so over the mild objections of Averell, Roger Hilsman, and myself; but with the strong approval of Secretary McNamara, General Taylor, the field, and just about everybody else you could think of. I believe his main train of thinking was that you cannot say no to your military advisors all the time, and with this I agree.” (Ibid., NSC Staff Memoranda. Michael Forrestal, 6/22-10/62)

295. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 295. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, October 1, 1962.

Dear Fritz: I think Thuanʼs visit was very successful—particularly in terms of the press.

We have sent a round-up telegram and memos of his conversations with the President, the Secretary, the Attorney General and Fowler Hamilton.2 He also had talks with the following:

Walt Rostow—Dr. Rostow was sympathetic and perhaps the most understanding of Thuanʼs interlocutors. He urged adoption of the amnesty program, pointing out that the most critical part of such a program was getting the signal through to the VC. Dr. Rostow made three suggestions in order to improve and strengthen relations between the Government and the villagers: 1. The organization of Vietnamese students from the towns to do civic action work in the villages, not only to help the villagers but to increase the students' understanding of the war which their country faces (this idea sounded particularly good to me).

2. A conscious GVN policy to encourage industries to manufacture goods needed by the peasants. This would help industry since “a rapidly growing industry must be based on the whole country, not just on the city”. It would also provide incentive goods for the peasants. Thuan agreed. He mentioned the problem of getting loans from the IDA and yen from U.S. Treasury accounts.

3. Train draftees whose terms of enlistment are ending so that they will have useful skills when they return to their villages. This has been done in Korea and some Korean experts might help in setting up such a program.

On Laos he emphasized that the U.S. was working with Viet-Nam in a life and death struggle. At the same time we had responsibilities which, while they may be of second importance to Viet-Nam are important to world order and in the long run will be important to Viet-Nam. He asked that Viet-Nam help us in responsibilities which are important to the United States in its position of world leadership.

Frank Valeo—As you know, Valeo is Senator Mansfieldʼs closest adviser. After 15 minutes with Senator Mansfield we had lunch with Valeo and Thuan later had a talk with him in his hotel. I think Frank benefited from this lengthy contact with Thuan. He started with the theme that Viet-Nam must have as an ultimate objective a reunified and neutral Viet-Nam. The more we talked about the problems of reunifying Viet-Nam and having it defend itself as a neutral the more Frank agreed that the ultimate should probably be postponed to the infinite.

Other Congressional Contact—included Senator Hickenlooper, Senator Mundt, Congressman Zablocki, Congressman Bloomfield (RIll.), Congresswoman Church, Assistants Carl Marcy and John Newhouse. Congressman Zablocki was the only one of the last who even indirectly raised the question of whether Diemʼs leadership was adequate.

As to the press, he was invited to lunch with several editors from the New York Times, met Mr. Wiggins a senior editor of the Washington Post who has connections with Newsweek (Wiggins asked that if either publication made factual errors in reporting, Thuan get in touch with Wiggins by cable or through his Ambassador), Joe Alsop, Ted Weinthal of Newsweek, and Carl Meyer, a Washington Post editorial writer. I also had two-hour discussion with Meyer. Thuan also held an open press conference on the afternoon of September 25.

Mike Forrestal and Carl Kaysen of the White House Staff—Forrestal spoke strongly on Laos representation. He pointed out that East and West Germany both send Ambassadors to Moscow although they do not recognize each other. Thuan raised Japanese yen in U.S. accounts. This would take legislation, possibly next January;AID thinks it impossible but Forrestal has told Thuan that something might be worked out.

The Vice President was only able to see Thuan for five minutes due to the crisis on the aid bill. He expressed admiration for the progress in Viet-Nam, said he hoped to make another visit, and assured Thuan of our continued prayers and support.

On the military side Thuan saw Secretary McNamara who bucked up Thuanʼs morale and impressed him strongly. He also saw General Lemnitzer whom Thuan asked for more H-34s.

Other events included a formal State Department luncheon given by Governor Harriman and a dinner by Roger Hilsman. Thuan had two or three visits to Bethesda Naval Hospital. I gather the tests revealed nothing abnormal. I must say he looked better than when I saw him in May.

We have pouched Thuanʼs speech at the Bank and Fund Meeting.3

Looking forward to seeing you on the 8th.

Very sincerely,

Chalmers B. Wood4

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, Thuan Visit, September 62. Secret; Official-Informal.

2 For memoranda of Thuanʼs conversations with the President and Rusk, see Documents 285 and 292; regarding the conversations with the Attorney General and Fowler Hamilton. see Document 284 and footnote 2, Document 287.

3 Not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

296. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 296. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 4, 1962—11 p.m.

385. Refs: Deptel 387, Vientiane 136 to Saigon, Embtel 377, Phnom Penh 194 to Saigon, Deptel 395, Deptel 390 Embtel 379.2

Had long talk today with Mau on relations with Laos and GVN-Cambodian problems. Made most persuasive pitch I could on need for GVN to take a fresh look at its relations and positions vis-à-vis its neighbors, and to take bold and imaginative diplomatic initiatives for the sake of stability in SEA and to prevent its own diplomatic isolation. Keyed this approach to improved situation in SVN, pointing out that under present conditions GVN initiatives would be reflection of strength and confidence rather than of weakness.

Specifically, I strongly urged reconsideration GVN position on relations with Laos, reviewing Presidentʼs talk with them,3 and stressing advantage to GVN in position as outlined in Deptel 387.

On Cambodian problems, discussed also at length, I urged immediate dispatch of conciliatory note on Koh Rokar incident,4 to forestall possible damaging ICC report, suggested that note should state intention to send GVN military mission to Phnom Penh, the head of which could negotiate its terms of reference, and which could be immediately used to help investigate Koh Rokar incident. On debt question, I urged that GVN break impasse by offering to join on condition that Cambodian will agree specifically to debt settlement conference. (Mau, in his mild-mannered way, hit the ceiling on this. He said, “If we gave Sihanouk his money first, we would be chasing him for the rest of our lives trying to get ours. I said I did not think so—that a magnanimous gesture might be exactly what this situation requires.”)

Mau was noncommittal. He said, regarding Laos, that he wanted us to know that GVN position had been very carefully weighed by President and Cabinet and it would be hard, if not impossible, to reverse. His only concrete commitment was to try to pry loose a note on Koh Rokar of type we discussed by “early next week”. I warned him that this might be too late; that GVN might miss opportunity after so long a delay.

I proposed to Mau that I see President Diem again on these questions before departure Honolulu,5 and suggested that I first send through Mau, an aide-mémoire giving our precise suggestions and recommendations on matters we had discussed. (Mau agreed and I am sending Diem an aide-mémoire, which will be pouched to Dept.6 )

Mau mentioned that according his information DRV Ambassador expected to arrive Vientiane October 7 and would be immediately accredited. He seemed resigned to fact this would mean rupture diplomatic relations unless Laotian King intervenes. I told him that we had certain recent information to effect that center and right-wing elements in RLG drawing closer together to counteract left wing, and re-emphasized this no time to abandon the fray.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/10-462. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Vientiane, Phnom Penh, CINCPAC, Bangkok, London, and Paris.

2 None printed. These telegrams, dated October 1-4, dealt with various aspects of the deteriorating relations between South Vietnam and Laos or Cambodia. (Ibid., 651H.51K/10-162 through 10-362, and 651J.51K/10-162 through 10-462)

3 See Document 292.

4 On September 10, South Vietnamese troops and planes had attacked the village of Koh Rokar on the Mekong River in Cambodia.

5 Nolting discussed the question with Diem on October 6 along these same lines. A report on the conversation was transmitted in telegram 395 from Saigon, October 6, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/10-662) Regarding the meeting at Honolulu on October 8, see Document 298.

6 Not found.

297. Paper Prepared in the Department of State 297. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Developments in Viet-Nam Between General Taylorʼs Visits—October 1961-October 1962

Then and Now

The Viet Cong were winning the war in October of last year. From January to October, 1961, VC regular forces grew from less than 10,000 to about 16,500. From July to October, their strength accelerated dramatically, jumping up by more than 1,000 per month. In September, the guerrillas struck several times in battalion strength. Less than 50 miles north of Saigon they attacked the capital of Phuoc Long province with a force of 1,500 and held it overnight. They seemed to have the capability of “liberating” an area on the high plateau. They choked off the flow of food to Saigon, and the GVN was forced to import rice and restrict the sale of pork. Most important, morale had ebbed away much more rapidly than real GVN strength was eroded. There was an air of near panic in Saigon.

Now a year later, the Viet Cong are not winning the war. As in 1862 and 1942, no one clearly has the initiative. However, VC are clearly further from their objective than they were in October, 1961. The most dramatic change is in morale. The GVN and its military forces are confident and anxious to get on with the job. There are signs that the people as a whole now believe the GVN will win: the army is getting more and better intelligence from villagers, volunteers for officer training are at an all-time high, rice is coming to market normally and for the first time in 15 years the price is dropping between harvests-a sign of confidence that security is returning because it means Ace hoards are being sold.

The political climate has changed. The GVN is gaining more popular support for the war effort, particularly where it counts the most—in the rural areas. By means of its strategic hamlet program, the GVN is making a major effort to provide the peasant with more social services and to introduce democracy at the hamlet level. Hamlet councils are being elected by secret ballot. Schools and medical facilities are going to the provinces. The military design calls for the defense of all of the people, not just military posts, communication arteries, and the towns and cities. And the people are being successfully involved in their own hamlets. With a stake in the local status quo, they have been giving a good account of themselves.

The implementation of GVN rural programs is uneven; it suffers greatly from a chronic shortage of skilled personnel. The GVN remains basically paternalistic; a nation at war, divided, underdeveloped and with 2,000 years of authoritarian traditions does not quickly or easily become a modern democracy. But real political progress has been registered in one short year.

Military progress is also encouraging. The basic need and wish of the Vietnamese people is security. They are beginning to get it through the application of a strategy based on defense of the whole population, by the whole population. U.S. logistic, technical and advisory assistance has resulted in sharply increased mobility, better communications, better intelligence, and better performance generally by both the regular and the paramilitary forces.

VC strength is now set at 20,000 regulars. But casualties are high, nearly 600 a week and going up. The guerrillas are troubled by shortages of food and medicine. Morale among replacements is reported low.

Most importantly the VC have not been able to escalate through regiment- and division-sized operations towards a new Dien Bien Phu. Their largest attack was in September, 1961, when they used 1,500 men. They have not “liberated” any area on which they could establish a government. In short, the momentum of the VC attack has been lost. Or, to put it in Vietnamese context, they no longer have the “mandate of heaven.”

Last Yearʼs Problems

To arrest the Viet Cong advance and turn the tide, a two-fold problem had to be solved. First, an effective strategy had to be devised. The body of anti-guerrilla doctrine was meager, and much of what we knew was not applicable to Viet-Nam. We had to learn how to apply our strength and how to hold an area once the military had cleared it. We had to discover how to involve the people in their own defense, and we had to find ways to separate the guerrillas from the people.

Second, we had to overcome obvious weaknesses in the Vietnamese military and civil establishments. We had to provide the military with better intelligence, a much greater degree of mobility, and we had to wean them away from static defense. We had to train and arm the paramilitary who take the brunt of the attack and who can relieve the regulars from static defense missions. The military and the civilian government had to work together as a team at all levels. The government had to streamline its operations and really put top priority on the war effort. Some means had to be found to cause the people to identify their interests with the defeat of the Viet Cong. And we had to achieve more effective cooperation between the Vietnamese and ourselves.

The Viet Cong strategy was simple to describe, hard to combat. They sought to isolate the government, both from its friends abroad and from its own people at home, and then to destroy it. The VC tried to paralyze the government at the rice roots by assassinating and threatening village and provincial officials. They sought to win the peopleʼs support, or at least their passive tolerance, through a combination of propaganda and threats. They threatened the families of potential draftees, trying to force the young men into their own ranks instead of into the government forces. They told the peasant that under the VC he need not pay rent to the landlord, they told the squatter that the land was his. They exploited grievances and floated rumors of government corruption. They kidnapped or killed the recalcitrant. Teachers and village health workers were special targets because they linked the people to the government and presented a benevolent image of the national authorities. More than 250 school teachers had been kidnapped; of these 100 are still missing and 30 are known dead. In the first eight months of this year 3,300 persons have been kidnapped; some return, many do not.

A Yearʼs Progress Toward a Solution

A. Devising and Implementing a Strategy. The VC aim to isolate the government from the people. We aim to tie government and people together, and to isolate the VC from the people. Applying the lessons learned in Malaya and in the GVNʼs own agroville program, the “strategic hamlet” program has been devised. This program seeks to give the people both the means and the will to defend themselves. The means: local inhabitants are armed and trained, a perimeter is set up around the hamlet, and communications with reserves forces are provided. If necessary—and usually it is not—the houses are regrouped from scattered homesteads into more defensible clusters. The will: the government provides the hamlet people with a stake in their own status quo, i.e., the hamlet gets a school, a maternity clinic, cheap agricultural credit. And the people elect their own hamlet officials by secret ballot.

The strategic hamlet concept is the child of the British Advisory Mission, our own military advisors, and the Vietnamese government. It is still being refined and defined, in practice. There are more than 3,000 strategic hamlets which have been constructed during 1962, and more than 2,600 under construction. Some are well defended and the people well motivated. Some are poorly done, and only half-heartedly defended.

We have devised a “hamlet kit”, including such items as barbed wire, weapons, and medicines, and we are planning to supply nearly 4,000 of these kits by the end of FY 63. But the majority of the hamlets are providing most of their own resources. Our military advisory machine has a special section working on the strategic hamlets. The GVN has an Inter-Ministerial Strategic Hamlet Committee chaired by the Presidentʼs brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu. The GVN has also set up a Strategic Hamlet regional committee under each of the Division Commanders.

The GVN is well aware that the strategic hamlet program cannot succeed unless most of the people are willing to go along with it. Presidential advisor Ngo Dinh Nhu stresses the political aspects of the program, bills it as a democratic revolution in the countryside, insists on election of hamlet officials by secret ballot and high calibre training for high calibre cadre charged with carrying out the program. As in all underdeveloped countries, there is an acute shortage of trained people, and the program is unevenly implemented. The GVN has recognized this by publicly calling for complaints from its citizens about corrupt or abusive behavior on the part of officials carrying out the program.

Built around the strategic hamlet program, which is nation-wide, are area clear-and-hold operations. These are coordinated military, economic and social drives designed to permanently clear given areas of VC strength and influence. Four are now in progress: Binh Minh or Sunrise in Binh Duong Province, Hai Yen or Sea Swallow in Phu Yen Province, and two just getting under way in Quang Ngai and Binh Dinh Provinces.

These operations are supported in depth by U.S. economic, psychological, and military aid and advice. Plans are approved by our Inter-Agency Province Rehabilitation Committee and money disbursed through project agreements with Province Chiefs and local committees on which U.S. officials sit.

While the strategic hamlets are being built everywhere and available resources are concentrated on clearing specific key areas, we must still prevent the VC from consolidating their strength and expanding their control. Hence the GVN armed forces must not only seek to protect the new strategic hamlets and expand GVN control by supporting clear-and-hold operations, they must mount constant spoiling attacks against VC strongholds. The recent, highly successful operations in the Ca Mau peninsula are examples of this kind of spoiling attack.

B. Strengthening the Military Machine. The GVN forces have been increased numerically, the regular army to 200,000 and the paramilitary to about 154,000. More important, their performance has been greatly improved by the application of U.S. technical and advisory assistance. Our helicopters and our M-113 personnel carriers have given the GVN forces much greater mobility, forcing the VC out of many areas simply because they know the GVNʼs reaction time is now too fast for them. The helicopters have added the vital element of surprise, frequently allowing the GVN to catch the guerrillas unaware at their bases. Although much remains to be done, both the regulars and the paramilitary are better trained to deal with guerrillas. They patrol more at night, stay in the field longer, lay more ambushes of their own. Perhaps most important, morale is up. They believe they are going to win.

As the strategic hamlet program and the clear-and-hold operations have progressed, military and civilian cooperation has greatly improved. The problem of Province Chief and military chain-of-command is still with us, but so eased by the meshing of military and civilian programs, changes in personnel, and government structural adjustments to the war effort that it is no longer a serious obstacle. American advisors at all levels, particularly in the provinces, have played a vital role in overcoming this problem.

U.S. military personnel in Viet Nam now number over 10,700. The great majority are directly engaged in advising Vietnamese officers and units. They are doing an excellent job, both in technically improving the effectiveness of the RVNAF and in building close bonds of real understanding at all levels of the Vietnamese military and government. The VC have made them a special target. From January, 1961 to September 1, 1962, the VC killed 11 and wounded 32 American military personnel.

The increase in U.S. military assistance is across the board, including such diverse items as radar to detect Communist overflights for intelligence or air supply of guerrilla forces, sentry dogs, defoliants to clear dense underbrush on road shoulders in order to reduce ambushes, helicopters and basic communications equipment. U.S. military equipment and personnel have given the ARVN forces a far greater measure of mobility. About 150 U.S. manned helicopters are now engaged in moving ARVN forces rapidly to whatever point they are needed. A joint Junk Patrol has been organized with the Vietnamese Navy and elements of the Seventh Fleet to cut infiltration from north Viet Nam by sea. Construction is underway to develop a Junk Force of 28 Divisions (20 junks per Division) for this task and for inland waterway patrols. Four Junk Force Divisions are operational and three Junk Force training centers are in operation. For inland waterway and coastal patrols, and to provide greater mobility in delta areas, the U.S. has provided the GVN with a total of 351 craft, including 125 river boats and 177 LCVP (landing craft vehicle personnel).

Intelligence assistance includes the assignment of intelligence advisors throughout the country at the province level, over 200 in all. Eleven Special Forces teams are training Vietnamese special forces. Advice and assistance on civic action has included medical and sanitary training as well as help on troop education and psychological warfare. A Joint combat test and development center has been set up to bring modern military technology to bear on the special problems of the war in Viet Nam.

Particularly important is the training program for the paramilitary which are bearing the brunt of the Viet Cong attack. Since January, the number of trained Civil Guard companies has increased from 33 to 255, companies in training from 13 to 64, and training centers from 4 to 5. In the same period the number of trained Self-Defense Corps platoons has increased from zero to 966, platoons in training from 53 to 220, and training centers from 15 to 31.

C. Strengthening the Government and Gearing It for War. The GVN has made some important structural changes, notably the creation of the Inter-Ministerial Strategic Hamlet Committee, which is in reality a war cabinet, and the division level Strategic Hamlet Committees on which the Province Chiefs sit under the chairmanship of the Division Commanders. But the most important alteration is in attitude. The war effort is now clearly top priority.

Signs of this changed governmental attitude are Nhuʼs almost fanatic devotion to the strategic hamlet program, the GVNʼs willingness to undertake whatever deficit financing is required, general willingness to allow American advisors to work at all levels, and a new energy and drive that has significantly reduced red tape and bureaucratic delays. Perhaps most significant is the clear recognition that the people must be won over at the rice roots.

Although still not adequate, the GVN intelligence machine has been overhauled and improved on our advice. A Central Intelligence Organization has been set up, … training programs are now in progress, and a national interrogation center recently began operations. Military and civilian intelligence operations are effectively linked.

Similarly, the psychological effort has been stepped up. The country is covered with a radio net; emphasis is on programming for the rural areas, and our advisors are working to improve quality. Nearly all provinces have a daily or weekly newssheet. The clear-and-hold operations have special newspapers produced with our help and advice. A general amnesty plan is being hammered out, and Nhu believes that by the first of the year the trend toward a GVN victory will make the launching of such a plan a sign of strength rather than of weakness.

Training programs for provincial officials are under way. Every province now has a training plan, a training officer at the Deputy Province Chief level, and a training center. In Saigon a special program is operating to train strategic hamlet cadres. The emphasis in the training is on winning the support of the people against the VC.

In January, as a result of the Staley recommendations, the GVN undertook fiscal reforms which included a successful devaluation (which means that the aid dollar now generates 25% more piasters), and an overhaul of the tax system. Tax collection is better this year than last, but more can and should be done in this area.

D. Improved Cooperation with the U.S. The Taylor recommendation that de facto administrative changes be accomplished by persuasion at high levels, by cooperation with Diemʼs aides who want improved administration, and by a U.S. operating presence, has been largely effected. The job is not done, but it is being done rather well. Our people have shown remarkable ability to deal with the Vietnamese, to advise and assist effectively at every level from the hamlet to the Presidency, to meet and defeat the Viet Cong on their own ground and on their own terms.

Specifically, the GVN is cooperating effectively with us on counterinsurgency planning: our Committee for Province Rehabilitation and the GVN Inter-Ministerial Strategic Hamlet Committee are working together closely. They jointly review and approve (or send back to the drawing boards) plans for clear-and-hold operations.

Counterinsurgency project agreements are signed directly with Province Chiefs, and disbursement of funds is approved by joint committees on the ground. Priorities on the strategic hamlet program have been worked out jointly—a major objective of recent U.S. negotiating efforts. We have military advisers working with every province chief now; Diem has expressed great satisfaction with their relationship with his people and with the results. Our military participate in the planning of virtually all operations, and we have set up a joint U.S.-GVN operations center in Saigon.

On the fiscal side, we have the GVNʼs agreement to take part in the vital and sensitive business of drawing up their national budget for 1963. This is a concession we have long sought. On the information front, the GVN has agreed to the establishment of USIS field support posts in the provinces. Eleven have been set up and a total of 18 are planned.

E. Some Specific Results. Perhaps the most dramatic recent success in Viet-Nam is the mass exodus of nearly one-sixth of the Montagnard tribal population out of VC controlled areas. The Montagnards are seeking protection from VC exactions in some cases, simply fleeing a battlefield in others. But a significant proportion are willing and anxious to be trained, armed, and sent back into the hills. These trained and armed Montagnards are increasingly valuable in supplying intelligence on VC movements on Viet Namʼs long and exposed frontier.

The VC tried to increase their attacks under cover of the waning rainy season, but did not succeed. The dry season, which lasts until the end of May, will increase the effectiveness of the air monopoly which we enjoy in Viet-Nam.

Since July, GVN control over the rural population has increased by an estimated 2 per cent. The GVN now controls 49 per cent of the rural population, the VC about 9 per cent. Communications arteries have been reopened. Roads which formerly required an armed escort are now traveled freely. Night train service has been resumed.

As a result of US-supported rat and insect eradication programs, a bumper harvest was anticipated in the Central Provinces. Unfortunately, a typhoon wiped out much of the crop. But unlike last year, Viet-Nam now has adequate reserves of rice to meet this emergency. The program for rural health is moving ahead significantly. Twenty-five provincial surgical suites will be completed by the end of the year. One American surgical team is already in Can Tho, three others will soon be provided. New Zealand will send a team, Australia and the U.K. may also contribute. We have placed 1,300 radios in the villages and others are being rapidly provided for the remaining villages and hamlets; they have already proved very effective in summoning help when the Communists attack.

Third country support is substantial. Eleven other countries have contributed about 108 million dollars in aid. An international coordination group has been set up in Saigon to stimulate more third country aid and coordinate it. The Australians have sent military trainers, the U.K. an advisory mission. The June 2 report of the ICC on DRV aggression and subversion in SVN had an important effect on international opinion.

The Present Problem

Viet Cong armed attacks are down, but they still average 110 per week for this year. Government forces have suffered over 3,000 dead since January. Betrayals of strategic hamlets and paramilitary posts are still frequent. VC intelligence is probably still better than GVN intelligence. The VC have probably made progress in convincing some of the Vietnamese people and some of the uncommitted nations that Viet-Nam should be neutralized on the Laos pattern. Pressures for a conference on Viet-Nam, while not yet serious, may be expected to increase, particularly if the Viet-Cong continue to suffer military reverses.

The possibility remains that the DRV will decide to escalate the war by a dramatic increase in the quantity and quality of infiltration. The ICC presence discourages this, but does not obviate the possibility. Perhaps the greatest deterrent is the knowledge that escalation to the kind of near conventional war the Viet Minh fought against the French in the later stages of that struggle would make the VC forces more vulnerable to reactions from our conventional arms.

Probably the most important problem is simply keeping up the momentum of our joint efforts. This promises to be a long struggle. A shortage of piaster resources coupled with the U.S. gold problem is already troublesome. Continued sacrifice by the Vietnamese people and armed forces may produce war weariness. American casualties can be expected to increase. Our aid input must go on for a long time.

We shall intensify pressures for increased contributions from the Vietnamese and from other countries. But the best way to save American money will be the achievement of peace in Viet-Nam. We do not intend to achieve this by surrendering Viet-Namʼs independence at a Conference. The war in Viet-Nam is costing us about one per cent of our military budget. By next spring we may be able to predict whether the peak of these expenditures has been passed.

The Viet-Nam war is important. For Americans it has proved among other things that our people can live in the provinces and villages with Asian peasants and help them hold off the Communists and improve their lot. On a larger scale, a Communist victory would have a strong impact on all of our allies by tending to devalue our commitments to them. It would provide the DRV with the rice surplus it so badly needs, add 14 million vigorous people to the Communist Bloc, and give the Bloc a strategic salient into the heart of Free Asia. A victory for us would prove that our people can live in the villages with Asians and help them, that underdeveloped nations can defeat “wars of liberation” with our help, strike a telling blow to the mystique of the “wave of the future”, and save the tough and hard fighting Vietnamese people from the Communist regime they manifestly do not want.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Confidential. Drafted by Heavner and Wood on October 5. The source text was attached to a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, dated October 8, which stated that it had been prepared in response to a request by the President.

IX. Press Relations, Defoliation, Strategic Hamlets, and South Vietnamʼs Relations With Laos, October-NovemberIX. Press Relations, Defoliation, Strategic Hamlets, and South Vietnamʼs Relations With Laos, October-November

298. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307. Secret. Drafted by Wood on October 10; initialed by Rice and Wood; next to Johnsonʼs name on the source text is the word “Saw.”

299. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 12, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/10-1262. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

300. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, October 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Vietnam Correspondence. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Wood.

301. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Vietnamese Presidentʼs Political Counselor (Nhu)

Saigon, October 13, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 301 Laos-GVN. Confidential. Drafted by Nolting.

302. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell)

Saigon, October 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/10-1562. Confidential; Official-Informal. According to another copy, this letter was drafted by Barbour and Robert T. Burke of the Political Section on October 4 and cleared by Manfull and Trueheart. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: ERC 67 A 677, 350 GVN)

303. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Staff to the Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

Washington, October 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962. Secret. Drafted by Johnson. A copy was also sent to Henry D. Owen and Henry C. Ramsey of the Policy Planning Staff.

304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, October 18, 1962—8:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-1862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rice, cleared with S/S, and initialed by Harriman.

305. Memorandum for the Record

Saigon, October 21, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159. Top Secret. A notation on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record of the meeting. A note attached to the source text states that it had not been reviewed or cleared by any of the participants.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 20, 1962—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-2062. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

307. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, October 22, 1962—4:06 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/10-2262. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Harriman.

308. Letter From President Kennedy to President Diem

Washington, October 24, 1962.

Source: Department of state, Presidential Correspondence Files: Lot 66 D 476. Limited Official Use. Transmitted to Saigon in telegram 472, October 24, for delivery to Diem.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 25, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-2562. Secret. Repeated to Vientiane.

310. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 29, 1962—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.50/10-2962. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

311. Telegram From the Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the United States Information Agency

Saigon, November 5, 1962—5 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, USIS 1962. Drafted by Mecklin on November 1. Repeated by pouch to Bangkok and Manila and pouched to Vientiane and Phnom Penh.

312. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood)

Saigon, November 6, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.50/11-662. Personal; Secret. On the source text Wood had written “WAH[arriman]—a word here can sometimes help!” For Woodʼs reply, November 16, which was attached to the source text, see Document 318.

313. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, November 9, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 370.64. Secret.

314. Memorandum From the Aide to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Bagley) to the Chairman (Taylor)

Washington, November 12, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-239-69. Secret.

315. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, November 12, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385. Secret.

316. Letter From President Diem to President Kennedy

Saigon, November 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence Files: Lot 66 D 476.

317. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President

Washington, November 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text.

318. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, November 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.50/11-662. Secret; Official-Informal. Attached to Document 312.

319. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, November 17, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385. Secret. The source text is stamped “See Def has seen Nov 26 1962.”

320. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Saigon, November 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 3A, GVN 1962,RVNAF General. Secret; Official-Informal. According to another copy, the letter was drafted by Barbour and Manfull on November 17. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: 67 A 677, 350 GVN)

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 21, 1962—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/11-2162. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, CINCPAC, London, and Paris.

322. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Saigon, November 27, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Hilsman Trip 12/62-1/63. Secret; Noforn. Moore sent a copy of this memorandum to Murrow on December 10 (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field—Far East (IAF)), which was circulated by Forrestal to the Special Group on Counterinsurgency on January 28, 1963.

298. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 298. Memorandum From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, October 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

VIET-NAM: Decisions and Discussion at Honolulu Meeting, October 8, 19622

This is an unofficial résumé of decisions and discussions on Viet-Nam at the Honolulu Meeting, October 8, 1962. This paper is written for the information of Messrs. Johnson and Rice and for the record.

I. Decisions

1. Get a B-26 unit flown by RVNAF into action as soon as possible.

2. Expand VNAF as fast as possible.

II. Discussions

General Harkins Briefing and Secretary McNamaraʼs Comments and Decisions (At the Meeting)

General Harkins showed that VC battalion-sized operations had declined steadily. There were 8 in May, 1 each in June and July, and none in August or September. On the other hand, ARVN battalion-sized operations had increased from 156 to a high of 454 in August, down to 378 in September. VNAF sorties had increased from 150 in January to 628 in September. Ambassador Nolting commented that evidence from the VC showed that these operations were hurting them and that there was no evidence from the VC that they considered they were getting any propaganda advantages from them.

General Harkins and General Anthis pointed out that American pilots are flying 100 hours a month which could not be maintained and that more planes and personnel were needed now.

Secretary McNamara stated that the initial objective was for US not to carry the burden of the combat. The following objectives were agreed upon: a) To get a B-26 unit flown by Vietnamese pilots into action as soon as possible. In this connection to explore the use of VN C-47 pilots for B-26s, and the possible use of Chinese pilots in C-47s.

b) To expand the VNAF as fast as possible, having in mind Thuanʼs estimate that it could be expanded to 10,000.

c) Secretary McNamara said “If you really want more US pilots, make recommendations, but they will be received coolly”. The Secretary emphasized that our objectives are to help the Vietnamese fight their war and to reduce, not increase, our own combat role.

General Anthis showed that Farmgate operations had been successful in convoying trucks. An average of 32 convoys a month had been escorted by planes from January through June and this had increased to 178 in September. None of the convoys had so far been ambushed.

General Harkins continued that generally Vietnamese troops were staying out longer. One battalion had stayed out for 3 weeks. However, there were cases where Vietnamese soldiers were not as fit nor as well-led as they should be. Recently one group had eaten up all their food too soon and gotten their feet wet, etc., to the point where they had to be pulled back prematurely. The Ninth Division was now operational, the 26th Division (which would be Viet-Namʼs 10th) was due in January. Two additional VN airborne battalions and 2 VN Marine battalions are now ready. (General Timmes commented before the meeting that there are now 4 Vietnamese paratroop battalions, but that they were not much used; this was partly because it was easier to get troops in and out by helicopters.) The men and organizations needed to handle the last large arrivals of M113s and M114 personnel carriers are now ready. (The Secretary commented that although these vehicles are in short supply, more could be made available for Viet-Nam if needed.) Staff planning had improved but was still weak. Logistic support was better. CO and DOC training would be finished as scheduled by the end of the year. Mobile training teams for these outfits had not worked out well, but some of it was being continued. There was a new airfield at Pleiku. Helicopter training was now being carried out in Viet-Nam. Civilian Irregular Defence Groups (CIDG) had made good progress. The Strategic Hamlet program was OK. Intelligence had shown great improvement and was being better used.

Defoliation operations in the Delta were very successful. Six target areas would soon be finished. 100,000 leaflets were dropped each time one of these operations was carried out. (Secretary McNamara asked for further recommendations on defoliation. As to crop destruction, he told General Harkins to assume that he could get rapid Washington approval for substitution of test sites providing the same high standard of choosing these sites was maintained. It was agreed that General Delmore3 who was then in Honolulu would be sent back to Saigon to supervise crop destruction.)

54 junks had been delivered and although there was squabbling amongst the contractors, another 143 were to be delivered during October. There had been no sabotage recently in this program. The tropo-scatter was working.

General Harkins then presented his ideas for an explosive type operation. The concept had been approved by Secretary Thuan and President Diem. Even if there are 30,000 hard-core VC as estimated by the GVN (the US estimate is 20,000) their forces were far inferior to the Vietnamese who have the equivalent of 51 trained divisions. The objective, therefore, is to conduct a nation-wide offensive to exert sudden and continuing pressure on known areas of VC concentration. This required a planning phase, a preparatory phase, which would include saturation bombing against VC installations, especially in Zone D. Theoretically the explosive phase would consist of full-scale coordinated operations exploding at every level from the rice roots to the national level and finally follow-up operations. In replying to a question from General Taylor, General Harkins said that such an operation might have to be repeated several times. He emphasized the preparations which would be made, particularly in the chain of command which would eliminate the field command and bring it to General Tyʼs Joint Command Staff. (This had been accepted in principle by President Diem.) Improvement would also be made in the disposition of Vietnamese troops, prepositioning of equipment, intelligence training, planning, etc.

General Harkins did not have time to present his plan for phasing out US personnel in Viet-Nam within 3 years. It is understood that this would involve large increases in the US MAP for the next 3 years and for the Vietnamese Defense budget. It would also involve very large increases in the number of Vietnamese under arms. For example, an increase of the SDC to about 140.000.

Armed Helicopters (Corridor Discussion)

Several officers were asked about the July recommendation that helicopters be armed. The answers were generally unclear and somewhat discouraging. General Anthis pointed out that it was difficult to fire accurately from an armed helicopter due to vibration and that it presented a relatively stationary target to VC on the ground. He recognizes the political importance of improving protection for US helicopter crews and agreed that the helicopters should be armed, at least to see what could be done to improve the situation. Major General Rowny who has participated in the field tests leading to the Howza (?)4 report, and who is going to Viet-Nam to supervise research and development, was more optimistic. He was also anxious to conduct experiments in mounting 2.75 inch recoilless artillery in helicopters. This would permit the helicopters to remain at a greater distance and still inflict damage on the VC. Both he and General Anthis agreed that the best helicopter operation was to use fixed-wing aircraft to soften up an area with bombs, napalm, and strafing, then bring in the helicopters as quickly as possible.

… the reason for the delay in arming helicopters was the Air Force reluctance to have the Army demonstrate that its helicopters could be effectively armed. This was certainly reflected in remarks by Anthis to the effect that the helicopters were not designed as armed vehicles.

USIA (Corridor Discussion)

John Mecklin is asking for projectors and generators for all MAAG advisers. USIA is replying to the effect that he should look for all available in-country equipment and that USIA will then see what more can be added. It is believed that there is a great deal of in-country equipment. The total cost of Mecklinʼs request even if no in-country equipment is used would be about $200,000.

. . . . . . .

AID (Corridor Discussion)

Mr. Brent had no problems which required help from the Washington end. However, AID is concerned about reaching an understanding with DOD (Bill Bundy) about who will pay for the Strategic Hamlet kits in late FY 63 and thereafter. It is hoped that this will be worked out in Honolulu on October 9. AID is also stirring up some new ideas about how to get more done for the Vietnamese peasants. We will hear about this shortly.

. . . . . . .

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307. Secret. Drafted by Wood on October 10; initialed by Rice and Wood; next to Johnsonʼs name on the source text is the word “Saw.”

2 No other report on the Honolulu meeting has been found.

3 Brigadier General Fred J. Delmore, U.S. Army.

4 The question mark appears on the source text.

299. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 299. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 12, 1962—7 p.m.

423. Had talk with Thuan today in his Office at Presidency. After we had covered wide range of subjects, I said I had inferred from his remarks that there was nothing to the rumors that he had resigned from any or all of his jobs because of Presidentʼs displeasure concerning the alleged lottery scandal.2 Thuan directly confirmed that he had neither resigned nor been asked to resign. He said when he returned from America and Europe on October 5, he had immediately heard stories that he was in disgrace because of involvement in a lottery scandal. He recalled he had called me the next day and in response to my questioning as to how he was, he had said, “I am trying to find my way around”. He said he meant that he had not at that time seen President Diem and didnʼt know what this was all about. He said Ngo Dinh Nhu had told him that apparently his enemies were out to get him. I asked who these enemies were, and he said a number of non-Communist Vietnamese who thought he had become too powerful and, of course, the Viet Cong. He mentioned in the former category a number of businessmen and professional men who, he said, for reasons of their own, opposed the 57th tax, the stricter enforcement of income declarations and collections, the draft of officers and doctors, and other measures which he had advocated.

Thuan said he went to the President directly as soon as he could get to see him and asked him bluntly whether there was any basis to the rumors that the President was embarrassed or irate because of any actions of his or his wifeʼs; if so, he offered his resignation. Thuan said President Diem said there was no basis to the rumors that Thuan was in disgrace, that he had had the matter personally investigated and was convinced that Thuan had nothing to do with it, and that he wished him to continue in his present duties. Since then, as was evident from Thuanʼs previous discussion with me on matters recently discussed with Diem, he has been active in all phases of his previous work.

I told Thuan I was delighted to hear this and asked whether this applied to other members of the Cabinet, about whom there were similar rumors. He said that to his knowledge it applied to Vu Van Mau, Nguyen Luong (Minister of Finance), and Nguyen Van Luong (Minister of Justice). I asked about Dr. Tuyen and Minister Ngo Trong Hieu. He said he did not know about Dr. Tuyen, since he was not a Cabinet minister and was always involved in “secret undertakings about which I know little”. He also said he had not heard anything about the present status of Hieu.

While Thuan did not state specifically that there was no irregularity or scandal concerning the national lottery (nor did I ask him this directly), he did state that the rumors that his wife had been involved and arrested were absolutely false and the rumor that Madam Duc Loi was an aunt of his was absolutely false. He said that he did not know her. Thuan added that it seemed that every time he went away there was a concerted attempt to cut him down, mentioning his trip to Formosa in February and the fact that before he could get back after the bombing there were rumors afloat that he was responsible. He also remarked that all of those who were allegedly implicated in this affair were northerners, who, he implied, were special targets of other Saigonnaise factions.

One other point stated by Thuan: he said an important telegram he sent to President Diem after his talk with President Kennedy on Laos recognition problem and crop defoliation had never been received by Diem or by Nhu. The telegram had been received by Vu Van Mau, who had sent it in two copies, as is customary, to President Diem and to Counselor Nhu, but neither had received it. This indicated to his mind that someone in the palace was either negligent or untrustworthy.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/10-1262. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 In mid-September it was discovered that the Vietnamese National Treasury was missing 44 million piasters owned by the distributor of the national lottery tickets.

300. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 300. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, October 12, 1962.

Dear Fritz: As you know I remain concerned about the dangers of over-optimism in Viet-Nam. I am well aware that things are much improved since last year and I want you to know again how much credit you and the other members of the Saigon Task Force deserve. Although the tide may be turning in Viet-Nam, there is a danger that certain very serious problems may not be receiving the attention and action which they deserve here in Washington. I think we are by far safer in carrying out the Presidentʼs directive to save Viet-Nam if we lean in the direction of emphasizing our problems rather than our successes. In this connection I would appreciate your full and unvarnished views on the following matters which have come to my attention during and after the Honolulu Meeting.2

1) Are the villagers being armed fast enough? I take it that their priority comes after the Army, the Civil Guard, and the Self Defense Corps, and yet they are the ones who must usually resist the first attack until the Army, Civil Guard or Self Defense Corps can come to their assistance. It is my understanding that in the average village of about 2,000 inhabitants there are approximately 50 Republican Youth who are natives in the village who must resist the first attack and that there are not usually more than 10 rifles of ancient vintage available to them. Secretary McNamara has made it clear that we have plenty of rifles, carbines, etc. I would like to know if we can do more now to arm villagers who have received a reasonable degree of training from Civic Action teams or from the Popular Forces.

2) I gather that there have been delays in the arming of helicopters despite the fact that at the July Honolulu Meeting3 Secretary McNamara said that helicopters should be armed as rapidly as possible. From what I understand, the Air Force prefers the strategy of bombing and strafing an area with fixed-wing aircraft before bringing in helicopters. I also understand that they prefer this method because it would give them a larger role than arming helicopters which do not belong to the Air Force. While bombing and strafing an area before bringing in helicopters may provide greater safety it also runs the risk of killing more innocent Vietnamese. I hope that Major General Rowny, who I understand has recently arrived in Viet-Nam to be in charge of Combat Development and Testing, will push ahead with the arming of helicopters as rapidly as possible. Since the whole doctrine of using helicopters in counter-guerrilla war is now under development, I think that the helicopters should be armed urgently so that we can at least find out whether they won't give adequate protection to American armed forces personnel without the necessity of saturation bombing and strafing.

3) I was frankly concerned by General Harkins' presentation of the “Explosion” operation which he is considering. I believe that the VC would be tipped off before such an operation could possibly take place and that it would give them time to make themselves scarce. I am concerned that given the very large numbers and different types of armed forces now operating in Viet-Nam the attempt to carry out such an operation simultaneously throughout Viet-Nam would lead to chaos and the loss of many innocent lives. I fear that after it had occurred the Vietnamese armed forces would be in a weakened condition and that the VC could slip back into their old positions relatively easily. In sum, I am dubious about such an operation and I think that its political implications are so important that it should not be approved without full consultation with the Department of State.

4) I would like your views on whether we are doing everything possible to put in administrative support in villages which have been recently liberated. I realize that in areas like Zone B it is necessary to soften up the Viet Cong by jabbing attacks and serial action and that you canʼt put a team of civil administrators in the middle of a Viet Cong area where they could not survive. However, I hope that every feasible effort is being made to maintain the Vietnamese Governmentʼs presence after the military have swept a village.

5) While I realize that progress is being made in improving the GVNʼs image, for example President Diemʼs speech at the opening of the National Assembly,4 I am still concerned that the Viet Cong propaganda machine is more effective. In general I think that the question will be solved through concrete steps taken to help the villagers, while unfounded public claims by the GVN will only hurt their cause. I approve of the many steps being made to get information to the villagers through radios, newspapers, etc., but I think we should make a constant effort to dissuade the GVN from over-optimism and from overstating its case.

In general I feel that we are doing better militarily but that more must be done to help the villagers themselves, not only by arming them more rapidly but also socially and economically. I am aware that AID has revolutionized its procedures, greatly expanded its recruiting, and that it is fortunate in having Rufus Phillips to work under USOM Director Brent in pushing this part of their program vigorously. Nevertheless, the risks are so great that I am still concerned on this question.

I want to assure you that the purpose of this letter is to determine more accurately how I can carry out my job of meeting the Presidentʼs requirements in Viet-Nam and of supporting you on questions where I may be of help in order to carry out his directives.

It was a pleasure to have seen you in Honolulu and I am only sorry that Thai matters prevented us from being able to discuss the situation in Viet-Nam more fully.

Very sincerely yours,

W. Averell Harriman5

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 307, Vietnam Correspondence. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Wood.

2 See Document 298.

3 See Document 248.

4 Nolting commented that Diemʼs speech on October 1 and its reception were the “high-water marks” in an increasingly successful attempt to rally Vietnam to a national mobilization. (Telegram 367 from Saigon, October 1; Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/10-162)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

301. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Vietnamese Presidentʼs Political Counselor (Nhu) 301. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Vietnamese Presidentʼs Political Counselor (Nhu)1

Saigon, October 13, 1962.

Dear Mr. Counselor: I have already taken much time of your Governmentʼs officials, including the President, on the subject of relations with the Laotian Government, and I hope you will pardon my sending you this note on the subject to express once again my Governmentʼs strong hope that the Government of Viet-Nam will find a way to continue diplomatic relations with the Laotian Government. As undoubtedly reported to you by Minister Thuan, and as stressed by me to the President, President Kennedy personally has requested a reconsideration of your Governmentʼs position, in view of the stakes involved in this matter, not only of direct concern to the Government of Viet-Nam but also in the wider sense involving the position of the free-world countries in the Laotian affair. President Kennedy has made it plain to Minister Thuan and to me that, while he can guarantee nothing respecting the final outcome in Laos, the Free World Signatories of the Geneva Accords have chosen a course there best calculated, in his judgment, to benefit stability in Southeast Asia and eventually to protect the frontiers of Viet-Nam against Viet Cong infiltration. The success of this endeavor depends in great measure on the solidarity of the free countries signatory to the Geneva Accords in pressing by diplomatic means for the fulfillment of those Accords by the Communist Bloc countries and by the Government of Laos. President Kennedy feels that the United States has the right to ask for the continued cooperation of the Government of Viet-Nam in this matter. He also recognizes and appreciates the fact that your Government has gone along thus far even despite grave misgivings. He feels that it would be a great mistake to break diplomatic relations at this point, regardless of what the Laotian Government may do in recognizing the Hanoi regime.

I would ask your consideration, therefore, of a similar case with which Chancellor Adenauer was confronted, of which I am sure you are aware. As you know, the Federal Republic of Germany has for years taken a stand similar to yours—namely, that it will not accept two German ambassadors representing the two parts of divided Germany. The United States has fully supported this position. Nevertheless, there has been one single exception to this policy, namely in Moscow. This exception was made by the Federal Republic of Germany for overriding practical reasons and as an isolated exception to a general policy. This exception has not only been maintained as an isolated case, not creating a precedent, but has also had practical, beneficial results for the Federal Republic of Germany. I hope it has been reported to you that the United States has offered to do everything it can to support your Government in confining a similar exception to your rule to the single instance of Laos.

It appears that the presentation of credentials of the representative from Hanoi is imminent and I therefore take the liberty of requesting a prompt reconsideration of this question in the light of the factors above, and in view of the repeated requests from my authorities in Washington on this matter.

I am sending this letter to you inasmuch as I have not had the opportunity to discuss the matter with you personally, although I have done so with the President and other members of the Government.

With best wishes and regards,

Sincerely yours,

Frederick E. Nolting, Jr.2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 301 Laos-GVN. Confidential. Drafted by Nolting.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

302. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell) 302. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Cottrell)1

Saigon, October 15, 1962.

Dear Cot: I have received your letter of September 112 which listed eleven questions asked by Ed Rice about Viet-Nam.

These are, as you know, some (but not all) of the complex and broad questions to which we are constantly seeking the answers and which we are attempting to cover as completely as possible in our reporting. The replies below are therefore but brief treatments of subjects which our reporting deals with in more detail. They are numbered to correspond with the numbers of your questions.

1. Because of the nature of a guerrilla warfare in which the enemy not only mingles with the friendly or uncommitted population but is frequently indistinguishable from such population in dress or manner, aerial bombing and strafing present recognized problems. The Operations Control Center uses the utmost care in selecting and cross-checking its targets against all available intelligence and we are constantly trying to refine these procedures. They are, in fact, as rigid and restrictive as any enforced in any combat area. Furthermore, there is no doubt in my mind that President Diem, the Vietnamese Air Force Commander and all others concerned are fully aware of the harmful effects, political, psychological, and military, of misdirected or inaccurate bombing. They are trying as hard as we to keep these to the absolute minimum. As to the effect of an air stake on the people in a VC-occupied village, we can assume it is not good. But so long as the VC conceal themselves among non-combatants, some of these will suffer, too. On the other hand, all available intelligence shows that the VC are being hurt by air operations and that the populace is not being driven into the communists' arms by them. So far, then, aerial bombing has done considerably more good than harm and the continued improvement in intelligence will further reduce the margin for error. Vietnamese tactical air support of army operations and its role in the relief of beleaguered hamlets have increased greatly during the past year, and in such operations the danger to a non-VC populace is greatly reduced. There are no indications that napalm is resented more than the rockets, bombs, or machine guns used by the Vietnamese air force in tactical operations. On the general subject of VC versus civil casualties see our telegram 376.3 For an account of the care exercised in bombing see also Bill Trueheartʼs letter of September 7 . …

2. In some cases the arming of hamlet militia has been delayed on the grounds that the local authorities were still in the process of determining the reliability of those they propose to arm, a position difficult to quarrel with. The usual pattern in the case of completed strategic hamlets seems to be to give the hamlet militia a small arsenal consisting of shotguns and old French weapons and to improve these gradually as better arms become available and the hamlet organization develops. It thus happens that strategic hamlets are sometimes attacked while they still have inadequate arms with which to defend themselves. Two points should be noted in this connection, however: a. An attempt is frequently made to protect insufficiently armed hamlets through the assignment of civil guard or SDC personnel.

b. One of the primary VC sources of arms in the past has been weapons captured from friendly Vietnamese forces. The chances of such losses occurring are, of course, increased when the Personnel in question are inadequately trained or their loyalty has been inadequately checked. But we know of no case where a hamlet had to show its willingness to withstand a VC attack in order to become eligible for weapons. This, obviously, would be nonsensical.

3. Many of Ed Riceʼs questions are phrased in terms of villages and villagers when I believe that hamlets and their inhabitants are meant. To clarify, Vietnamese provinces are divided into districts, which are in turn divided into villages. (In some of the larger, more sparsely populated provinces there is an intermediate unit called the canton.) Villages are primarily administrative subdivisions of a district. Their councils are appointed, usually by the district chief. Several hamlets are usually found within the village area, one of which may also be the village headquarters. Most of the people therefore are grouped in the hamlets, which are the smallest and most numerous unit of habitation-not in the villages. There has as yet been no attempt to arrange for the free election of village councils, but it is the avowed goal of the strategic hamlet program to provide that each hamlet council be so elected. Elections have not yet been held in all of the strategic hamlets on the grounds that many are not yet ready for them. As to whether they are really “free,” I can only report that balloting is secret and there is a choice of candidates. Instructions to hamlet cadres insist on these two elements but point out that if the cadre has done his job well, the proper candidates will be elected. Despite this paradox, there appears no doubt that a real thrust toward free elections at the hamlet level is being felt and that perhaps as much progress in this direction is currently being made as could be hoped for.

4. It is true that the poorest inhabitants are bearing the brunt of unpaid work on strategic hamlet defenses. Those who are better off are also called on to make their contribution but can do so by giving cash or hiring someone else to do the necessary work. In defense of the procedure it might be noted: a. That most of the strategic hamlets established to date have been financed without direct U.S. support and with limited means;

b. That the construction labor is a temporary contribution which does result in increased protection for the inhabitant and thereby directly benefits those working on the project;

c. In the case of current clear-and-hold operations and those which are expected to be initiated with increasing frequency in the future, we are hoping the GVN will provide minimal remuneration for work accomplished, perhaps compensation in kind with PL 4804 commodities.

5. The government does have an inspection service for dealing with corruption, among officials in the provinces. There also exists a Presidentʼs “letter box” to which complaints alleging misconduct may be addressed. While this machinery may not be adequate, there is evidence that efforts are being made to eliminate lower and middle level abuses. In the press there is a constant campaign devoted to exposing misdeeds, and editorial comment calling on the people to denounce, and on the government to punish, all cases of official corruption.

6. Most strategic hamlets do not involve relocation. The most common practice is simply to build fences around the existing settlement. In some cases those outside the perimeter are moved within, but they continue to work their own land and remain within easy walking distance of it. On the other hand, some combat hamlets, such as those in Operation Sunrise, involve relocation. Our experience so far has been that it was both wise and necessary to move the villagers into combat hamlets in the Sunrise operation, which was carried out in an area which had been held by the VC. By relocating these people they were brought back under GVN control, the logistic support they provided the VC was reduced, and they were offered a better and more secure life. On the basis of this experience and similar situations in other provinces we support the combat hamlet regroupment concept.

7. ARVN and civil guard misbehavior is a chronic problem, but here again the trend is an encouraging one. Military civic action is still just getting off the ground, but the concept of the good soldier as a friend of the people is being accepted. Foraging in VC areas will undoubtedly continue, and there is probably little that can be done about it at this time. On the other hand, outright crimes are usually punished when an officer hears about them. Additional fundamental progress is primarily an educational matter, and this is a slow procedure. The SDC, being the least disciplined organization, most removed from regular units and most in contact with the people in the hamlets, is, as you pointed out, the worst offender. I personally believe their low pay is a contributing element in this problem. Their 900 piasters per month salary was originally set up when the SDC was considered to be a part-time organization. It has since clearly become an onerous, dangerous full-time job. While squad and platoon leaders have recently been given small increases, the SDC continues to bear the brunt of VC pressure, continues to receive the lowest pay, and continues to have the fewest fringe benefits. A problem arises in finding the necessary piasters to raise SDC pay, however. As in the case of hamlet labor, we are considering augmenting their compensation by PL 480 commodities.

8. The answer to question number 8 is contained in a number of recent economic reports, particularly airgrams 134 and 140.5 As the question suggests, some basic reforms are needed. Plans are currently underway to distribute large quantities of fertilizer to Vietnamese farmers. The details, including the question of whether or not free distribution should be made, are currently under discussion.

9. I do not consider that a serious problem arises from any impression that we are replacing the French in their colonial rule. This is, of course, a theme on which communist propaganda has relied heavily, but it may be expected that such propaganda will continue despite any action on our part. It is also true that as Westerners in an Asiatic land we have a physical resemblance to the French and other European colonizers. There is, however, general recognition of our fundamental differences from the former French administration, namely, that we have not infringed on the sovereignty of the Vietnamese government or people, that our actions are directed toward assisting them, and our programs are largely carried out by the Vietnamese themselves. Many of these same considerations are true with respect to the question of whether the American presence here has reached a counter-productive level. I believe that it is generally recognized that we are here to assist. In light of the difficult conditions under which both the Americans and Vietnamese are operating, the evidences of faction have been remarkably slight.

10. The role of northerners in the GVN is less a source of criticism than it was several years ago. While regionalism is still very much present in the Vietnamese mentality, and a native of one area is quick to make slighting generalizations about those from another, the past years have had an homogenizing effect. Thus, I do not think Diemʼs administration is handicapped by the use of northerners.

Diemʼs alleged favoritism of Catholics is more of a problem, for many actions take place which are unjustified and are attributed to his own favoritism of Catholics. A current source of concern in this area is a report that the Phu Yen province chief, with whom we have worked exceptionally well, is to be relieved because of his failure to get along with a very active Catholic priest in the province.6 There are reports that many officials in the government and officers in the army believe the only way to get ahead is to be or become a Catholic. It may well be that the alleged favoring of Catholics is based less on what the policy actually is, however, than on what those involved believe it to be.

There remains the presence and insidious influence of the Can Lao in the government. The Can Lao, however, seems to have lost momentum during the past year or two. It is no longer the feared machinery for intrigue and inquisition, for individual success or failure, that it used to be. The factions within it are more divided today than they have been previously. Ngo Dinh Canʼs Central Viet-Nam wing is probably even more estranged from Ngo Dinh Nhuʼs Southern branch than it was in the past and various favored groups outside the Can Lao have come into being. The party still maintains its military groupings and economic interests, however, and these undoubtedly are a source of insecurity and irritation on the part of businessmen and army officers.

11. The answer to question 11 may be found in the portion of our weekly progress report cable number 313 which deals with a breakdown of VC and GVN control of areas here.7

With personal best wishes to Ed & you.

Sincerely,

Fritz

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/10-1562. Confidential; Official-Informal. According to another copy, this letter was drafted by Barbour and Robert T. Burke of the Political Section on October 4 and cleared by Manfull and Trueheart. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: ERC 67 A 677, 350 GVN)

2 Document 282.

3 Dated October 3. It stated that incident and casualty figures were only two of many factors taken in assessing the progress of the war. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/10-362)

4 Formally entitled the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954, P.L. 480 provided for the donation of U.S. agricultural surpluses to friendly governments; for text see 68 Stat. 454.

5 Airgram 134, September 13, transmitted a paper on Vietnamʼs economic problems and suggested possible remedies. (Department of State, Central Files, 851K.00/9-1362) Airgram 140, September 17, transmitted a political and economic assessment of the situation in Vietnam at that time. (Ibid., 751K.00/9-1762)

6 I have just been told that Maj. Dong (Phu Yen Prov. Chief) is to remain with Diemʼs full support. FEN. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 Dated September 18. This Task Force Saigon weekly progress report stated that the Government controlled 49% of the population; the Viet Cong 9%, and the rest remained in dispute. (Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/9-1862)

303. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Staff to the Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 303. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the Policy Planning Staff to the Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)1

Washington, October 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

The Situation in Central Vietnam

On Friday, October 12, I had an interesting talk with John Heble, the U.S. Consul in Hue, about the situation in Central Vietnam. The Consul in Hue has always gotten around the countryside much more than any other US diplomatic official in Vietnam. When I prepared my paper on the “Central Government and the Countryside”2 I found the reports of Mr. Heble and his predecessor among the most useful sources of information on the situation. Since his return to Washington, Mr. Hebleʼs relatively pessimistic reports on the present situation in Central Vietnam have provoked a good deal of interest; Governor Harriman and Ed Rice have taken a personal interest in them. Following are the principal points made by Mr. Heble in his talk with me: 1. The situation in Central Vietnam can be characterized in general as one in which the rate of deterioration of the Central Governmentʼs position has been reduced but deterioration itself has not stopped.

2. In Central Vietnam the strategic hamlet program is mostly pure facade. Often creation of a so-called strategic hamlet involves nothing but a very inadequate fence around one-quarter of the hamlet. This in itself might not be so significant since, while the hamlet fences have become the symbol of the strategic hamlet program, other elements are of equal or greater importance. However, in Central Vietnam the “strategic hamlet” begins and ends with such a fence. There is no other effort to improve the defenses of the hamlet and nothing at all to improve the internal situation in the village in connection with the strategic hamlet program. In part this failure may be the result of differences between brothers Can and Nhu. Can is unconvinced as to the value of the strategic hamlet program. More generally, however, it reflects customary defects of Vietnamese administration-its basic inability to handle such a program, particularly with the speed that is presently being demanded. The result is failure combined with an effort to cover up failure through superficial compliance which can be reported to the Central Government as full compliance.

3. The villagers in Central Vietnam can see no advantage in the strategic hamlet program and they complain because work on the hamlets takes them away from their fields. Province and district chiefs with whom Heble has talked admit that the strategic hamlet program has had no effect whatsoever on the number of VC attacks, etc.

4. Canʼs Popular Force is in Hebleʼs view a much more promising approach to the problem of security in the hamlet and village. This program is based upon the realization that the VC are much more deeply rooted in the village than the Government has been willing to admit. Experience in Central Vietnam suggests that about 1/3 of the males in any village are likely to be active VC collaborators. You can build all the hamlet defenses you wish, but if you leave the VC cadres in the village untouched you will not increase the villagersʼ sense of security and his willingness to collaborate with the Government.

5. Can recruits his Popular Force on a volunteer basis. Its members are given training which is comparable to US Marine boot camp training in its rigor. Members of the force are required to work all day and much of the night. After a few weeks of training members are given the option of leaving, of taking a somewhat easier administrative job in the Popular Force, or of staying on in the military units of the force. The Popular Force has a good deal of esprit and has something of the same appeal to the youth possessed by the VC. It offers adventure and dedication to a cause.

6. After training, a Popular Force unit of 150 men is put in a village. The members live with the villagers and help them in the fields, in the construction of public works, etc. over a period of six months. The members are strongly disciplined and behave in a proper manner toward the villagers. After working all day members of the force spend much of the night on military patrols and forays against the VC. They use VC tactics, hitting the VC when they outnumber them or can achieve surprise and retreating from the village when attacked by a stronger VC force. Their activities create a sense of gratitude on the part of villagers—a feeling that the Government is interested in the village and its welfare. The Popular Force builds up an intelligence net and gradually begins to get the cooperation of the villagers. Even more significant, VC cadres in the village begin to defect. (Although interrogations have provided some information on the reasons for such defection, a more intensive effort is going to be made by Can to determine the reasons.) After six months or so, when the Popular Force feels it has rooted out the VC organization, has developed the village defenses and has created an intelligence net it moves on to another village. In Hebleʼs view the strategic hamlet program can make sense only if it is made an adjunct to such an effort as this. At the same time he cautioned that if the Popular Force concept is introduced generally in Vietnam—and there is some present trend in this direction—it may not be effective in areas where Can does not control it.

7. There has been a struggle between Can and Nhu over the Popular Force. Until recently Nhu and Thuan tightly controlled the Central Governmentʼs support for the Popular Force and it was largely dependent upon local resources in Central Vietnam. Recently, however, Diem has been convinced of the desirability of increasing support for the Popular Force and has reduced Nhuʼs and Thuanʼs control over its finances. …

8. In Central Vietnam about the only welfare program of the Central Government that reaches the villager or hamlet dweller is the program for elimination of crop pests. This program, for which we supply much of the support, has done an effective and important job of significantly increasing crop yields. When I asked Heble what sort of welfare programs he would recommend he mentioned small public works—especially roads and small irrigation works.

9. A general exception to Hebleʼs statements about the ineffectiveness of Government programs was his view of the Montagnard program. The Government has in recent months been doing a much more effective job with the Montagnards. Nonetheless he is a little afraid that there may be a gap in planning between the kind of immediate relief activity in which the Government is presently engaged and its longer term resettlement programs. I mentioned to him that I had had a similar concern as reflected in my paper but had been assured by Bill Trueheart and others that, in fact, the Government was moving beyond the immediate welfare stage.

10. Mr. Heble confirmed what I have heard before with respect to intelligence; namely, that while intelligence on the VC has improved as a result of improved organization and efficiency of military intelligence collecting system, cooperation of the villagers in providing intelligence has not significantly improved. This failure is, of course, a significant indicator of the inability so far of the Central Government to obtain the loyalty and cooperation of the rural populace. The Popular Force program has, in the limited areas where it has been developed, resulted in improved intelligence from the rural population.

11. Heble emphasized the need for better training of officials, particularly those in immediate contact with the rural population. The rural populace rarely saw officials above the level of district chief. Heble thought that a training program directed in the first instance at the district chiefs would be of considerable utility. This is, of course, the suggestion I made in my paper. Heble also agreed that there could be real value in using visits to districts and provinces where an effective job is being done as part of a training program for district chiefs and others. It provided one means by which one could hope to change the attitudes of district officials.

12. Heble also agreed with my conclusion that the election of hamlet councils under present circumstances had little, if any, value in providing a channel of communication between the Government and the countryside. As long as the councils were fundamentally the instrument of the central Government for the imposition of certain programs in the countryside, truly free elections would be difficult to achieve and even if achieved would not produce a body that could serve as a channel of communication. Heble believes that the establishment of such channels of communication is of considerable importance.

Comment: I did not attempt to check all of the proposals in my paper with Mr. Heble. However, his account of the situation in Central Vietnam confirms the validity of the recommendations to which his remarks had a bearing. At Ed Riceʼs invitation I chatted with him (Ed) Monday about what further actions we might take in Vietnam and I am contemplating following up that conversation with a memo.3

1 Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Vietnam 1962. Secret. Drafted by Johnson. A copy was also sent to Henry D. Owen and Henry C. Ramsey of the Policy Planning Staff.

2 See footnote 3, Document 249.

3 A copy of this 2-page memorandum, dated October 18, is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron.

304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, October 18, 1962—8:24 p.m.

459. To Nolting from Harriman. Deptel 331, Embtel 438 and Vientianeʼs 620 repeated Saigon 173.2 I must tell you frankly that it will be diplomatic defeat if Diem severs relations with Laos.

Diem cannot expect us to accept his refusal, in affronting disregard of request from the President, to stay in the fight to preserve Laos, Laos being on his own doorstep. This is a fight which he should be helping us wage with all vigor.

Diemʼs stubbornness and personal feelings are understood, but there comes a time when being a good ally requires laying them aside and cooperating to make joint policies work. This is such a time, and you should now put the matter to Diem in such terms.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-1862. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rice, cleared with S/S, and initialed by Harriman.

2 Telegram 620, October 18, reported that the North Vietnamese Ambassador would arrive soon and present his credentials. (Ibid.) Telegram 438, October 17, stated that South Vietnam would break relations with Laos if the North Vietnamese Ambassador presented his credentials. (Ibid., 651J.51K/10-1762) Regarding telegram 331, see footnote 3, Document 292.

305. Memorandum for the Record 305. Memorandum for the Record1

Saigon, October 21, 1962.

SUBJECT

Meeting at Gia Long Palace, Saigon, Saturday, 20 October 1962

ATTENDANCE

Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu, Political Advisor to the President

The Honorable Frederick E. Nolting, Jr., United States Ambassador

Admiral Harry D. Felt, Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Honorable Edward J. Martin, CINCPAC Polad

Mr. Nhu met his visitors at the door to his office and, after everyone was seated, asked Admiral Felt how the SEATO meeting had progressed.2 Admiral Felt answered that he thought that the meetings had been successful and had been concerned principally with the refinement of the latest plan. He commented that, of the four plans which had been prepared up to now, three of them concerned South Vietnam.

Mr. Nhu then asked the Admiral what he thought of the situation in Laos. Admiral Felt held up his crossed fingers and said that we must hope for the best. Ambassador Nolting explained that crossed fingers meant, in Vietnam, “nothing doing”. The Ambassador then said that the Phoumi charges concerning the locations of North Vietnamese Communist units had been delivered to the International Control Commission. He added that the forces which were working in Laos appeared to be driving Phouma more to the right. Admiral Felt agreed, and said, in confidence, that that very morning the Pathet Lao had launched attacks in direct violation of the Geneva Agreements. He could not, he said, understand what their interest could be in doing this. Ambassador Nolting agreed that it was difficult to understand what they could gain by such violations. Mr. Nhu stated that these actions could be the result of the fact that there were many factions, many “tendances” within the Communist element. The Ambassador commented that there was not much coordination between the factions. Mr. Nhu then volunteered his personal opinion that the two North Vietnamese regiments which were in Laos did not want to return to Hanoi. They wanted to come to South Vietnam—which was contrary to the desires of their leaders in the North. He then said that last year, there had been a meeting in Hanoi which had been presided over by the Chinese. At the meeting zones had been assigned within South East Asia—including Vietnam, Malaya, Thailand, Burma and Cambodia in connection with the settlement of the Laotian question. North Vietnamʼs task was to provide two regiments which would operate in the South. Since that time, authorities in Hanoi had decided to replace the two regiments in South Vietnam by two regiments which were more reliable and the two units originally assigned to South Vietnam were ordered to the area surrounding Saravane. This action created doubts within the two regiments which had been reassigned and their morale was affected by the knowledge that they were not trusted. They had sent emissaries to Mr. Nhu with the request that he take a strong position against neutralism in Laos—since the realization of this state would result in their forced return to North Vietnam—which they did not want.

Admiral Felt then asked what the monthly rate of defection was. Mr. Nhu said that he did not know but that it was increasing because of the growth in the number of strategic hamlets. He went on to say that the defection of officers remained a question of the individual and that the surrender of entire units still remained in the contact-negotiation phase. He then told the story of how, in Khien Phong Province, a leader—Colonel—of the Viet Cong had been seriously wounded during an offensive operation carried out by government forces. A check of the serial numbers of this officerʼs pistol (which Mr. Nhu produced and showed to his visitors) revealed that the wounded man was a person who had been favorable to the government. Generally, said Mr. Nhu, the dissatisfied Viet Cong troops wanted no part of neutrality in Laos. One of their leaders, a General, had attended a number of meetings held by the Communist chiefs and had reported that one must not believe that the Communists really wanted a neutral Laos. He had added that the creation of the present government in Laos had served to demoralize the factions in the North who were opposed to the Communist regime. Ambassador Nolting then asked Mr. Nhu if he thought that there were many malcontents in the North. Mr. Nhu replied that, although the number of people who were opposed to the Communist government was important, they were not properly organized. Reverting to his discussion of the two regiments he said that some of the troops were willing to return to North Vietnam, but most of them would rather return to the South. He added that a peculiar problem had been raised by the possibility of the Russiansʼ refusal to supply the Communist regiments in Laos. If this occurred Hanoi would be forced to take care of them. Meanwhile, the effect of this problem was felt in Zone “D”. It had been planned that this area would be stocked in a manner to provide for the needs of a division. Recently, however, the plan had been upset. Operations carried out by forces of the Government of South Vietnam had resulted in the loss of one-third of these supplies. Another third had been stolen to meet the needs of the two regiments in Laos. This was why it was necessary, concluded Mr. Nhu, for the government to launch an operation which would result in the seizure of the remaining stocks, leaving the projected VC division hungry. In reply to Ambassador Noltingʼs question, he said that he did not believe that the effective of a complete division were actually in Zone “D”.

Mr. Nhu then said that he believed that the doctrine of Mao Tse Tung contained a basic fallacy. According to Mao there was a natural progression from guerrilla activity—through irregular forces to conventional warfare. The fallacy became evident when the Viet Cong tried to progress to the stage of irregular forces and found that they did not have popular support. This was the reason for their many recent failures, to which mobility of regular government forces and improved counter-guerrilla tactics had contributed a great deal. He ended this part of his statement by saying that there was a direct connection between the events in Laos and the Viet Cong plans for Zone “D”, adding that the Geneva solution of the Laotian problem had caused much hesitancy among the Viet Cong forces which had been sent to Saravane.

Ambassador Nolting then asked Mr. Nhu for a clarification of what he had said. Did he mean, asked the Ambassador, that the continuation of Pathet Lao control on the borders of South Vietnam was an encouragement for the defection of Viet Cong troops and an advantage for the side of the Government of South Vietnam. Mr. Nhu answered that he thought that it could be—if we could inspire confidence in the defectors. He said that he had met with their spokesmen twice, only, but that they had spoken at length with their old friends now in the South. Many of them, he felt, were serious minded men. Eight or nine months ago they were worried about the results of the Geneva Conferences. From the standpoint of basic doctrine, as well as that of strategy, they were opposed to neutrality—recognizing it as merely a step toward communism. When Ambassador Nolting pointed out that these people continued to fight on the side of the Communists, Mr. Nhu said that their approach to him was with the objective of finding out what the government had to offer. They saw the American approval of neutralism in Laos and an aberration—and asked—“if they fought for real freedom, who could they count on to fight along side them?” When Ambassador Nolting insisted that, in Vietnam, there was no question of neutralism, Mr. Nhu answered that he believed this, but that others asked, in view of Laos, where the United States policy would stop. He then went on to say that there was a decalage—an echelonment in time between the psychology of the United States and that of the under-developed countries of Southeast Asia and the captive nations of Europe. This, he said, was the greatest worry of those who were hesitant about which cause they should support. The second reason, he added, was himself. The concept of the strategic hamlets had been accepted as a stroke of genius. But, people said, you, Mr. Nhu are an intellectual and you have tended to surround yourself with intellectuals who are incapable of realistic action. This is a cause for their hesitancy now—and later. Mr. Nhu then made reference to the Dulles policy—which he said was still being applied to Southeast Asia. He said that the Dulles concept, which he described as a concept of a personal universe, was better understood outside America—particularly in the under-developed countries of Southeast Asia and the captive countries of Europe. Ambassador Nolting then protested that the world picture of the Dulles policy was wrong—an illusion. He said that Dulles was a firm man—that he was credited with having said that “there was no morality in neutralism” but. insisted the Ambassador, the basic policy expounded by Mr. Dulles was the same as that of the present administration. He added that Mr. Rusk, as well as Mr. Dulles and before him Mr. Acheson and he, himself, saw things alike. Mr. Nhu replied that, perhaps there was an illusion—an optical illusion—but he felt that dealing with neutralism was dealing from a position of guilt. He said that he had the impression that the government in Washington was above prejudice. When it dealt with under-developed countries or the captive countries of Europe it was, in a sense, like the dealings of Russia with Albania. Once again he used the word “decalage”, (an echelonment in time) to explain that the continuation of the Dulles policy vis-à-vis the nations of Southeast Asia was similar to the Russian, or Khrushchev, policy vis-à-vis Communist China—still considered to be operating under the policies outlined by Stalin. This, Mr. Nhu went on to explain, was one of the reasons for the misunderstanding over the settlement in Laos. It has caused hesitancy on the part of the anti-Communists in the North. Vietnam, he reminded his guests, has been at war for twenty three years. It cannot afford to settle for an intellectual ideal. To be objective equals folly. For the past six months, he emphasized, the war has been intense. The people have been convinced that they have been fighting for a just cause—one worth dying for. Now they are told that they must die for half this cause. Ambassador Nolting asked, at this point, what we could do. Given the fact, he said, that there is an agreement which we are committed to uphold, what could be done to reaffirm our resolution? Mr. Nhu replied that Washington should realize that they must not let go of the prey to grasp the shadow. South Vietnam is at war, he said, she must not be sacrificed for the shadow of Laos and Cambodia. When the Ambassador said that the United States had no intention of doing this, Mr. Nhu insisted that the position of South Vietnam had been weakened in favor of an overall policy for Southeast Asia—which exists, he added, only because of the solid spiritual and political strength of Vietnam. He then said that the policy of the Communists should be emulated. They had worked toward the consolidation of the North—and the spread of revolution in the South. We should reverse this by consolidating the South and spreading revolution to the North. Ambassador Nolting suggested that the word “magnetize” be substituted for the word revolution. Mr. Nhu agreed, with the proviso that the effort be a solid one. The thinking in Washington, he thought, was somewhat abstract—adding that he could ask for nothing better than to be mistaken. He went on to say that Vietnam certainly did not want to precipitate clashes. He then referred to Mr. Harrimanʼs written account of the Yalta Agreements pointing out that these agreements rested on the signature and the word of Stalin.3 He quoted Harrimanʼs question in which he asked Stalin why he had not lived up to the agreements—and Stalinʼs answer that the conditions which had made the agreements necessary no longer prevailed. Mr. Nhu then said that the events in Laos were the direct consequence of the Vienna discussions between Khrushchev and Kennedy.4 Ambassador Nolting reminded him that at the time of the Vienna meeting, some twenty months ago, the Communists were doing very well in Laos and conditions there were in their favor. Also, he added, the tension which existed in Laos was not the same as that which prevailed at Yalta. In Laos, the Communists had created the tension themselves and were free to lift it whenever they chose to do so. He then asked Mr. Nhu if he thought that Khrushchev wanted real neutrality in Laos. Mr. Nhu replied that the actions of the countries of the Free World were such that the initiative was always left with the Communists. The “agreements” in Laos were entirely dependent upon the will of Khrushchev. Why, he said, canʼt we provoke an anti-Communist movement through our own initiative? When Ambassador Nolting referred to the present policy of the United States, Mr. Nhu retorted that Americans, ideologically, think that governments really govern. Passing over Ambassador Noltingʼs remark that this was true in the United States, Mr. Nhu said that, in under-developed countries control of the people had to be established at hamlet level. How, he asked, could Phouma or Phoumi hope to do this? In Vietnam, he added, the government in Saigon could be changed 36 times and the people would never know it. We must think seriously, he said, of organizing the villages in Laos—and in Thailand. If the villages are not held, there is no hope of stopping Communist progress. Ambassador Nolting then said that Phouma had expressed his intention to travel extensively throughout the country. Mr. Nhu retorted that President Diem had been traveling throughout Vietnam for eight years. He was adored by the population, but there still remained the question of organizing the masses. For this, he added, there must be a revolution. In Thailand and Cambodia this was equally true. In Thailand the great difficulty lay in the fact that two revolutions would be necessary. There, the Army and the police constitute two separate forces. Reorganization of the villages would involve paramilitary forces—the police—and consequently the Ministry of the Interior. The Army, of course, would not approve and there would consequently have to be two revolutions—one at the summit—and the other in the villages. In Laos too, added Mr. Nhu, there would have to be a revolution and if this revolution is not better than the one which the Pathet Lao have to offer, the country will be lost. Ambassador Nolting at this point commented that, when Phouma visited Washington5 he was asked his views on social and economic reform. The general impression gathered from his answers was that he had a good fundamental program. Mr. Nhu interjected the facetious remark that Phouma had promised such things as hospitals and schools. The Ambassador insisted that Washington was convinced that Phouma had ideas which went deeper and that he was genuinely interested in reform. Mr. Nhu commented that reform was not enough—there had to be a real revolution.

Mr. Nhu next said that he had discussed some of his theories with an American journalist. This man had told him that if he really carried them out he was working toward his own destruction. Nhuʼs answer to him was that “unless the seed die, there can be no new harvest”. He then, once again, spoke of the “decalage” or time gap in Washington thinking. Ambassador Nolting admitted that there was a tendency on the part of Americans to think of governments doing what they say they will do vis-a-vis the people. Still, he added, responsible people in the United States Government were beginning to understand more and more what Mr. Nhu had said about the need to win over the people at the basic hamlet level. Mr. Nhu agreed that this was good but insisted that the need for social revolution in under-developed countries should be appreciated. Cambodia, he said, was a country in which this was not realized. Sihanouk wanted no part of agricultural reform or of any other revolutionary move. He was content to hide behind the “alibi” of nationalism. Ambassador Nolting commented that this was somewhat like the Sukarno government in Indonesia. Mr. Nhu then went on to say that in 1945, the need for revolution was not appreciated. When he had said to the French Commander, during the period of Japanese occupation, that it was time to do something about reform and independence, the Admiral had said, “Yes—after we have achieved victory”. It was useless to tell him that, without reforms, there would be no victory. The need in all the Southeast Asian countries was for an economic and social revolution. Governments could not prevail unless they themselves carried out this revolution.

Ambassador Nolting then reminded Mr. Nhu that he had continuously expressed the hope that South Vietnam would keep its representation in Laos. Mr. Nhu said that there would still be a South Vietnam presence in Laos, though, he added in response to Admiral Feltʼs question, there would be no Embassy. Perhaps, he said, there would be Consulates—and by his manner implied that there would be other forms of presence. He then said, somewhat lightly, that the Laotian Embassy would remain in Saigon—though the only time they had anything to say was when they wanted money or something else. He once again mentioned the differential in the thinking in Washington and in Vietnam. He said that he was not against the basic Washington policy but that his objection to it was one of degree and form. Ambassador Nolting suggested that there might be some difference of perspective—to which Mr. Nhu replied that South Vietnam, not having the means of the United States, could not afford this basic policy. Ambassador Nolting then said that if there was any doubt in the minds of the people of Vietnam, or amongst the Viet Cong who wanted to return to the side of the government, a way must be found to clarify the fact that the Americans are in Vietnam at the invitation of the government and that they intend to continue to help until victory has been won. They would then leave. Any doubt about the United States shifting its policy toward neutrality must be dispelled. Mr. Nhu said that there was no fear that the Americans would remain too long—the fear was that they would leave too soon—and that they would slip out through the door of neutrality. Ambassador Nolting then said that Admiral Felt, who had frequent and recent contact with Washington, could attest to the fact that, in Washington, there was no thought of neutrality for Vietnam. Admiral Felt said that he had never heard the faintest whisper of such an idea. Mr. Nhu then said that he, personally, was convinced that the United States had no idea of abandoning Vietnam, but that others could not understand the reason for what had taken place in Laos. Those who had the desire to confront the Communists thought that Laos offered the perfect terrain for their struggle. Admiral Felt made the point that there was a big difference between Vietnam and Laos. In South Vietnam people were willing to fight, and to die if necessary for their freedom. This had not been true in Laos. Mr. Nhu repeated that the guerrilla-minded people thought that, if ever they had to fight the Chinese Communists, the ideal terrain would be Laos. Here, they said, was the place to open a gigantic hemorrhage in the belly of Communist China.

Admiral Felt, at this point, asked Mr. Nhu what the status of the amnesty program was. Mr. Nhu said that it was now too early to announce this program and that it should be proclaimed at the time of the general offensive proposed by General Harkins.6 He said that the Viet Cong were preparing plans for their fall and winter campaigns—but that the initiative would be taken away from them by the government. He said that the recently increased government activity was preparatory to the general offensive. In reply to Admiral Feltʼs question as to when this campaign would be launched, Mr. Nhu replied that this was a military matter to be decided by the military, but that he felt that it was closely linked to the Strategic Hamlet Plan which, at the first of the year, would have three-quarters of the population under government control. Admiral Felt commented that, at that time, the second of the two new divisions would have completed its training. Mr. Nhu again pointed out what he believed to be the great fallacy in the Mao doctrine and said that his concept of the Strategic Hamlet Program had grown out of this.

Admiral Felt then said that he was much encouraged by the attitude of the government authorities he had talked to during this visit. He added that a great change for the better had taken place since he first visited Vietnam some four years before. Mr. Nhu agreed that much progress had been made and said that, in three months the problem of desertion would be solved. Admiral Felt said that he had examined the desertion reports carefully and had been quite worried about them. Mr. Nhu explained that one of the principal causes of desertion had been the feeling of injustice which had spread amongst conscripts who, ostensibly had been drafted for eighteen months service but who had subsequently been extended indefinitely. The major problem, he said, had been that if the conscripts were released after. eighteen months service they would return to their native villages where they would be impressed by the Viet Cong. This, in effect, amounted to the government training troops for the enemy. As of the first of the year, all draftees who had completed thirty-six months service would automatically be released. When Mr. Nhu repeated that there had been a terrible sense of injustice amongst those who were kept beyond the originally specified period, Admiral Felt assured him that there was no difference between their feelings and those of Americans. Mr. Nhu then said that an impending problem would be that of taking care of the defectors who would come over to the side of the government in ever-increasing numbers. Smilingly he said that this was really a post-war problem. Ambassador Nolting added the comment that it was an optimistic problem. Admiral Felt said that he kept statistics on the number of people killed in action, wounded in action and captured. To this, he said, he would add a column showing the number who defect to the side of the government. This, he said, would become the most significant figure.

Admiral Felt then asked Mr. Nhu what actions were being taken to solve the problem of dependent housing. Mr. Nhu replied that the problem had been placed high on the priority list of things to be accomplished through the strategic hamlet plan. He said that first priority in the hamlets was given to families of combatants—not only for housing but in such matters as agricultural credits. Their children were granted scholarships to attend schools. In reply to Admiral Feltʼs question as to what had been done for the families of conscripts, Mr. Nhu said that these people could be divided into two categories. The first of these, in the tradition of the French expeditionary forces, were the camp followers. Eventually this problem would be solved by the completion of the Strategic Hamlet Program which would assure the security of the families and protect them from the threats and reprisals of the Viet Cong. Meanwhile, a special policy was required to take care of them. Not only was there need for housing for them, but an organization had to be set up to train them in “mobile” skills such as nursing, midwifery, hairdressing, teaching and sports. With these skills, which they could take with them as they followed displaced troop units, they could supplement the family budget instead of whiling away their time uselessly while their men were away. The presence of these families would also constitute a cordon sanitaire around troop installations. The establishment of strategic hamlets would provide for the second category of families. Freed of the menace of Viet Cong reprisals they could remain on the family land and devote themselves to productive tasks. Mr. Nhu insisted that he should not normally be concerned with these problems which, in essence, were military, but, as Admiral Felt agreed, the strategic hamlet program touched on all basic problems—including that of morale.

Ambassador Nolting who, earlier, had said that he would have to leave in a relatively short time in order to say farewell to Ambassador Hooten, the Canadian member of the ICC, told Mr. Nhu that it was long past the time when he should have left, and the meeting came to a close

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159. Top Secret. A notation on the source text indicates that it was prepared from the interpreterʼs notes and should not be considered a stenographic record of the meeting. A note attached to the source text states that it had not been reviewed or cleared by any of the participants.

2 Since there was no formal SEMO Council meeting in 1962, Nhu is probably referring to the informal SEATO Council meeting in New York on September 29.

3 Presumably Nhu is referring to Harrimanʼs account of his discussion with Stalin in Peace with Russia? (New York, 1959), pp. 163-164.

4 Reference is to the Vienna meeting, June 3-4, 1961.

5 Laotian Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma visited the United States, July 27-30.

6 Regarding the general offensive, see Document 277.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 20, 1962—10 a.m.

443. To Harriman from Nolting.Deptel 459.2 It will be a diplomatic defeat if Diem severs relations with Laos. It will be something considerably worse if he breaks relations with Laos after approach in terms your telegram. I am convinced he will do so unless approach is coupled with threat of severe sanctions, and even then outcome would be doubtful. I do not believe that such sanctions are in the interests of the United States and I gather this is also Washingtonʼs position.

The further approach prescribed—which advances no arguments not previously put to GVN and to Diem personally, but which directly engages President Kennedyʼs prestige—would in my judgment undermine our future influence here, and, with it, the carrying forward of our program. Whatever success we have had to date rests in important sense on our ultimate respect for GVN sovereignty, including its right in final analysis to make decisions in field of foreign policy.

Within limits indicated above (respect for countryʼs sovereign rights and no threats of withdrawal of US aid), we are doing everything we can on this issue. To take the position set out in your telegram would, in my judgment, defeat our purposes here—on an issue which in itself cannot compare in importance to the United States with that of maintaining an independent, non-Communist Vietnam.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-2062. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Document 304.

307. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 307. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, October 22, 1962—4:06 p.m.

466. For Ambassador Nolting from Harriman. Your 4432 indicates that you and I are not on the same wavelength. The Presidentʼs position is already doubly engaged, not only by his personal letter to Diem,3 but also by Laos settlement which must be made to achieve US objectives as far as possible. In making settlement we have made it plain to all concerned that we consider it not as ending all conflict, but transferring conflict from military to political area. In this conflict we have a right to expect full support and assistance from GVN as ally as well as a signatory. From your messages I gained the impression that you do not consider Diemʼs attitude towards Laos of prime importance.

What happens in Laos will have substantial influence on South Viet-Nam and therefore I have asked you to make Diem understand the importance we place upon it and the fact that we have a right to ask him as an ally to cooperate in matters which so vitally affect our efforts to keep South Viet-Nam free. This is also true of Cambodia where GVN is continuing to aggravate situation to our mutual disadvantage.

I am relieved to learn from your 449 that Diem is beginning to recognize his obligations toward the President.4 If, however, this does not occur, your are instructed to make another approach along lines of Deptel 459 or in whatever manner in your judgment you consider most appropriate. We have never suggested application sanctions, and you are not to give any implication that US has any idea of applying them. When you talk to Diem you should talk as an ally to another expecting support due us and may inform him you are speaking under instructions.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/10-2262. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Harriman.

2 Document 306.

3 See Document 238.

4 Telegram 449, October 20, reported that Thuan had indicated there was a chance that Diem would change his mind about breaking relations with Laos. (Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-2062)

308. Letter From President Kennedy to President Diem 308. Letter From President Kennedy to President Diem1

Washington, October 24, 1962.

Dear Mr. President: As the Republic of Viet-Nam comes once again to celebrate its establishment and its independence, the United States of America sends greetings to the Vietnamese people and to their government.

In writing to you on this same occasion last year,2 Mr. President, I paid tribute to your countryʼs heroic struggle against the campaign of terrorism, destruction and suffering by which Communism had responded to the progress which your young republic had achieved. In those dark days the American people joined with your compatriots in looking forward to a future October twenty-sixth when Viet-Nam would again know peace, and its citizens would begin to enjoy the freedom and prosperity which Communist subversion would deny them. That day is approaching. The valiant struggle of the past year, the sacrifices and sorrows of countless heroes and the introduction of new institutions such as the strategic hamlet to bring lasting social and economic benefits to the people in the countryside earn for Viet-Nam the worldʼs admiration.

As Viet-Nam gains its victory over adversity and aggression, it will be in a position increasingly to devote its energies to achieving closer cooperation among the community of free Southeast Asian states. Each of these nations has its unique character and philosophy. In common they are confronted not only by grasping Communism but also by the chance to develop together. By sharing the development of their individual capacities they can multiply their mutual strength. Thus can Southeast Asia become unassailable and contribute to the stability of the world community. This task is as difficult as it is necessary. It will require a mutual submergence of differences and bold leadership. It will call upon those of vision to see a future of Asian peoples working for their common benefit in a harmony and freedom bequeathed them by their forefathers.

Mr. President, I again express my faith and that of the American people in Viet-Namʼs future and I look forward with confidence to a year of increased momentum and progress leading to the restoration of peace, law and order, and a better life for the Vietnamese people.

Sincerely,

John

1 Source: Department of state, Presidential Correspondence Files: Lot 66 D 476. Limited Official Use. Transmitted to Saigon in telegram 472, October 24, for delivery to Diem.

2 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 1049.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 309. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 25, 1962, noon.

456. For Secretary Harriman from Nolting. References: Departmentʼs telegram 4662 and previous. I used occasion of presenting Presidentʼs message on Cuba3 to Diem to urge upon him again importance to GVN as well as us of his finding a way to continue diplomatic relations with Laos. I had previously worked again on Thuan and Nhu to this end. Thuanʼs previous cryptic word (Embassyʼs telegram 449)4 had been watered down by him in subsequent report to effect that GVN now seeking “middle position”. This turned out to be leaving of Laotian Embassy in Saigon and cutting back to consular representation in Vientiane in event DRV Ambassador accredited. I told Diem that this would not satisfy requirements as we saw them, since consular representative in Laos would not be in position to help with diplomatic influence on RLG and RLG would doubtless not leave its embassy in Saigon under these circumstances. I used President Kennedyʼs great and heavy responsibilities involving world peace, as reflected in decision re Cuba, as yet another reason why Diem as ally should support US and our President on Laos. I put this to him as strongly as I could without indicating any thought of withdrawal of support or infringement GVN sovereign right of decision. I asked Diem not to come to a decision immediately but to think it over yet again in the light of what I had said on instructions. He did not seem as adamant as previously, but did say that he thought that he had gone quite far, and as far as he could go, to accommodate our views. He added that he had no desire to undermine the agreement on Laos, although he had little faith in its outcome; but he also was determined not to undermine the will and rationale of the Vietnamese people by seeming to ignore an action on part RLG weakening to SVN relative to DRV. I cannot say what final result will be.5

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651J.51K/10-2562. Secret. Repeated to Vientiane.

2 Document 307.

3 For text of President Kennedyʼs proclamation, October 23, interdicting delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 410-412.

4 See footnote 4, Document 307.

5 On November 8 the North Vietnamese Ambassador presented his credentials. The following day the Government of the Republic of Vietnam issued a communiqué stating that in view of the accreditation, its Embassy in Vientiane would “cease to function.” (Telegram 499 from Saigon, November 9; Department of State, Central Files, 6511.51K/11-962)

310. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 310. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 29, 1962—5 p.m.

466. Embtel 464.2 Trueheart and I spent hour and a half with President Diem this morning seeking persuade him change his position on expulsion of Robinson (NBC). Regret to report that Diem proved quite impervious to my arguments. He did agree, at my request, to allow Robinson to remain in Vietnam three more days but he gave us no reason to believe that he would use this period to reconsider the matter, still less to change his position.

In approach to Diem, I made it clear that I considered decision to expel Robinson was matter of utmost gravity which could only have highly adverse effects on our joint effort here—particularly coming after expulsion Sully and continued banning of Newsweek. Reminding him that what I was telling him was in large part repetition of what President and Secretary had told Thuan in Washington,3 I stressed that it was essential that American public, Congress and government not gain impression that GVN was seeking to conceal what was going on in Vietnam. I pointed out that press reporting on Vietnam had improved markedly in recent weeks and that this favorable development would be undermined by expulsion Robinson. I urged him to accept fact that press problem would cure itself, and could only be curbed, by manifest success in defeating Viet Cong. Finally, I told him calmly that his rationale for action against Robinson would not be understood or accepted by US Government or people.

Trueheart and I repeated these and other arguments many times in course of meeting without apparent effect. Diem acknowledged that visa question was technicality and that action was directed against Robinson personally. He had with him a dossier of Robinsonʼs past broadcasts and showed me one of about six months ago which was highly critical of President and his family. He characterized Robinsonʼs attitude as “intolerable”, lacking in elementary respect for chief of state, referring specifically to Robinsonʼs alleged remark to GVN press officer, after long interview with Diem some months ago, that president had “taken a great deal of time saying nothing”. He referred to sacrifices which he and his family have made for Vietnam over many years and said that for these past actions he and his family were widely respected in Vietnam. It was his duty not to permit this respect to be undermined by insulting press reporting. He said several times that it was also his duty to other chiefs of state not to tolerate attitude of reporters like Robinson. (It was made clear that American political leaders do not expect immunity from personal press attacks for themselves or their families.)

This is essence of lengthy discussion in which I believe all available arguments were brought to bear with great earnestness and in which basic difference in points of view was clearly isolated. Fundamentally, this difference is that Diem is unwilling or unable to subordinate to other considerations, however important, his canons of correct behavior, and what he regards as his primordial obligations to his family. Accordingly, I frankly have little or no hope that Robinsonʼs expulsion can be averted.

Robinson has been advised of three-day reprieve and gist of above.4

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.50/10-2962. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Telegram 464, October 28, reported that Nolting had talked repeatedly to no avail with Thuan about the expulsion of James Robinson,NBC Southeast Asia correspondent. (Ibid., 951K.50/10-2862) Despite Noltingʼs appeal directly to Diem, Robinson was expelled on November 5. For another account of the expulsion, see Mecklin, Mission in Torment, pp. 136-138.

3 For memoranda of Thuanʼs conversations with President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk, see Documents 285 and 292.

4 At 7 p.m. on October 29, the Embassy in Saigon transmitted Robinsonʼs message to NBC in Washington summarizing the events of October 28-29 and stating that American correspondents were alarmed that Diem might get away with the expulsion without a vigorous protest from Washington. (Telegram 467; Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/10-2962)

311. Telegram From the Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the United States Information Agency 311. Telegram From the Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the United States Information Agency1

Saigon, November 5, 1962—5 p.m.

Tousi unnumbered (by pouch). Bunce from Mecklin, Hi-lites October 21-November 1.

1) Press Relations

Feuding between GVN and American newsmen, for years one of unhappy facts of life in Saigon, this week appears to be expanding to unprecedented and undeniably dangerous proportions.

In past Mission has been able to preserve at least semblance of order, e.g. last spring when Ambassador persuaded President Diem to rescind expulsion orders against Homer Bigart (NY Times) and Francois Sully (Newsweek). When Sully was again ordered to leave early September, however, Mission appeal was rejected. Since then, as though reassured by relatively harmless reaction, GVN has been getting increasingly tough with press—despite Thuanʼs promise to DCM after Sully affair that effort would now be made to improve facilities and otherwise repair relations.

Newsweek has been wholly banned from SVN circulation since Sully affair, despite Mission representations to Thuan, Tao and other senior officials. Minister Hieu last week told PAO ban would remain in effect at least six months—though this may be softened if Kenneth Crawford of Newsweekʼs Washington bureau, visiting for month, maintains initial good impression. One-issue bans and delays of other American publications, notably Time, have become more frequent.

GVN has also advised Associated Press correspondent Malcolm Browne that it intends to terminate AP contract as of end of calendar 1962 to save money ($600 monthly), rotating UPI and AP on yearly basis thereafter. Since GVN controls AP circulation through Vietnam Press, this will deny entry to Vietnam of AP news in any form. (We are attempting to find way to buy service for new AFRS station as possible means persuading GVN to reconsider.) For moment thereʼs no hard evidence that cancellation is anything more than economy, but itʼs considerable coincidence in view of open GVN moves against US press. It also comes after several Browne dispatches that irritated GVN. These notably included report few weeks ago of trouble between ARVN and US personnel; GVN officials have repeatedly protested article to Mission officers.

GVNʼs repeated promises to institute daily military press briefings have come to naught, and project now seems to be dropped, at least for moment. MACV PIO reports that the three DGI officers, whom he had been training in briefing techniques, have ceased coming around; PIO speculates that complexities of undertaking were too much for them. Two military officers who GVN had promised to provide for similar training have never materialized.

Within past few days two new restrictions were imposed: 1) prohibition on newsmen riding in T-28 aircraft, and 2) prohibition on visits to Special Forces units without DCI permit. Letter, when newsmen discover it, is certain to stir considerable bitterness because most SP operations are run by Americans, who thus are made inaccessible without GVN okay.

On top of all this, GVN chose October 25, eve of Independence Day celebration which was marked by public assertions of gratitude and friendship with US, to order James Robinson, veteran Far East correspondent for NBC, to leave country “within shortest delay”. GVN publicly said expulsion was ordered because Robinson had entered SVN with transit visa and failed apply for regular visa within seven day limit (which was true).

Ambassador called on Diem October 29 to protest and learned technicality was only ruse, that true reason was “insulting” broadcast by Robinson last May discussing family “clique” running SVN government. Diem also complained he had once given long interview to Robinson only to learn subsequently that Robinson not only had not used story but also had remarked that itʼs not much of a President who has that much time to “waste” on reporters. Diem flatly refused Ambassadorʼs appeal to reconsider (see Embtel 466),2 conceding only three day extension of expulsion order. Robinson accordingly departed today for Hong Kong.

Mission has considerable evidence that expulsion created unprecedented divisions inside GVN. DGI Director Phan Van Tao and his deputy Dang Duc Khoi called on PAO in unmistakable state of emotional agitation same night Robinson received order. They reported that order had originated with Ngo Dinh Nhu and that they had spent previous hour and half trying futilely to persuade him not to issue it. Tao and Khoi continued thereafter to try to persuade Nhu and Diem to reconsider, including strong memo from Khoi to Diem yesterday, all unavailingly. Khoi openly told newsmen he opposed expulsion, leaked considerable details on behind-scenes maneuvers (including Diem talk with Nolting), and even told PAO he was disgusted to point of resigning (most doubtful).

Grotesquely Tao and Khoi gave dinner evening October 27 for foreign newsmen, including Robinson. Newsmen considered boycott but then decided to go and found guest of honor was Madame Nhu, who spent evening being charming, turning away newsmenʼs complaints with quiet response that they must understand conditions unusual here because SVN at war.

Newsmen sent formal mildly-worded protest to Diem in Robinsonʼs behalf October 31. Its main point was that this discrimination because other journalists had also violated visa regulations. (Mission has located three who are here now, though all applied after seven-day deadline.) So far GVN has not responded.NBC Vice President McAndrew cabled protest to Diem calling expulsion “incomprehensible” and asking explanation. McAndrew also asked how long ban would remain in effect. Mission has repeatedly asked us same question and received no clear answer, except that Robinson should not attempt return immediately. Robinson today said he would try for visa about month hence.

Newsmen of course are uniformly bitter, predicting if GVN gets away with Robinson on top of Sully, still more expulsions are probable. Post is inclined to agree. Affair has made clear that Diem has decided he can override advice of US Mission on press policy. It also has indicated clearly that Nhu, and presumably wife, are becoming increasingly the moulders of this policy, and are doing so in bitter spirit of revenge.

[Here follow sections on the other aspects of the public affairs program.]

Mecklin

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, USIS 1962. Drafted by Mecklin on November 1. Repeated by pouch to Bangkok and Manila and pouched to Vientiane and Phnom Penh.

2 Document 310.

312. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) 312. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood)1

Saigon, November 6, 1962.

Dear Ben: The enclosed is something I almost sent off last week—but held. The matter has since died down somewhat, and I would not recommend issuing any such statement at this time. However, I wanted you to know how I felt about the matter in principle, and I am also puzzled by the lack of any reaction from Washington. I suppose our little problem was completely snowed under by the Cuban crisis—right?—or was there a deadlock on whether to invoke sanctions?

All the best,

Sincerely,

Fritz

P.S. This is for YOU personally—not intended to stir up any action. F.

[Enclosure]

Draft Telegram of November 1, 1962

CINCPAC for Polad. Embtel 466.2 Re Robinson (NBC) case. In response to American newsmen, I have in mind making on-record statement along following lines, if Dept approves.

“Embassy has done everything it can on this case (James Robinson, NBC), short of recommending changes of US policy, which I do not think desirable or justified. The Republic of Viet-Nam is a sovereign country and makes its own decisions. For our part, we have made quite clear to President Ngo Dinh Diem our view on this matter, which is that the encouragement of a free flow of information is the best way to vindicate the just cause of Free Viet-Nam and to maintain full support for it. Measures of suppression or control, either directly or through a technicality, are in the final analysis self-injurious.

“I hold no brief for inaccurate reporting, nor for discourtesy in any form, but I believe that the best antidote to criticism is success and victory, rather than press control.”

I recognize such statement will in all probability bring heavy riposte from GVN-controlled sources here and may cause further decline my ability to influence Diem. On other hand, to let the matter go without comment (Robinson has departed this afternoon) will, in my judgment, increase tendency here to pursue policy of press control and intimidation at expense U.S. ability to continue support this effort.

We have of course been waiting for some guidance from Dept on this matter, which I recognize may have been difficult under circumstances of past week. Would appreciate reaction re above ASAP, with discretion to use or not depending on circumstances—e.g., other pending issues, degree of press interest, etc.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.50/11-662. Personal; Secret. On the source text Wood had written “WAH[arriman]—a word here can sometimes help!” For Woodʼs reply, November 16, which was attached to the source text, see Document 318.

2 Document 310.

313. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 313. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)1

Washington, November 9, 1962.

Dear Ros: I have seen a copy of the proposed memorandum from Secretary McNamara to the President which recommends that henceforth defoliation operations in Viet-Nam be conducted under the supervision of the Ambassador and General Harkins.2 I am agreeable to your indicating Department of State concurrence to the memorandum.

However, I suggest that we ask for regular reporting from Saigon on the effectiveness of the operation as weighed against the harm being done to United States interests by Communist propaganda on the subject.

If the President approves the memorandum, I suggest Saigon be informed by a joint State-Defense message.

Sincerely,

Alex

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 370.64. Secret.

2 The proposed memorandum has not been found; for text as sent to the President on November 16, see Document 317.

314. Memorandum From the Aide to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Bagley) to the Chairman (Taylor) 314. Memorandum From the Aide to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Bagley) to the Chairman (Taylor)1

Washington, November 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Proposed Memorandum Concerning Viet Cong Attacks on Strategic Hamlets

1. There is considerable differences of opinion within the Executive Branch as to the progress being made in the strategic hamlet strategy. This is not unnatural during a period of transition, but resolution of opposing views is difficult because of a paucity of information. This problem is recognized in Saigon and effort is being made to get at the true facts by better administration and production of information on the GVN side. In the meantime, it would be wise to evaluate the incomplete information available cautiously.

2. The doubters exist in the Pentagon, as well as State and in the White House in the person of Mr. Forrestal. Last week, Governor Harriman called General Krulak over for a general talk on our military efforts in SVN with emphasis on the security aspects of the strategic hamlet strategy. General Krulak allayed Governor Harrimanʼs uneasiness, using the basic information contained in the attached draft memorandum to the Secretary of Defense.2 The provision of this information to the Secretary of Defense, and perhaps distributed in some form to other interested Departments, is probably intended by General Krulak to spread the gospel and offset opposing views in Washington. This will not be easy, however, because of information gaps and other factors, some of which are as follows: a. The American Consul in Hue has reported Diemʼs brother, Bishop [sic] Can, is according priority to his Republican Youth Civic Action and Self-Defense Program rather than the strategic hamlet program being pushed from Saigon and, as a result, the strategic hamlet program s not effective in its present form.3

b. While current Viet Cong actions against hamlets (kidnapping, theft, murder) are direct attacks against the people, they serve the political purpose of showing that the GVN is not able to protect the populace using the strategic hamlet concept. This is important as the program gets underway.

c. Neither the Fiscal Year 1964 MAP nor AID programs provide for strategic hamlet kits. This is not a serious matter at this point except to indicate that administration of the strategic hamlet program is not yet an efficient matter. In this particular case, there is also a dispute between AID and DOD as to division of funds for such kits.

d. Information available from Saigon continues to indicate that the GVN strategic hamlet program is handicapped by poor implementation by province chiefs.

e. In Malaya, the requirement for reinforcement to meet Communist attacks at night was met by the collection of good intelligence and by assuring that villages and posts had defenses sufficient to resist attack for the 6-8 hours until daylight when reinforcements could be deployed. It is not clear how this problem is being met in SVN.

3. The draft memorandum as prepared raises certain questions which follow: a. Is the additive of 300 strategic hamlets per month being applied in the area of the some 2700 poorly conceived hamlets which now exist or is it merely an add-on to the current total of 3353 strategic hamlets? If the latter is true, the program remains seriously weak; if the former is true, real efforts at improvement are in progress.

b. How many strategic hamlet kits have already been delivered? How does this figure compare with the total of not more than 600 properly conceived hamlets? In other words, is the number of effective hamlets directly proportional to US provision of hamlet kits or does it, in fact, depend to a major degree on other action by the GVN?

c. To be useful, figures showing attacks against strategic hamlets and other villages should indicate the total targets in each category. Further, there should be a breakdown of the numbers of strategic hamlets attacked into those which were properly conceived and those which are poorly defended.

d. There should be a statement indicating just how the US/GVN is meeting the problem of “considerable significance” concerning Viet Cong attacks at night.

4. I recommend that answers to these basic questions be sought and that a specific reporting system be instituted to refine reports now made by Com USMACV. At the same time, there is no reason why the proposed SACSA memorandum should not go forward to the Secretary of Defense as a current appraisal. I would suggest adding the following paragraph to assure the data is in proper perspective: “6. Continuing assessments of the effectiveness of the strategic hamlet concept requires better information than is now available. Action is being undertaken to develop a broader reporting system which will become the basis for future analyses of this program.”

5. If you concur with the above, I will: a. Have the draft memorandum typed in final form, with the addition of paragraph 6 and, on signature, distributed to State and to Mr. Forrestal.

b. Advise SACSA of the need to develop answers to the basic questions remaining, preferably through a refined, continuing reporting system levied on the field.

W.H.B.4

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-239-69. Secret.

2 Not found. For the memorandum that Taylor sent to the Secretary of Defense, see Document 319.

3 See Document 303.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

315. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 315. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, November 12, 1962.

CM-104-62

SUBJECT

Status of National Military Campaign, South Vietnam

1. During your meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 29 October,2 you requested information on the status of implementing plans or orders and the initiating dates for the “explosion” concept which was discussed by General Harkins at the 8 October conference.3 As of 3 November, General Harkins reports that the operation is still in the planning stage as amplified below; that operations will be intensified in critical areas during December, January and February with nationwide intensification anticipated in mid-February. The exact time has not been determined.

2. The purpose of the plan is to conduct a nation-wide offensive against the Viet Cong, bringing to bear the full military potential of the RVNAF, paramilitary and citizenry of South Vietnam in an integrated campaign. The plan is phased as follows: I. Planning Phase: Involves adjustments in the Vietnamese command structure to streamline channels of command as well as the development of a comprehensive RVNAF operation plan.

II. Preparatory Phase: Includes preliminary operations with the preoperational preparations. This phase is not necessarily dependent upon Phase I planning but is a continuation of current operations and shall proceed concurrently with and beyond the planning phase.

III. Execution Phase: Full scale coordinated operations, utilizing the talents and capabilities of every loyal citizen and every paramilitary organization with the regular military establishment.

IV. Follow-up and Consolidation Phase: Restoration of full control by the Government of South Vietnam, banging into the plan all elements of the civil government.

3. Plans for reorganization of the military command structure are being finalized and have been submitted to President Diem for signature which is considered necessary as a legalizing procedure. President Diem informally approved the over-all concept in early October.

4. Highlights of the Vietnamese reorganization include: a. Readjustment of the Joint General Staff and the creation of three service component commands.

b. Creation of an Unconventional Warfare Directorate to coordinate and control the efforts of special forces and irregular fighting elements of the country.

c. Elimination of the Field Command Headquarters from the command structure.

d. Establishment of a fourth Corps for operations exclusively in the Delta region.

e. Assignment of the necessary tactical and logistic support elements for each corps by attachment or in direct support.

5. General Harkins expects the reorganization to be completed by late December. Implementing plans by the RVNAF and operational planning by the Corps are proceeding concurrently.

6. As further developments materialize in the foregoing outline, I will keep you informed.

Maxwell D. Taylor

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385. Secret.

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

3 Regarding the Honolulu meeting on October 8, see Document 298.

316. Letter From President Diem to President Kennedy 316. Letter From President Diem to President Kennedy1

Saigon, November 15, 1962.

Dear Mr. President, I wish to thank you warmly for the message,2 so cordial and full of understanding, which you sent me for the people and Government of the Republic of Vietnam on the occasion of our National Day, Oct. 26.

As we celebrate the seventh anniversary of our Republic this year, we note with great satisfaction that our determination has overcome the difficulties which the enemy has heaped in our way, and that our efforts in the economic and social fields already bear the most promising fruits, raising the hope, as you kindly pointed out, that the day is approaching when the Vietnamese people finally enjoy peace, security and happiness again.

I deeply appreciate the fact that you made a special reference to our strategic hamlets and described them as an institution designed to help us rapidly attain the essential objectives of our policy, which are respect for the human person, social justice and the creation of true democracy.

It is hardly necessary to add that the assistance of the United States, under your leadership, definitely contributed to the successes which we have scored, particularly during recent months. I bow with respect to the sacrifices of those American citizens who came and shared our trials and hardships and sealed with their blood the brotherhood of our two peoples. I want to renew here the expression of our gratefulness to these noble sons of America, to their families, and to the entire American people as well. Their sacrifices will not be in vain, as they show that the cause which the Vietnamese people are defending is just, one which deserves to be upheld by all peoples dedicated to freedom, and the more so by those directly interested in the maintenance of peace and stability in this part of the world.

In reaffirming the friendship of the United States of American and its faith in our future, your message is not only particularly auspicious but also really heartening to us.

Please accept, [etc.].

Ngo Dinh Diem

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence Files: Lot 66 D 476.

2 Document 308.

317. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President 317. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President1

Washington, November 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Defoliant/Herbicide Program in South Vietnam

Defoliant operations have been completed in the areas in South Vietnam that you approved 9 August 1962. The technical team charged with evaluating the program considers the results of the spray operations as excellent. The effectiveness of herbicides against the types of vegetation sprayed in previous operations is evaluated by General Harkins as follows: Mangrove forest—90-95% effective

Evergreen forest—60% effective

Tropical scrub—60% effective

The operation conducted in the Bien Hoa Air Base area during July has increased horizontal visibility from approximately 5 feet to 30-50 feet while improving vertical visibility by 80-90 percent. The susceptibility of the sprayed areas to ambush has been significantly reduced.

United States advisors working in the vicinity of areas sprayed report that there has been no apparent reaction by the populace to the spray operations. Radio Hanoi commentaries to Asia and Europe, 13, 14, and 16 October, claimed that chemicals sprayed by the United States had injured hundreds of people. No neutral or friendly press coverage or comments have been reported.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff and CINCPAC have reviewed the overall effects and operational value of defoliants in South Vietnam and have recommended that general authority be granted to General Harkins to plan and conduct future operations to achieve specific military objectives by use of herbicides, without reference of each detailed plan to Washington for approval. The authority proposed would not extend to crop destruction and would be limited to field decision concerning operations to clear grass, weeds, and brush around depots, airfields, and other fixed installations; to clear fields of fire to inhibit surprise attack by the Viet Cong; and, in conjunction with military field operations, to spray defoliants in areas wherein attainment of a military objective would be significantly eased. Plans and arrangements for each operation would be reviewed and approved both by the United States Ambassador to Vietnam and by the Commander of the United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam.

Meanwhile the Joint Chiefs of Staff have also received field recommendations for extension of the defoliant operations which you approved in August to five additional specific areas. The five recommended areas, shown on the attached map, are examples of the type of operations that we propose be conducted in the future on the authority of Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins. They are segments of highways 1, 13, and 14, a rail line and a power line, each located in an area regularly harassed by the Viet Cong. The military objectives sought in defoliating these five areas are improved visibility and reduced susceptibility to Viet Cong ambush.

Specific psychological warfare precautions taken in previous defoliant operations would be applied as appropriate for these and all future operations involving use of herbicides. These measures include loudspeaker warnings, dropping of leaflets, discrimination to avoid damage to cultivated and inhabited areas, and avoidance of areas near the Laotian or Cambodian borders.

I recommend that employment of herbicides be authorized in the five specific areas shown on the attached map2 and that Ambassador Nolting and General Harkins be delegated authority to approve employment of herbicides in future operations not involving crop destruction to achieve specific military objectives in South Vietnam. The Department of State concurs. Your approval is requested.3

Robert S. McNamara4

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text.

2 Not found.

3 On November 27, McGeorge Bundy informed McNamara that the recommendations had been approved along the lines indicated, adding that the President wanted to be consulted on any operation beyond these limits and desired to be informed of the results of future operations. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 370.64) This decision was transmitted to Saigon on November 30 in telegram 561. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

318. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 318. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, November 16, 1962.

Dear Fritz: Thank you for your letter of the 6th2 on the Robinson case. I can understand your puzzlement by the lack of reaction here which was occasioned more by the lack of manpower than lack of interest. I was in touch constantly with the head of the Washington NBC3 bureau and he understood the speed and firmness with which you acted vis-à-vis the GVN. He felt that the Embassy had done what it could and I gathered that he did not think Robinsonʼs own actions merited all-out support from NBC. There was no suggestion here from the Governor or anyone else about invoking sanctions.

On the other hand the Governor feels as strongly as ever that the GVN is making a serious mistake in its handling of the foreign press. The second and third sentences in the paragraph numbered 2 of Deptel 5134 are only pale reflections of the depth of his feelings. For the present I think the expulsion of Sully and Robinson have been at least partially swallowed by the journalistic profession on the grounds that they are not perhaps among the more outstanding members of the Fourth Estate. Although the enclosed editorial from the New York Times5 indicates a continuing journalistic thundering, the cases of Sully and Robinson are certainly not developing into cause celebre here.

Perhaps the banning of Newsweek and the continued sporadic suppression of other American periodicals will have a more galling long-run effect and, I must say, seem inexcusable in American eyes. These are international publications which only very occasionally refer to Viet-Nam. Whereas an individual correspondentʼs behavior might provide some grounds for “handing him his passport”, the suppression of one of the Free Worldʼs leading news periodicals seems a bit childish. Do you think anything might be done?

Evidently the GVN think they have our number on this press question and can do as they wish. I can thus understand your temptation to make a public declaration. Should we perhaps have one or two plans up our sleeves in case they should try another fast one?

1. As you know, the Governor has very good relations with the upper brass of the journalistic world and has recently said that he is always prepared to have a word with them. By this he meant that if you see storm clouds gathering around a particular journalist or publication he might help m explaining the Vietnamese point of view here to the owner or Publisher concerned. He would, of course, only undertake this if the Vietnamese view could be presented as making sense in American eyes.

2. Might it be wise to let the GVN know now that if they intend to “fire” another correspondent, it may be necessary for you in Saigon or for the Department here to make a public statement, calmly but clearly setting forth our disagreement?

3. As to sanctions, while the Governor has said he did not wish to invoke them, we have not studied the question here. Would we be prepared to cut off any USIA or Psywar services to the GVN which would embarrass them without hurting the war effort? I imagine we should not cut off services to the provinces, but we might seriously consider whether we should reduce our support of cultural activities in Saigon if the GVN should take another swipe at the freedom of the U.S. press.

Certainly the main point that the Vietnamese should understand is the one expressed so clearly by the President to Thuan, when the GVN begins to do better in the war, its public image will take care of itself.

Good luck with your numerous visitors and may you have a quiet Christmas at home with your family.

Yours very sincerely,

Chalmers B. Wood6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 951K.50/11-662. Secret; Official-Informal. Attached to Document 312.

2 Document 312.

3 Deptel 474. [Footnote in the source text. Dated October 26, it reported on conversations with Bill Monroe, Washington News Director for NBC, on the Robinson case. (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/10-2662)]

4 Dated November 12. These two sentences read: “Embassy should impress on GVN that measures outlined in AP report [on limiting press activities] would jeopardize American public and Congressional support essential GVN operations. There must be reasonable opportunity for press to observe and report shortcomings as well as accomplishments.” (Ibid., 751K.00/11-1062)

5 Not printed. It was The New York Times editorial for November 16.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

319. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 319. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, November 17, 1962.

CM-117-62

SUBJECT

Viet Cong Attacks on Strategic Hamlets

1. Although the Government of Vietnam publicly announced support of the Strategic Hamlet Program in February 1962, a national plan was not formally approved by the Government until early August. In the interim, the strategic hamlet idea expanded rapidly throughout the country, as a form of inter-province competition, with little planning and less coordination. Numbers appeared to be the prime objective. Many hamlets were improperly constructed and inadequately defended, and little attention was given to the psychological, sociological and economic preparation of the populace, or to the proper qualification of administrative personnel, with the result that a basically sound idea got off to a weak start.

2. Now, the Government of Vietnamʼs Strategic Hamlet Priority Program, and the related implementing documents, include measures designed to overcome the deficiencies inherent in the initial poorly-coordinated program, and there is evidence of limited progress.

3. There are now 10,971 localities designated for development as strategic hamlets, of which 3353 are reported as completed. These vary widely in quality, as to the nature of their defenses, the composition of related security forces, and as to the efficiency, competence and dependability of administrative personnel. Of the entire number, probably not more than 600 can be viewed as fulfilling the desired characteristics in terms of equipment, defensive works, security forces and, possibly most important, government.

The number of properly conceived hamlets is now growing at the rate of about 300 per month. There are some 1,897 strategic hamlet kits provided in the current MAP/AID programs; over 1,200 village radios are now installed, and installation of hamlet radios is now beginning at the rate of 1,000 per month.

Kindred to this is the growth in quality of the Self Defense Corps, Civil Guard and Civilian Irregular Defense Groups, all of which contribute in some measure to hamlet security.

Thus it will be seen that the real strength of the program is still more in prospect than in reality. It is only now beginning to be felt, and the statistics with which we have been working to date are not an accurate measure of the durability of the true strategic hamlet but, more accurately, are a reflection of operations of the Viet Cong against all rural localities.

4. The enclosures present the recent situation graphically. Tab A2 shows the number of attacks on strategic hamlets and other, less secure, localities in the past three months. “Attacks” are characterized as destruction of defenses, assassination of hamlet officials, kidnapping and theft of foodstuffs (Tab B). Strategic hamlets sustained an average of five attacks per week, while other localities were attacked nine times weekly. In the three month period covered about two per cent of hamlets of all types were attacked. Two strategic hamlets were overrun; nine of the less secure localities suffered that fate. The remainder varied from serious depredations in the hamlet, to outright defeat of the Viet Cong, to a stand-off, where both sides lost resources and interest.

In terms of size, six attacks against strategic hamlets exceeded platoon size while twenty-five attacks of platoon or larger composition were reported against the other localities. (Tab C)

It is further of interest to note, in terms of VC tactics, that about eighty per cent (Tab D) of all attacks occurred during hours of darkness. This assumes considerable significance when contemplating reaction time and the use of vehicles or aircraft for reinforcement or support.

In geographic terms, Tab E portrays the areas in which the attacks on strategic hamlets and other localities have occurred. They cover some 23 provinces. Of interest is the fact that during the period there were only 14 attacks against the hamlets in the current GVN/US approved clear and hold operations in Bin Duong, Phu Yen, Binh Dinh and Quang Ngai.

5. There would seem to be no reason for modifying the views expressed by General Harkins and Ambassador Nolting regarding the long-term virtues of the program. It is only now commencing to mature and the vigorous reactions against it—both reported and forecast—suggest that the Viet Cong also perceive its potential. Certainly the current Viet Cong actions with respect to hamlets, involving terrorism, theft, murder and kidnapping are direct attacks against the people. In this sense they are inconsistent with the avowed communist principle that the affection and confidence of the populace are essential to their program.

Maxwell D. Taylor

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, Vietnam 1962, 380-385. Secret. The source text is stamped “See Def has seen Nov 26 1962.”

2 None of the tabs is printed.

320. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 320. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Saigon, November 19, 1962.

Dear Governor Harriman: I thank you for your letter of October 122 on the dangers of over-optimism here and on other matters basic to our operation. Your thoughts were most welcome, and, had we not had unfortunate difficulties relating to Laotian recognition, press problems and border incidents to try to deal with, I would have answered it earlier.

I agree with you that over-optimism is dangerous. I find it difficult at times to be optimistic at all, in face of setbacks, non-activation or poor execution of plans, dissensions among the Vietnamese, and a general stickiness which pervades this place. But, as General Harkins put it the other day, we must “whistle while we work”, for the sake of our own and everyone elseʼs morale here. And we are making progress.

Your inquiry whether the, villagers are being armed fast enough seems to imply that there might not be enough small arms in Viet-Nam to give out rapidly. That is not the case. Supplies of shotguns, carbines, Springfields, grenades and other weapons are more than ample. There are, however, two problems. First, the GVN and local authorities have been reluctant to issue arms to village youths or militia before they have been thoroughly screened and given some training. This slows up the process, though for reasons we cannot really challenge. Second, it is Ngo Dinh Nhuʼs fear that too many arms in a strategic hamlet will make them targets for VC supply operations. He advocates, therefore, that the number of arms in a hamlet be limited to about a dozen and that if the VC attack in numbers too large to be resisted by the hamletʼs defenders, they hide their arms and disperse. We have not followed this concept, however, and in the plans we are now supporting there is provision for equipping two and in some cases three squads (of about 12 men each) of hamlet militia depending on size and location of the hamlet.

The question about arming helicopters and using them on escort missions is being taken care of. As you know, there is now a squadron of HU-1Aʼs here. Each carries a sizeable quantity of rockets and two machine guns, and they have been very busy and effective lately.

I had previously talked on several occasions with General Harkins, along the lines of your misgivings about the “explosion” scheme. He assumes the VC will know in general what is up, but he does not expect them to be able to cope with it. He expects them in many cases to conceal themselves, a standard tactic, but to be unable to operate as effectively during and after the operation as before, because in the meantime the strategic hamlet and the clear-and-hold programs would go forward and forces would be developed to secure the area more permanently. Further, the “explosion” scheme is not conceived as a one-shot operation but rather as a series of measures designed to place RVNAF in a more aggressive posture throughout the country and to show the fence-sitters who has the power. I am not completely convinced of the soundness of the concept, nor of its feasibility. But I can frankly think of no better way to test this governmentʼs will to bring this struggle to a show-down, and this, I think, is becoming psychologically necessary, particularly as regards the GVN armed forces. I share your concern about the need to protect the innocent from injury during military operations insofar as possible, and I can assure you that General Harkins does also.

Administrative support of former VC villages is a problem which grows in proportion to the GVNʼs success. Until our first province rehabilitation operations got started, there was little retaking and little rehabilitation. However, in Binh Duong, where Sunrise is going on, and in Phu Yenʼs operation Sea Swallow, villages have been retaken from the VC, and in these administrative support and institutions have been installed. This will continue as the comprehensive strategic hamlet programs we are beginning to support in the delta areas. All hamlets, even those formerly dominated by the VC, seem to get the same general treatment. The controls in the latter may be a little stronger and last longer, but the plan is that ultimately they, too, will have their own hamlet councils and defense forces. And, we will try very hard to insure that they, too, receive the dispensaries, wells, schools, etc. that are part of our support program and a necessary follow-up to military operations. There is of course a continuing lack of trained administrators and civic action specialists.

Your comments on the GVNʼs image and the need for concrete accomplishments instead of empty claims are well taken. We are aware of this problem which, in fact, was discussed during the last Province Rehabilitation Committee meeting. USIS and MACV psychological warfare people are increasingly involved in advising on and supporting province operations. As you point out, the best propaganda by the GVN will be its concrete accomplishments in the countryside.

I feel we have made considerable headway toward focusing on the social and economic betterment of the villagers, particularly on the organizational aspects. Joe Brent and Rufe Phillips are pushing ahead rapidly and the GVN appears to agree on the importance of these aspects. In connection with the review of next yearʼs military budget we have been careful to retain on the civilian side a sizeable amount for direct counterinsurgency operations. In exploring this generally with Thuan earlier this week, he recognized the importance of this and of earmarking the necessary funds on the GVN side. As you are aware, concrete accomplishments in these areas are directly related to the degree of security in a given area. While we can assure, for example, that the necessary economic and civic action components are included in our province rehabilitation planning, they can only take hold and develop in those areas where GVN clearly exercises control. As the security situation improves we should expect an accelerated and cumulative effect from the economic and civic action measures. We will continue to concentrate on these important areas, which I agree, must go hand-in-hand with the military.

I share your view that it is safer to lean in the direction of emphasizing our problems rather than our successes. After a hard winter, however, it is difficult to restrain feelings and expressions of exhilaration at the first signs of spring. There has been a rather dramatic change in outlook among GVN (and US) officials from the extreme pessimism of a year ago. This, I think, is a good thing and provides considerably more impetus toward uniting and getting the job done. The mood is nevertheless still one of cautious optimism and I do not believe that any of us underestimates the complexity of the task ahead.

I should add that, in general, things seem to be going internally pretty well; the external problems less well (relations with Laos, the Cambodian problem, press relations, etc.). A part of our difficulty in dealing with the latter comes precisely from the increased confidence of the Government, which—they are frank enough to admit—we have helped to create!

Sincerely yours,

Fritz

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 3A, GVN 1962,RVNAF General. Secret; Official-Informal. According to another copy, the letter was drafted by Barbour and Manfull on November 17. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: 67 A 677, 350 GVN)

2 Document 300.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 321. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 21, 1962—7 p.m.

537. In talk with Thuan at his request November 19, following matters discussed: 1. Progress Against VC Insurgency. Thuan briefed me on contents VC documents recently captured in An Lac operation. (We have copies of these, now being translated.) According Thuan, these documents, mostly letters from VC officers in high plateau area, describe a situation of severe lack of food, medicines, recruits; generally low morale, desertions, and fear of ARVN attack. Asked whether this was local condition around An Lac, or typical of larger area, Thuan said he thought it applied generally to high plateau (roughly GVN Second Corps area), but this not entirely clear from captured letters. He said President Diem, greatly encouraged by these reports, had briefed his military commanders on them, stressing necessity to keep up military pressure everywhere in highlands; necessity to enforce strict controls over drugs and food distribution; and feasibility of attacking areas like An Lac where ARVN had previously feared to go. I asked Thuan whether this picture of VC demoralization did not offer just the opportunity we have been looking for to start large-scale defections and surrenders by a well-organized country-wide amnesty program. I suggested something like Magsaysayʼs “all-out friendship or all-out war” program, tailored to Vietnamese psychology. He said this had been again discussed and that a program of this kind would be launched at Tet (late January).

2. External Relations. From discussion of above, I led into dangers to Viet-Nam and to progress achieved here from too narrow and inflexible a policy vis-à-vis Viet-Namʼs neutral neighbors, especially Cambodia. I told him again of our deep concern re RKGʼs threat to invite ChiComs into Cambodia if Sihanoukʼs fears of aggression from Viet-Nam and Thailand were not calmed. I said I did not know what USGʼs position on proposed neutrality statute would be (since we had not seen text), but that GVN ought to be as concerned to find a way out of dilemma made by this move as we are—even more so. I said I felt GVNʼs handling of the issues with Cambodia (border incidents, notes, debt settlement, etc.), regardless of the rights and wrongs on specific issues, had been slow, unimaginative, and inept. If in fact their aim was to calm Sihanouk down and prevent his pushing his demands and threats too far, they should be more skillful in dealing with him. I said we were counting on GVN, and specifically Thuan as Min. of Defense and Acting Min. of Foreign Affairs, to avoid anything which could be interpreted as hostile towards Cambodia on the one hand, and to promote some constructive moves on the other. Thuan said this subject was most difficult. Without contesting that GVN had not been forthcoming or adept in dealing with Sihanouk, he said this was inevitable when GVNʼs president was constantly being attacked personally by Sihanouk as a “bloody dictator,” etc. Under these circumstances, he said, it was most difficult to achieve a flexible and realistic policy, even though such a policy would be “smart”. I asked him point-blank whether there were any grounds whatsoever for Sihanoukʼs fear that GVN had designs to overthrow him or to take any aggressive moves against his country. Thuan answered that there were no grounds whatsoever. I said we continued to get from time to time reports that GVN agents were plotting with Cambodian dissidents, and that Sihanouk apparently believed this to be the case. Thuan denied that this was going on. I then stressed again necessity on the military side to avoid any actions which would exacerbate this situation and might lead to introduction of ChiCom forces on the flank of Viet-Nam. Thuan said he realized the importance of this and would do everything possible to minimize the chances. I told him that we would rely on that. Thuan said that GVN would not enter into an international agreement on the Laos pattern with Cambodia, because this would be tantamount to condemning themselves as aggressors, which they are not. He said the Thai Government felt the same way.

Thuan then said that GVN, despite gratification over internal success, continued to be deeply concerned and alarmed over developments in Laos, where, he said, General Phoumi is bitter against the U.S. and left wing is continuing to make progress among the people. He said that any reduction of Phoumiʼs forces would simply mean transferring those soldiers to support Pathet Lao. He then said GVN was convinced that French Government has made deliberate policy decision to try to restore French influence throughout former Indo-China states through extension of neutralism, with “U.S. paying the bill”. He said French are doing this through Souvanna Phouma in Laos and through “French lawyers” and men like Charles Mayer in Cambodia. He said while GVN fully trusted U.S. intentions in Vietnam, they were deeply worried by U.S. “trustfulness” of French policy. I said that we are not as naive as this statement seemed to imply, that perhaps we had better information on French policy than GVN, whose views on this matter were somewhat prejudiced.

There are good reasons to believe that GVN is genuinely concerned over Cambodian developments and are doing their best to prevent border incidents. On the other hand, I do not expect any effective soothing salve to be applied by GVN, nor any real dexterity in dealing with this ticklish issue.

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/11-2162. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, CINCPAC, London, and Paris.

322. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 322. Memorandum From the Public Affairs Officer of the Embassy in Vietnam (Mecklin) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Saigon, November 27, 1962.

Press Relations

Saigon once again is full of brave talk about imminent GVN inauguration of regular press briefings. Besides the assurances you received Monday from Thuan, Counselor Nhu told me last week that briefings and other facilities should be instituted. Colonel Smith reports that General Khanh has volunteered to do the briefings temporarily himself. Khanh has even asked Smith for advice on creation of a DOD public information office.

Unhappily we have heard this tune before, always followed by endless delays. Already there is a taste of the same routine in the air. When I called Dang Due Khol today to ask what comes next, in view of Thuanʼs promises, he replied that immediate action is impossible because of “difficulties” in obtaining information from the field fast enough for the newsmen. He said he would speak to Khanh about it. This is exactly the stall we encountered on the last go-round, when we offered unsuccessfully to feed the GVN information collected through MACV channels.

I hope Iʼm wrong, but it seems to me almost certain that adequate improvement, if any at all, in GVN relations with the foreign press is not about to materialize. In anticipation of this and in view of the fact that these relations have presently reached an abysmal low, there follows a reassessment of the situation, and recommendations for relatively drastic action. I hope you may see fit to send a copy (attached) to General Harkins and that the three of us and Colonel Smith may then meet to discuss it.

Reason for a reassessment, in my judgment, is the fact that it has now become clear that the expulsions of Francois Sully last summer and of Jim Robinson a few weeks later were considerably more than isolated incidents. On the contrary, evidence accumulates that they signaled a major change in GVN press policy, and that this policy is being formulated and administered by Counselor Nhu, uncomfortably often at the whim of his wife. In my opinion, the policy is rooted in an emotional, almost irrational attitude which will prevail indefinitely, regardless of what comes of the current crop of promises. There is ground to doubt whether the newsmen of the US Mission can live with this.

Subtly but undeniably, evidence is accumulating that Nhuʼs attitude toward the US press reflects his attitude in general toward the US Government and people. It is surely significant that during my talk with him on November 19, which included considerable discussion of the press, Nhu made at least a half dozen openly contemptuous remarks about Americans. Variously he accused us of failing to “understand” communism, underdeveloped countries, Asians, India and cold war realities. As reported elsewhere, he capped all this with the reckless (and psychotic?) remark that the US should now mount an atomic attack on Peking.

If you relate this to the evidence that Nhuʼs personal power is critically increasing, I think it may be likely that press policy happens only to be one of the first of our forthcoming disagreements with him. It follows that the US Missionʼs reaction to this initial challenge quite possibly could set a pattern for future, much more difficult and important problems with him.

The Nhus' influence almost certainly is the main reason why the GVN—despite repeated promises to you, the DCM and myself—has failed to date to institute a single one of the improved facilities we have suggested. There is even less doubt that the Nhus have been behind what amounts, contrarily, to a deliberate new campaign of harassment. It has been applied against all the newsmen, furthermore, friend and critic alike, and in a spirit of bitter contempt for their protests.

There have been continued public and private recriminations against the correspondents by the Vietnamese press and leaders, e.g. Mme. Nhuʼs remark in a taped interview this morning with a Mutual Broadcasting System correspondent that the American correspondents here are “intoxicated by communism.” (Copy attached)2 American newsmen in Saigon believe they are regularly tailed. They are threatened with reprisals if they fail to be properly “objective” (which means friendly by GVN definition), notably including recent publicized letter to the AP in New York personally attacking correspondent Mal Browne. The permanent ban on Newsweek continues, as well as intermittent bans of other American publications.

If there was any question whether all this was officially inspired, it was removed by General Tyʼs circular of October 13 (Embtel 536)3 requiring field unit commanders to talk to correspondents only through written questions and answers—which of course amounts to a ban on talking to journalists at all if literally enforced. We have not been able to confirm the origin of the Ty circular, but several newsmen claim to have information that it was suggested by the Palace; in any case Nhu endorsed the order when I asked him about it last week. The order has already resulted in several newsmen being kicked off American helicopters.

Hard on top of this came last weekʼs prohibition on newsmen covering the new operation in Zone D. This ruling also originated with the GVN. Some 30 or 40 American helicopters participated—which together with unit advisors meant perhaps as many as 150 Americans entering into combat conditions. The newsmen felt that the ban on reporting this to American readers was an outrage. Inevitably many of them found their own sources for information on the operation, notably including Neil Sheehan of UPI, whose story led to a MACV investigation, intensifying the newsmenʼs resentment. The Zone D order has tended to turn the newsmen bitterly against the US Mission—to a more serious degree, I think, than at any time since last winter.

Sheehan and Halberstam of the New York Times have both sent messages to their New York offices urging formal complaints in Washington because of the Zone D operation. Halberstam says he told his office that the MACV explanation of the ban (that the operationʼs objectives are classified) was “an insult to the patriotism” of the newsmen. Attached is a hastily written letter to you4 which Halberstam composed in my office and then threw on my desk in disgust last Friday,5 remarking “you can do any damn thing you want with it.” It is certainly true, as the letter notes, that Halberstamʼs initial effort to be detached and fair to the GVN, which indeed has been the tone of his copy, is fast disappearing. The process accelerated Sunday when Halberstam went on a trip with the junk forces, got what he called a first rate briefing from a US Navy officer only to be told later by the same officer that the GVN commander had rebuked him for giving the briefing and asked him to ask Halberstam not to use it. When he got back to Saigon, Halberstam was literally shaking with anger.

Our hope that the GVN would begin getting a better stateside press as it made progress with the war has been fulfilled. There has been a distinct, continuing improvement, a widening recognition that the GVN perhaps can win. But the GVN, instead of easing off its bitterness, is responding with blind vindictiveness for past criticism.

I said earlier Iʼm not sure we can live with this. Apart from the tactical problem of how to deal with Nhu, I think we must consider action because the issue itself has changed. We reluctantly accepted the Sully and Robinson expulsions, without resorting to sanctions, on the principle that the GVN is a sovereign country and thus has a right to move against unfriendly reporters, even though this is not the way we would do it. The difference now is that this time the GVN is deliberately harassing all foreign newsmen, and, even more seriously, deliberately attempting to establish a blackout on news from Vietnam other than official communiques, which are notoriously unreliable, including news about activities of US personnel in Vietnam.

The question of GVN sovereignty is less black and white in this case. This is not just another under-developed country, or banana republic or what have you, rocking along in the usual intrigue and petty chauvinism. This is 1) the scene of a confrontation between East and West which could be decisive to the fate of Asia, and 2) an area of massive US involvement. This is not in any way meant to invoke the weary argument that we're spending millions here and the US thus has a “right” to special treatment by the GVN, which in effect is to confirm the communist line that Diem is a puppet, etc. The point is rather that the GVN is infringing on a root American right: the right of the American people to be informed of the facts on which the policies of their government are based, and on the activities of US military personnel committed to combat.

All this, furthermore, is apart from the fact that continued criticism of the GVN in the US press for trying to suppress newsmen inevitably weakens the Administrationʼs political capability to maintain the present policy of support for the GVN.

There is a certain parallel here with the problem of the American correspondents who covered the Eastern Front in World War II under innumerable restrictions, with one very big difference: in Vietnam, the USG has the means to correct the situation unilaterally, at least partially. It is, furthermore, conceivable that this could be done without a direct clash with the GVN, i.e., without forcing a face-losing showdown which could lead to serious damage to our relations in other areas.

Accordingly some recommendations which I hope you and General Harkins will consider: 1) We should cease forthwith any further efforts to change the GVN policy toward the press by persuasion, especially in view of Thuanʼs categorical assurances to you yesterday, which were the most we can hope for anyway. Failure of the GVN to follow through this time will surely establish beyond doubt that persuasion on this highly emotional issue doesn't work, and that further agitation can only exacerbate our relations.

2) MACV should begin now to give regular daily briefings to Western newsmen on a non-attribution basis. These in general should be limited to news about activities involving US personnel (which means virtually every action initiated by the GVN), but news of major developments involving only GVN personnel should also be “leaked” at the discretion of MACV. It would be preferable not to advise the GVN formally that such briefings have been started, thus avoiding a direct question of “face.” But if and when the GVN hears about them and inquires, we should simply say the pressure from the US press for adequate information became so intense that we could no longer resist it, and that of course the briefings will be discontinued once the GVN itself begins doing the job.

3) MACV should begin giving a limited amount of classified information to reputable Western newsmen to give them a true picture of whatʼs going on, and then request them not to publish or otherwise circulate those portions which would be damaging to operational security. This could not be done to the extent that correspondents were briefed during World War II because there is no censorship nor juridical control over them in this situation. (Censorship might be desirable here, but GVN application of it would unquestionably be so chaotic and politically motivated that itʼs not a reasonable consideration, in my opinion.) But I am completely confident that enough information could be entrusted with the newsmen to win their cooperation. It would, of course, be relatively simple to enforce their respect for classified information by instantly barring a correspondent who violated a confidence not only from the briefings but even from all American installations in Vietnam. If this is feasible, I think we should call a meeting of the American newsmen here to discuss how to go at it.

4) American advisors throughout the country should be instructed to ignore any GVN efforts to prevent them from cooperating with newsmen, to urge their Vietnamese counterparts to cooperate, and to insist that space for newsmen be provided in the plans of any operation involving American personnel or equipment. In application, the sense of this would be: no correspondents, no choppers. Again if this were done at the regional level, I think a showdown with the GVN could be avoided because the local commanders would be less willing to jeopardize US support by balking than would be the case in Saigon.

I think we should all accept the reality that the newsmen here will continue to find access to very much of the truth of whatʼs going on, regardless of what we may do. I think it is futile to try to “control” them, or cut off their sources. Americans, even in the military, simply donʼt work that way. If Sheehanʼs source for the Zone D story were located, for example, he would find somebody else next time. Similarly it seems rather pointless to me to try to prevent newsmen from obtaining such classified figures as the number of helicopters in an operation. Most of them find out simply by checking friends who live near Tan Son Nhut and count them as they take off.

There is hope of suppressing that kind of sensitive information, however, if we take the newsmen into our confidence as much as possible, i.e., honor their sense of patriotism as Halberstam puts it, and then ask them on the basis of their own good sense not to use certain specified items.

This kind of drastic shift in our policy vis-a-vis the press admittedly risks an unpleasant time with the GVN. It would verge on application of sanctions—especially in insisting on the right correspondents to go along on all operations as a condition to providing the helicopters. In my opinion, however, the long-term damage, if we permit the GVN to continue its present policy of deliberate harassment, would be appreciably greater. There is a good possibility, furthermore, that if the US applied this new policy swiftly and decisively, yet quietly, so nobody loses face, the GVN would go along with it in recognition, however reluctant, of the greater need for our help.

Subsequent (November 28) to typing of the foregoing, Colonel Smith advises that General Khanhʼs office had called to ask PIO/MACV to act temporarily as the outlet for ARVN military reports on a daily basis, pending inauguration of ARVN briefings. Khanh then delivered to the PIO a three-paragraph “bulletin” reporting on the resumption of the Zone D operation on November 27. Smith is releasing this to newsmen in writing. Khanhʼs office promised to deliver such bulletins daily around 5 or 6 p.m. Smith plans to follow the same procedure of release in writing, at least for the time being.

This, of course, is encouraging in the sense that Khanh is showing real interest in the project. It must immediately be noted, however, that the first bulletin was a day late. If this continues, the newsmen can be expected to continue tapping their own sources to get the news faster, with resulting continued errors and possible security breaches. Also, the bulletin was vaguely worded, omitting any indication of the size of the operation and similar details that newsmen will be sure to want.

The GVN will have to go vastly beyond this cautious first step if it hopes to bring about any appreciable change in the situation. My recommendation that MACV should begin its own briefings forthwith perhaps should now be amended to read that MACV should be prepared to do this if the present GVN experiment fizzles. But this does not change my opinion that MACV briefings will inevitably become necessary, nor affect my other recommendations.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Hilsman Trip 12/62-1/63. Secret; Noforn. Moore sent a copy of this memorandum to Murrow on December 10 (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA/I/S Files: FRC 68 A 4933, Field—Far East (IAF)), which was circulated by Forrestal to the Special Group on Counterinsurgency on January 28, 1963.

2 Not found.

3 Telegram 536, November 21, reported that reporters were required to submit their questions to field commanders in writing. (Department of State, Central Files, 951K.6211/11-2162)

4 Not printed.

5 November 23.

X. Senator Mansfieldʼs Visit to Vietnam and Subsequent Report; Visits and Reports by Johnson and Heavner December 1962X. Senator Mansfieldʼs Visit to Vietnam and Subsequent Report; Visits and Reports by Johnson and Heavner December 1962

323. Memorandum of Conversation, Gia Long Palace, Saigon, December 1, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Saigon, December 1, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 22.1. Mansfield Visit to Saigon. Confidential. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text, which is apparently a draft as it contains numerous handwritten corrections. The meeting was held at Gia Long Palace. On October 18 Kennedy had written Mansfield asking him to lead a bipartisan group of Senators to visit Berlin, Vietnam, and Southeast Asia to review the situation and U.S. policies in these areas. (University of Montana Library, Mansfield Papers, Series XXII, Box 95, Folder 13) The Senators left Washington on November 7 and returned December 17.

324. Editorial Note

325. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)

Washington, December 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Wood.

326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 8, 1962—2:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/12-562. Secret. Drafted by Wood on December 7, cleared with Cottrell and DOD/ISA, and initialed by Harriman Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

327. Notes on Visits to Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, and Okinawa by the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, December 10, 1962.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, IJKL. Confidential. Attached to a transmittal note from Johnson to Harriman, dated December 10. The visits took place December 1-9; Johnson was in Saigon December 6-8.

328. Report by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner)

Washington, December 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 10/30/62-12/31/62. Secret. The source text was attached to a memorandum from Cottrell to the Special Group (CI), dated December 11, which stated that it was being circulated for the information of the members. On December 18, Forrestal sent a copy of the report to President Kennedy, saying that it was one of “the more informative reports we have.” (Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office File, Staff Memoranda, Forrestal) On the same day Robert Johnson also sent a copy to Rostow stating that it was excellent and well worth reading. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron, 1962) On November 13, Heavner had written to Wood giving his initial impressions on the situation in Vietnam. A copy of this 4-page letter, which dealt mainly with the strategic hamlets, is ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 20.6 WG/VN-Meetings. Before leaving Vietnam Heavner had also prepared a 16-page memorandum for Nolting on his visit. Dated December 4 and comprising the following sections: General; Strategic Hamlets; SDC, Force Populaire, Village Defenders; and Random Observations on the Military Effort, this document is the same in substance as the report dated December 11. (Ibid., 1.A-2, Briefing Papers, GVN 1962)

329. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 15, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/12-1562. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

330. Report by the Senate Majority Leader (Mansfield)

Washington, December 18, 1962.

Source: Senate Document 93-11. Printed in U.S. Senate 93d Congress, 1st session, Two Reports on Vietnam and Southeast Asia to the President of the United States by Senator Mike Mansfield (Washington, April 1973), pp. 7-14. For Mansfieldʼs report to the Foreign Relations Committee, see U.S. Senate, Vietnam and Southeast Asia, Report of Senator Mike Mansfield … to the Committee on Foreign Relations (Washington, 1963).

331. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 19, 1962—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/12-1962. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

332. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, December 19, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Noforn. Signed by Hilsman. A stamp on the source text shows that it was received by the NSC on December 26. Copies were also circulated to the Special Group (CI) on December 31. Also printed in part in Hilsman, To Move a Nation, pp. 451-453.

333. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, December 21, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Top Secret.

334. Memorandum for the Files by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner)

Washington, December 27, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 22.1 Mansfield Visit to Saigon. Secret; Limit Distribution.

323. Memorandum of Conversation, Gia Long Palace, Saigon, December 1, 1962, 11:30 a.m. 323. Memorandum of Conversation, Gia Long Palace, Saigon, December 1, 1962, 11:30 a.m.1

Saigon, December 1, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Senators Mansfield, Pell, Smith, Boggs, Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu, Mr. Meloy the Ambassador, Mr. Truong Buu Khanh (interpreter)

The party arrived at Gia Long Palace at 11:30 a.m. Senator Mansfield expressed the groupʼs pleasure at being able to visit Mr. Nhu. He noted that the Ambassador and President Diem had already briefed the Senators on the Strategic Hamlet program, and that the party had just visited National Assembly President Truong Vinh Le and Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho.2 Senator Mansfield asked when the Strategic Hamlet program was likely to be completed. Mr. Nhu said that three years from now was the target date for complete implementation of the Strategic Hamlet program. Two thirds of the population will be living in Strategic Hamlets by January 1, 1963. The political, social, economic, and military revolution involved in the program would not be complete for three years, however. Ambassador Nolting noted that, while speed was important in implementing the program, thoroughness was also essential.

Senator Pell asked Mr. Nhu to explain the over-all Strategic Hamlet concept and its long-range goals. Mr. Nhu said the concept was intended to be a positive contribution to international strategy in the anti-Communist struggle. Subversion is the principal Communist strategy on the international level, and Viet Namʼs contribution is to develop a means of countering subversion. As long as the Communists are able to engage in subversive war, the free world cannot negotiate with them, because the Communists will not negotiate in good faith. The war here may be won militarily, but so long as the Communist Bloc retains the capability of waging subversive war, any free world victories will not be definite. By destroying the Communistʼs subversive capability, we will be placing them in the strategic deadlock in which we presently find ourselves.

Senator Mansfield noted that we were thus trying to turn the tables on the Communists.

Mr. Nhu stated that neither the Communists nor the free world wants a conventional war at this time. The Communists thus have an element of superiority in being able to wage subversive war, and it is not in their interest to negotiate. They will negotiate sincerely only when they are convinced they will not win by subversion. This is the perspective in which the strategic hamlet program should be seen.

Mr. Nhu noted that underdevelopment in Viet Nam has three aspects: 1) a feeling of humiliation, 2) a disunity of minds, resulting in contradictory forces, and 3) Communist subversion. To combat the problem of underdevelopment there are two great historical forces, one tending toward centralization, the other toward fragmentation.

The history of underdeveloped countries in the last fifteen years shows that the tendency toward concentration and centralization has predominated. All governments in underdeveloped countries that have tried democracy have been overthrown and replaced by military regimes. The backward nations have used only one of the great historical forces presently at work, concentration. Mr. Nhu said he had developed the idea that Viet Nam could make use of both of these forces, authoritarianism and democracy, to combat underdevelopment. He compared these forces to positive and negative electrical currents, which produce thunder, fire, and death, when not harmonized. If we can harness these forces, however, we can provoke not destruction but power.

The device for accomplishing this is the strategic hamlet. It attempts to exploit the war in Viet Nam for progress and democracy. This is contrary to history, but Viet Nam is trying to prove history wrong. Thanks to the war, the peasants recognize the usefulness of the strategic hamlet in providing them security. Security, however, is but one consequence of the social and political revolution contained in the strategic hamlet philosophy.

If there is no such revolution in Laos, Thailand or Cambodia, these nations will not be able to fight Communism or to make progress. The international proletariat of underdeveloped countries, and Communist subversion, have upset the classical norms of economic development. A more dialectical concept is needed. Most Afro-Asian countries choose neutrality in order not to be subject to pressures from East or West. Because of their distance from the West, they enjoy the indulgence of the Communists, but they still cannot achieve economic progress. Cambodia and Laos, for example, should wage an economic social, and political revolution.

Senator Pell asked whether land reform was necessary in Cambodia.

Mr. Nhu said that it was necessary, for each man should have his own property. Viet Nam has supported land reform with land development and agricultural credit programs. 87% of the population in Viet Nam is rural; this is the usual ratio for underdeveloped countries. However, this segment of the population enjoys only l/a of the national production, and this gives rise to a feeling of injustice. With the Strategic Hamlets, we hope to be able to reverse this ratio.

The West pays too much attention to winning the sympathy of the population, and not enough to organizing it. If the population is not organized, the Communists will be able to mobilize it against the government overnight. In Cambodia, for instance, the Communists could foment a rebellion at will, because the population is not organized. This would not be done only by political propaganda. In 1954, after the Geneva Agreements, the Communists regrouped 135,000 people to North Vietnam, and 10,000 of these were Cambodians. With this 10,000, they can blackmail 10,000 families, and can infiltrate agents into Cambodia whenever they wish. This is how the problem started in Vietnam.

It is impossible to combat Communist subversion with the personal popularity of the leadership. President Diem, for instance, was elected by the whole people, but the government is still subject to a subversive war.

Senator Mansfield noted that the President had explained this concept in theory to the group yesterday. The Senator stated that the relationship between our countries is excellent, but that occasionally people in the United States read about difficulties with the Western, and especially the United States, press. He said he was raising this question not only from a personal point of view but also from a Congressional standpoint. Some things that happen here create an unfavorable reaction in the United States. The Senator asked whether something could not be done about this problem, bearing in mind security and mutual respect, because it is a serious problem, and really the only one between the two countries. He said that he was asking this in the friendliest spirit.

Mr. Nhu said he was glad that Senator Mansfield had raised this question, as he was concerned with the problem as a part of global strategy. The free world is not adapted to subversive war in all fields. The Western press, especially the American press, is not adapted to subversive war, and lags in the world evolutionary process. For example, American newspaper correspondents in Vietnam are very young and inexperienced

Mr. Nhu stated that he had seen Mr. Crawford, a Newsweek editor, recently and had talked to him in the same vein. Mr. Crawford had asked him why the things he was saying were not known in the United States. Senator Mansfield asked if these things were new to Mr. Crawford. Mr. Nhu said that Mr. Crawford had told him that he had talked to the American Embassy before he called, but that Mr. Nhuʼs remarks went far beyond anything he had heard. Mr. Nhu said he had told Mr. Crawford that he understood it was difficult for the United States press to send high level correspondents to Viet Nam. However, newsmen must meet minimum standards of intellect and of emotion in order to grasp the problems in Vietnam.

In the case of Vietnam, in addition to Communist infiltration, there exists infiltration from other countries who have interests contrary to those of Vietnam. Vietnam is a former colony, and a certain class of people were left behind after independence who remained attached to colonialism. This class has lost its privileges as the go between for the colonialists and the Vietnamese people. As former landowners, they are the victims of agrarian reform, and therefore discontent. Because they know how to speak foreign languages, they find it possible to communicate with foreigners.

The Ambassador explained that Mr. Nhu was referring to the tendency of foreign correspondents to get their views from French and English speaking Vietnamese, who sometimes provide a distorted view.

Mr. Nhu noted that “our French friends” believe they have been replaced by the Americans, and are dissatisfied.

Before the Strategic Hamlet program, Mr. Nhu stated, there was great discontent in the Vietnamese countryside. Under the pressure of Communist subversion, the army was not capable of protecting the population. Military operations fell into a vacuum because the Army was not helped by the population. The people were dissatisfied with the army, troops were dissatisfied with their officers, and far from protecting the people, the army created popular discontent.

Senator Boggs asked Mr. Nhu to describe the reaction in North Vietnam to the economic and social progress being made in the Republic of Vietnam.

Mr. Nhu said that the North Vietnamese reaction was to seek a method of countering this progress, but that up to now they had not found an adequate one. He said that his objective was not to break the natural process of Communism, but rather to exploit it. The enemy is thus placed in an impasse. The Strategic Hamlets are a point of attraction for VC troops. Traditional in Asia, leaders have been afraid of remote regions, because distance can foster dissidence. The Strategic Hamlets will attract Communist troops and they will abandon their leaders. Mr. Nhu compared this tendency to the tendency of the Chinese who migrated to California to implant themselves there and forget their origins.

Mr. Nhu noted that the Laotian settlement failed to exploit this tendency, because Laotian neutrality, which is really pro-Communist neutrality, is destroying the hope of eventually liberating North Vietnam.

Senator Mansfield pointed out that there was a difference in the Laotian and Vietnamese problems because the Laotians would not fight. Mr. Nhu stated that this was because they do not know how to fight a subversive war. Senator Mansfield observed that the United States had spent 400 million dollars in Laos to help them fight. Mr. Nhu said that they had not been organized and thus did not know how to fight. Senator Mansfield said that the pro-Western Laotians had only shot their guns into the air, and that the Pathet Lao must have been stiffened by North Vietnamese, and even Chinese, soldiers. Mr. Nhu asked why we had not sent our own cadres to stiffen Gen. Phoumiʼs troops. Senator Mansfield asked if this had ever been suggested. Mr. Nhu said he had suggested it to Governor Harriman and to the French. He went on to say that if, in foreign policy, we say we accept the facts, that means we refuse to break the balance of forces. But we must break the balance of forces if it is not in our favor. One year ago, the balance was against us, but Mr. Nhu would not accept the facts and refused to believe the Laotians would not fight. In Vietnam too, before, to [the?] Strategic Hamlets, the people did not want to fight. As he said earlier, the population was against the soldiers, the soldiers were against the generals, the generals were against the government, and the government was dissatisfied with United States effectiveness. This general dissatisfaction prompted Mr. Nhu to develop the Strategic Hamlet program.

Senator Mansfield noted that Mr. Nhu had said he was dissatisfied with United States aid. The Senator noted that we had sent our best generals to Vietnam, and asked what had been wrong.

Mr. Nhu said that what he had meant was that when the situation was bad, everyone blames his neighbor. He said he had refused to accept these dissatisfactions, and had thought something else was wrong. What had been needed was a master plan corresponding to the requirements of an underdeveloped country in the Twentieth Century. Senator Mansfield asked if he had found it in the Strategic Hamlet plan. Mr. Nhu said that the Strategic Hamlet plan was only one element. He said that it must be considered in the context a) of Vietnamese history, b) of the historic movement of underdeveloped countries, c) of General Taylorʼs visit, and d) of men in the modern world. It was part of a new kind of humanism. The freedom which one acquires oneself is more precious than the freedom that is given by Santa Claus.

There has been a tremendous enthusiasm arising in the countryside during the last month. Mr. Nhu said he did not reproach the United States press for ignoring this popular movement, but he did notice that the press was not up to date.

Senator Mansfield asked if this was just the American press.

Mr. Nhu said that the American press is the most powerful. He said that his ambition was to bring a positive contribution to the United States, which is the leader of the free world. United States strategy leans on regional organizations, but is weak in underdeveloped areas. These areas have been a dead weight so far for the United States and have made no contribution. Mr. Nhu said that if we succeed in our experiment here, it will be very valuable for all other countries.

The Ambassador said, with respect to the press, that there was always a time lag in reporting. He said he tries every day to explain to the press how things are moving in Vietnam. One mark of the journalist, however, is skepticism toward government releases. The journalist wants to go out and see for himself. If he sees that the government is applying pressure on the people, he compares this with the governmentʼs own statements. The Ambassador asked again that there not be a severe reaction to unfavorable stories, as this only increases the skepticism of the press and makes our mutual task more difficult.

Mr. Nhu said that we must not concentrate so much on this question because the American people have a good sense of fair play. Once they recognize their mistakes they change their attitude. For a powerful country such as the United States, opposition to the press is nothing. For a small, poor country at war, like Vietnam, there is great popular sensitivity. Mr. Nhu said that the Vietnamese are conducting an impassioned war, not subject to reason. There are only 14 million South Vietnamese fighting against international communism, represented by 650 million Chinese. Vietnam has been fighting 23 years for subjective reasons. Its passion must be respected as that is all it has left.

He said that he thought the attitude of the American press had changed, because the Americans have a high respect for those who are willing to fight. The Vietnamese are proud to fight, and want to be proud of their friends. He said that the United States reaction to the Cuba situation had made the Vietnamese proud.

Senator Mansfield said that we were very pleased to hear this.

Mr. Nhu continued that the Vietnamese had been humiliated, however, by the United States policy in Laos and Cambodia.

Senator Smith asked Mr. Nhu to describe the background of the Cambodian and Laotian problems, and to estimate how long they would last. Mr. Nhu said that when the United States found an adequate solution for subversive war, we would win. So long as we have no solution, we will be humiliated.

Relationships between Vietnam and Laos and Cambodia include United States involvement as a factor. What the Communists are seeking in Laos and Cambodia is to weaken Vietnam and to drive the Americans out. That is all. They accomplished this in Laos and Cambodia and are trying to do it in Vietnam. The Ambassador said that they had not done it yet in Cambodia. Mr. Nhu said that Cambodia had asked that the MAAG withdraw. The Ambassador noted that this had not yet been done, and that the problem was very delicate.

Mr. Nhu said that both Souvanna and Sihanouk realize that their value lies in their distance from the U.S. If they were committed to the U.S., they would lose their value. By leaning toward the Chinese Communists, they retain their position with the U.S., but if they aligned themselves with the U.S. they would be despised. They have a means of pressure on the U.S., but the U.S. has no means of pressure on them.

The Ambassador asked whether Mr. Nhu thought Prince Sihanouk would like to see North Vietnam take over South Vietnam. Mr. Nhu said that Sihanouk hates North Vietnam. There are two elements in his policy: 1) the conviction that communism is the wave of the future, and 2) the desire to retain his bargaining position with the U.S. He takes advantage of the fact that America has no means of pressure on him. If we develop a theory of subversive war, and can wage it ourselves, we will have a means of pressure on him.

Mr. Nhu continued that in the meantime, America should not drop its existing friends for potential friends. Sihanouk and Souvanna are not friends of America. America has a firm friend here in South Vietnam, and must not sacrifice it for the sake of those who will never be Americaʼs friends. If the Communist Chinese come to Southeast Asia, Vietnam will fight them. The Vietnamese would like to fight the Chinese, and there are elements in North Vietnam that would support such a war.

At this point the meeting broke up. The Ambassador asked Mr. Nhu, after the meeting, for clarification on one point. Had Mr. Crawford of Newsweek magazine said that he had not understood our explanation of the situation in Vietnam? Mr. Nhu said that Mr. Crawford had understood it, but that he, Mr. Nhu, had clarified his understanding of the problem.

On leaving, Senator Mansfield thanked Mr. Nhu for being so frank and direct. Mr. Nhu said that his frankness was an expression of Vietnamese friendship for the United States, and added that America is Vietnamʼs only friend in the world.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 22.1. Mansfield Visit to Saigon. Confidential. No drafting or clearance information is given on the source text, which is apparently a draft as it contains numerous handwritten corrections. The meeting was held at Gia Long Palace. On October 18 Kennedy had written Mansfield asking him to lead a bipartisan group of Senators to visit Berlin, Vietnam, and Southeast Asia to review the situation and U.S. policies in these areas. (University of Montana Library, Mansfield Papers, Series XXII, Box 95, Folder 13) The Senators left Washington on November 7 and returned December 17.

2 Memoranda of these conversations are ibid., Folder 8.

324. Editorial Note 324. Editorial Note

On December 3, 1962, Roger Hilsman transmitted to Secretary of State Rusk research memorandum RFE-59, “The Situation and Short-term Prospects in South Vietnam,” which appraised the internal political situation in South Vietnam over the past year. Although the leaders of South Vietnam apparently believed that the tide was turning against insurgency and subversion, the memorandum concluded that this optimism was premature, and that at best the rate of deterioration had decelerated as United States assistance had increased. For text of RFE-59, see United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Book 12, Part I, pages 487-521.

325. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting) 325. Letter From the Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Wood) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Nolting)1

Washington, December 7, 1962.

Dear Fritz: This letter can be put aside and read later when you have fewer visitors.

We were very pleased here with Ken Crawfordʼs cover story in Newsweek on Viet-Nam of December 10, 1962. If anything it was a bit optimistic, but we can use some balancing cheer in the public prints. I hope to get to the Saturday Evening Post people about the two poor articles in their November 24th issue. Bernard Fallʼs recommendations certainly follow very close to the neutralist, crypto-communist line. I donʼt think he is a communist, but his emotions have been so long wrapped up in Viet-Nam that his judgement is false. I must say I was surprised that the Post published it. The article on South Viet-Nam in the same issue by Harold H. Martin left one with the impression that all of the Americans are champing at the bit for more military action, but are being held back by a timid President Diem. This non-accurate assessment presumably reflects the many and galling frustrations under which all military advisors work in the field and is probably also connected with the fact that they canʼt know everything or even enough of whatʼs going on in Saigon. Halberstamʼs articles also rely heavily on military sources.

I have been discussing this here with some of our public relations people and we would like to encourage you to give even more time than you now do to the newspaper men so that their reporting will reflect a better overall assessment of the war from the point of view of all American interests involved. I donʼt know what your present practice is, but wonder if you would consider giving a weekly backgrounder. I realize this can be time consuming, annoying and that they donʼt always appear to listen, but I do believe it will pay off not only as a means of briefing them, but also as an occasion of give and take exchange of news and as a chance for them to vent their frustrations to the top American. The reporters are there and they are going to report the war to the free world press. Since the Vietnamese are doing such a poor job, it devolves on us to see that we get better understanding and support from the American press. I remember how well you handled the press during the backgrounder which you gave here last winter, as well as your TV appearance.2 Since you have both the capacity and the position to speak for the Americans, allow me to sell you on doing as much as you can, I am sure that this will give us the results in the press here which we badly need. In fact this gap—the explanation of the war to the American citizen—seems to us the biggest remaining problem to be licked in our efforts to maintain an effective and long-continuing American support of the Vietnamese defense effort. Furthermore, if you demonstrate that the American press can be briefed successfully and that they are, after all, human, the Vietnamese may be encouraged to be more forthcoming and to take on more fully the job of describing their own war to the foreign newsmen. However, I realize the deep emotional problem which you face here with Counselor Nhu.

I was asked recently about how Americans are briefed on the concept that as guests in the Vietnamese house they should not be publicly critical of Vietnamese efforts. I recall in 1959 that incoming personnel, both military and civilian, used to receive several days briefing and I suppose that this continues. I realize that to circulate anything in writing which could be interpreted by the newspaper men as an order to U.S. personnel to keep their traps shut would hit the headlines the next day. I therefore suppose the guest-in-the-house idea is presented orally, in the course of indoctrination briefing. In view of the frustrations all Americans face in Viet-Nam, particularly those in the field, I suppose it is one of those topics on which people need frequent oral reminders. If fish and guests stink after three days, sometimes the guestʼs view of the host can become jaundiced during the course of the visit.

New subject. I have pouched to you yesterday several old despatches and telegrams which I drafted on the history of the Vietnamese-Cambodian frontier and other aspects of the relations of the two countries. This is not only pride of authorship but also because there seem to be no other documents in the files. I concluded in 1958 that there was no sacred document which would reveal the one, true line. There does appear to have been a series of decrees (cited in the telegrams I sent you) issued at about the time the French pulled out but apparently the decrees did not have any maps annexed to them. Within a few days I will get together with the Geographerʼs Office and send a telegram to Saigon and Phnom Penh giving a round-up of the information available in Washington. This incidentally includes a full set of 1:40,000 aerial photographs made in the late 1950s for the Army Map Service. More on this anon.

Ted gave a most excellent discourse on the situation in Viet-Nam yesterday to the assembled members of Cotʼs SEA Task Force. It evoked much interest and sympathy. He will pouch you his report very soon.3

With best wishes,

Yours sincerely,

Chalmers B. Wood4

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Wood.

2 Regarding Noltingʼs visit, January 5-14, see Documents 14-16.

3 Document 328.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 326. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 8, 1962—2:02 p.m.

588. Embtel 567.2 In Departmentʼs view political considerations would suggest limiting use napalm to high priority targets which clearly VC installations. Assume this has been past policy and that similar discretion will be employed in future.

Also request Embassy report to Department on pros and cons use napalm in Viet-Nam with particular emphasis on question whether such use will damage GVNʼs eventual ability reestablish its influence in areas subjected to it.

In future, plans for using large amounts napalm in any one operation to be cleared with Department.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/12-562. Secret. Drafted by Wood on December 7, cleared with Cottrell and DOD/ISA, and initialed by Harriman Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Telegram 567, December 5, reported that Harkins had obtained JCS authority contingent upon Embassy concurrence, to utilize Farmgate aircraft to deliver napalm in an air operation in Zone D. (Ibid.)

327. Notes on Visits to Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, and Okinawa by the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 327. Notes on Visits to Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, and Okinawa by the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, December 10, 1962.

[Here follow reports on Johnsonʼs visits to Bangkok and Vientiane.]

Saigon

In Saigon I had conversations with President Diem, Foreign Minister Mau, Defense Minister Thuan and several members of the Assembly.2 In addition to the Ambassador, I also met with selected members of the Country Team, particularly the CIA Station Chief and the DCM, Mr. Trueheart, and some U.S. military officers. I also visited two provinces in the highland area (Pleiku and the new province of Phu Bon) and one in the coastal area (Tuy Hao), as well as the new Pleiyit mountain commando school.

My general impressions and observations are as follows: 1. The spirit of the Vietnamese officials and the U.S. officials and advisers, and the relations between them, are very impressive. While there is a subjective tendency on the part of both to emphasize the positive and to minimize the negative, the undoubted gains are substantial. The negative factor for which it is difficult to find a satisfactory answer is that both the U.S. and Vietnamese estimates indicate a significant increase in organized Viet Cong strength during the past year. It is also difficult, even in the field close to the area, to obtain a clear view of the level and relative importance of present infiltration through Laos.

2. There is no basis for believing the “war can be over” in another year. Thuanʼs most optimistic estimate is three years.

3. USOM is now doing a vigorous and effective job, and there is excellent coordination between all elements of the Country Team as well as with the Vietnamese Government.

4. Diem continues to be very suspicious of French motives and these suspicions have been reinforced by the French attitude on the recent Sihanouk neutrality proposals.3 Diem constantly seeks reassurance that we are not going to be influenced by the French to seek a negotiated “neutral solution” in South Vietnam.

5. Both Thailand and South Vietnam see Cambodia as “their Cuba” and hope that if Sihanouk invites in the Chinese Communists we will take an equally vigorous stand.

6. The Montagnard program is very impressive and the Vietnamese have embraced it with enthusiasm. In some ways they seem to be going to greater lengths to woo the Montagnards than their own people.

7. In the field one feels much less squeamishness on using chemical crop destruction than when back here in Washington. First, napalm has for long been used quite extensively. Also, one gets the feeling that the local officials and military have a fairly accurate picture of what crops are going where. Also, one is reassured by the evident effective measures for relief of Montagnard refugees. In addition, there seems to be much less of a psychological or political problem in the use of such methods against Montagnard crops than would be the case against the crops of the more sophisticated Vietnamese.

8. The $189 million ceiling on MAP for FY ʼ63 is substantially interfering with our ability to fund the very important “strategic hamlet kits” and the less important TR-5 hamlet radios. Nolting feels the ceiling should, if possible, be raised to $205 million.

9. The “Province Rehabilitation Committee” chaired on the U.S. side by DCM Trueheart and on the Vietnamese side by Nhu, with the Minister of Interior as Nhuʼs “action officer”, is working excellently and is the point at which military, political and economic plans and programs are really tied together. One very senior U.S. military officer told me “Trueheart comes closer to carrying out the day-to-day overall direction of the war as a whole than any other individual in Saigon”.

10. A conversation with Diem is an experience never to be forgotten. The words flow in an unending stream and for one whose French is less than perfect the strain of following is intense, particularly as he makes many of his points very indirectly. He has opinions on most subjects from the relationship of taxi dancers to espionage to Chinese Communist tactics in Guinea. However, he listened carefully and with evident interest to a short summary of the events with respect to Cuba.

11. In the eight-day period from November 29 to December 6 eight separate Congressional delegations visited Saigon, of which four called on President Diem. While Saigon, as does any other post, welcomes serious Congressional visits such a number of uncoordinated visits and the often exacting nature of the visitorsʼ demands not only impose extraordinary burdens on the staffs of the posts, but also on the good nature of the local officials. For example, one delegation demanded that all members of the party, including wives and subordinate staff members, be present at the meeting with President Diem and established a strict limit on the time they would make available for the meeting. Another insisted on advance approval of table seating. In Vientiane at the last minute another advanced its departure time, requiring the Ambassador to produce the Prime Minister (which he did) for a hurried 11:30 lunch, etc., etc. It is the feeling of the posts that much of this results from excessive zeal on the part of escort officers in interpreting the supposed wishes of the principals. However, much of it leaves an impression of bad manners and all too often an impression on local officials that they and our Ambassadors abroad are expected to jump at the whim of any Congressional visitor. This is not good for the United States. There are, of course, notable exceptions in which I would include Senator Jackson, from what I observed.

[Here follows a report on Johnsonʼs visit to Okinawa.]

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, IJKL. Confidential. Attached to a transmittal note from Johnson to Harriman, dated December 10. The visits took place December 1-9; Johnson was in Saigon December 6-8.

2 A memorandum of the conversation with Mau, which dealt with the situation in Laos, is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 67 A 677, 350 GVN. A record of a similar conversation with Ambassador Nolting on Cambodia is ibid., 320 Cambodia. No record of the other conversations has been found.

3 For text of Sihanoukʼs letter to President Kennedy, August 20, requesting official recognition of Cambodian neutrality, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1002-1003.

328. Report by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) 328. Report by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner)1

Washington, December 11, 1962.

VISIT TO VIETNAM, OCTOBER 18-NOVEMBER 26, 1962

I. Recommendations

A. Continue to place top priority on the strategic hamlet program. Adopt and refine present plans and programs but prove out what we are now doing before turning to new plans or tactics. Set up evaluation machinery to determine the best means of establishing effective strategic hamlets.

B. Use our influence and resources to insure that hamlet authorities have adequate means and powers, including the control of separate hamlet budgets and the power to inflict minor punishments. Seek to increase the competence and prestige of hamlet authorities by training, publicity, and rewards.

C. Strengthen the SDC by more contact with American advisors, frequent on-spot retraining, and more emphasis on civic action training.

D. Continue limited support for the Force Populaire as an experimental and promising form of CIDG, but resist GVN plans to cut SDC funds or strength in order to finance the Force Populaire.

E. In connection with recommendations B and C, seek to assign US advisors to district chiefs.

F. Work for better overall control of Citizens Irregular Defense Groups. Standardization or formalization of the CIDG is not desirable, but improved machinery for coordination with other counterinsurgency measures and plans is necessary.

G. Anticipate and plan for increased infiltration, particularly via Cambodia. Study on a high priority basis all means of closing the Cambodian frontier to infiltration.

H. Further refine the use of air power in this kind of unconventional war. Avoid bombing “VC villages.” Emphasize the fast reaction time and surveillance capabilities of aircraft.

I. Study the problem of VC rehabilitation in the context of the strategic hamlet program and influence the GVN to develop an appropriate rehabilitation program for VC sympathizers in the hamlets.2

II. General Remarks

I spent 40 days in Viet-Nam and visited 17 provinces, making a special effort to compare the present situation with conditions as I observed them in March and April of this year and during the period July 1958 to July 1961. The following report is necessarily impressionistic. I did not have time to go into any one problem exhaustively, and fact is not always easy to come by in Viet-Nam.

Since the fall of last year, we have moved from a situation in which the VC were clearly winning to a stand-off. This is real progress, particularly in a guerrilla war. But the tide has not fumed. The VC are still very strong, and our key programs are still in many respects experimental.

I see no prospect of completely eliminating the Viet Cong by actions in South Viet-Nam. So long as the country is undergoing the strains and tensions of modernization, and so long as it is relatively safe and cheap for the DRV to exploit those strains and tensions, we will have the VC with us. But I do believe that the programs now in motion in South Viet-Nam, if pursued consistently and vigorously, will reduce VC strength and activity to the point where the GVN can handle the situation with greatly reduced US military assistance. This is likely to take several years at least.

The strategic hamlet program is the heart of our effort and deserves top priority. While it has not—and probably will not—bring democracy to rural Viet-Nam, it provides truly local administration for the first time. Coupled with measures to increase rice production and farmer income, these local administrations can work a revolution in rural Viet-Nam. But it will not come quickly and it is by no means assured.

On the military side, there is no question that ARVN and the paramilitary are fuming in markedly better performance. Morale is high, they are doing more night work, killing fewer prisoners, and getting more intelligence from the people. There is also no blinking the fact that the VC do not seem to be declining in numbers, weapons or ability. Moreover, the DRV could probably increase VC strength substantially in a short period of time by stepping up infiltration.

The most encouraging things I noted on this trip include the general success of our people in winning confidence and working with the Vietnamese (this is significant progress over the suspicion I observed six months ago), the training and arming of the Montagnard, increased GVN and US emphasis on rural economic programs, and a general lift in morale.

III. Strategic Hamlets

A. General Observations

This program is off to a good start. Except in Central Viet-Nam, where the program has been weakened by Ngo Dinh Canʼs failure to support it, provincial and local authorities have a far better understanding of the concept than was the case six months ago. The hamlets vary greatly in quality, and the program suffers from the general, chronic shortage of leadership and organization. But as a mixture of political, economic, and military measures, the strategic hamlet effort appears to offer the best hope of defeating the Viet Cong. As such, it should be the main focus of our planning, and we should resist any tendency to reduce its top priority.

We must recognize that our experience with strategic hamlets is quite limited. The concept in its present form may not be the best means of dealing with the VC. We should not be doctrinaire about standards or models at this time.

We should undertake systematic and continuing evaluation of the program. Ideally, this would be done by a joint US-GVN team with its own transport and with authority to visit any hamlet at any time. Failing this, we should at least encourage the GVN to undertake systematic evaluation, independent of the provincial authorities, while we make an effort to do the same on our side through sector advisors and the new embassy provincial reporting program.

One example of the need for evaluation—and the importance of not being doctrinaire at this time—is the matter of fences. Flimsy, halfhearted bamboo barriers around some of the hamlets are often the subject of scornful criticism by our people. But there is no point in demanding elaborate perimeters everywhere before we really know how important the perimeter is. Conversations with missionaries and local authorities, including several hamlet chiefs, suggest that the so called “political fences” are far from useless. They have the immediate psychological value of making the hamlet a visible geographical entity, automatically set up “in” and “out” groups, force the VC to at least symbolically violate the whole hamlet to get at any individual. Also, the Vietnamese generally like hedges and fences around their homes and have a feeling of family security and unity behind them. Even a poor hamlet fence has something of this effect on the whole community, and what counts in an attack is the attitudes on the inside of the fence

B. Some Immediate Results

It is a truism to say that this war is as much political as military. The political side of the strategic hamlet program is sometimes described as the establishment of rice roots democracy by means of hamlet elections. I donʼt believe this is happening (see below). But the new hamlets do achieve at least two immediate political effects.

One of the first results of setting up a strategic hamlet is that it tends to bring loyalties into the open and force choice on the uncommitted. Some who are pro-VC can of course hide their sympathies and contribute to the building of the hamlet with enough enthusiasm to be regarded as good citizens. Some of the uncommitted can do what is required of them and still maintain their neutral posture. But the building of the fence is a symbolic act which is lost on neither the peasant nor the VC. Few peasants are consummate actors, and as the hamlet is built, their sympathies become apparent to neighbors and friends and hamlet authorities.

This separation of hamlet populations into groups of various shades of loyalty and disloyalty to the government is already partly accomplished. In Hai Yen visitors are told how many of the people are pro-VC, how many have relatives with the Communists, and how many actively support the government. District chiefs have always kept records on suspect elements, and these records are available to the hamlet authorities. I think we can reasonably hope that the process will be carried out over the next year to the point where there are relatively few Vietnamese whose political coloration is not known to the government. This will be a major step toward the ultimate separation of the people from the VC.

Another immediate political result of the program is the building, for the first time, of truly local administrations. The hamlet officials may not be democratically selected by our lights, but they are not immune to social pressures. They live in the hamlet. Village officials may be able to ignore real grievances to some extent. District chiefs certainly can. It will be far more difficult for the hamlet officials who, on the average, are dealing with only about 1,000 of their friends, neighbors and relatives.

C. The Matter of Elections

I observed closely, in the provinces, the 1959 National Assembly elections. The question uppermost in the minds of the peasants then was not “Who should I choose to represent me?” but simply “What do they want of me?” I saw no evidence of fraud, and I donʼt think there was any in the areas I visited. But the government candidates got 99% of the vote. It was a simple matter of the peasantʼs observing that one of the candidates wore the government label and concluding that the prudent course was to vote for him.

Much the same sort of process appears to be at work in the hamlet elections. The village or district chief can informally let it be known who he favors for office—usually the present hamlet chief—and the election is carried out accordingly. Evidence of this came to me in the remarks of a number of Vietnamese officials. Nearly all conceded the necessity for close control of the elections. In several cases, they said frankly that rural Viet-Nam will have to wait a generation or longer to have real democracy.

One Province Chief said that of course he was controlling the elections: “Democracy here cannot come before security. It will take at least ten years.” The chief of a provincial council observed that the people require strong leadership and so the officials must put forward the candidates. A Regional Delegateʼs deputy remarked that there are two or three families in each hamlet who have always called the shots, and they will continue to do so for at least another generation. A missionary pointed out that the kind of direct confrontation involved in western style elections is repugnant to the Vietnamese; they would rather make such decisions informally to prevent loss of face: “Of course the elections are decided in advance. The people would be very uncomfortable if they were not.”

I was also told by MAAG advisors that the old hamlet chief is usually elected to be the new hamlet chief. Three hamlet chiefs themselves told me that they had been the “thon troung” or hamlet chief long before they were elected to the job. While a hamlet charter which I obtained in Binh Tuy sets the term of office at one year, other hamlet charters shown to me had no term of office, and provincial officials generally said that there is none: “We will have new elections when they are necessary.”

In short, given the character of rural Vietnamese society plus the Communist threat, there is at this time little likelihood of free elections as we conceive them.

D. The Aims of the Program

The basic aim is, of course, to separate the people from the VC. To achieve this, I am not convinced that there is any present need to impose our political ideas on the Vietnamese peasants. Free elections and town meetings can come later. If we can get effective local administration—albeit paternalistic—plugged into the national administration, if we can open up a few lines of communication up as well as down, and if we can involve the peasant in the defense of a felt stake in a developing hamlet economy tied into the national economy, we will have done quite enough to freeze out the VC. We are by no means sure of doing any of these things. To help bring them about, I think the following ideas should be considered:

1. Adequate means and authority for hamlet officials.

If the hamlet chief and his council are forced to refer all decisions to the village chief and rely on him for sanctions, if they must depend on allotments from the village budget to carry out their improvement plans, and in general, if they appear only as feeble appendages of the village and district authorities, they are not likely to be very successful.

The hamlet charters now being written by each strategic hamlet invest the hamlet council with very slight powers (almost exclusively advisory) and no sanctions. They are completely silent on the authority of the hamlet administrative committee, which is to be the real governing body in the hamlet. (The charters follow very closely the model charter issued by the GVN as a training document.)

I am told that the GVN is considering authorizing hamlet budgets. I am much in favor of this, and feel strongly that the powers of the hamlet administrative committee ought to be spelled out in a GVN decree or law and incorporated into the hamlet charters as well. They should have the power to collect and disburse hamlet funds, enact and enforce local regulations, and be armed with authority to inflict minor penalties on offenders.

Our monetary assistance to the hamlet “self-help” projects in Hai Yen will help to arm the hamlet authorities with the necessary means and authority. But this can not be more than a partial and transitory answer. The GVN will have to accomplish this itself, probably at the expense of village administration.

2. Training, rewards, prestige for hamlet officials.

Getting the right people in office is important, of course, but getting the most out of them is probably more so. Being a good hamlet chief is well within the native abilities of a great many peasants, but few are sufficiently trained and motivated. We should press for better training and retraining of these people, get into the process ourselves (perhaps via sector advisors) when we can.

Perhaps USIS and USOM could help prepare a weekly or monthly publication for hamlet chiefs. Such a publication could include practical administrative advice, using the experiences and successes of various hamlet chiefs as concrete examples. The publication would serve both as a training device and a morale builder for hamlet officials. We might also consider partially underwriting contact training teams, to include perhaps a US administrative or PsyWar expert, to train hamlet officials on the spot.

A national congress of strategic hamlet chiefs held some time, say next spring, would serve as a useful device for training and exchange of ideas, while building the prestige of the hamlet chiefs. Awards for outstanding performance, with appropriate ballyhoo, might do a lot to improve the prestige and morale of those prime targets for VC assassination. Perhaps the President could be induced to make the awards at the national Strategic Hamlet Congress.

3. Economic Development.

A real stake in the status quo at the hamlet level for every peasant could be a powerful weapon for the GVN. The GVN is wisely putting its funds for schools, agricultural credit, dispensaries, etc. into the strategic hamlets. Our aid in the form of fertilizer, plant protection chemicals, surplus food, and the pig program is effectively reinforcing this effort.

But the heart of rural Viet-Nam is rice. If we want to help the peasant in a way that really makes sense to him, if we want to increase peasant income and GVN resources, if we mean to give the hamlets a real economic lease on life, we must increase rice production dramatically. Vietnamese rice yields are very low compared with Taiwan and Japan. The yield could be increased, perhaps doubled, if we brought in, on a big scale, the fertilizers and the third country technicians to carry out effective, large-scale agricultural extension and improvement.

This would be expensive. It would require facing the fact that Vietnamese rice would be in competition with Louisiana rice because a large increase in rice production would mean exports (some could be exported in the form of pork, beef and alcohol, of course). It would take time, probably a minimum of several years. It would also require a sharp about-face in GVN price policies, which are now aimed at deliberately holding down the domestic price of rice.

I am told that the world rice market is good now and that long term prospects are also good. I understand that Vietnamese rice sells in Saigon now for about half what it would bring in Hong Kong. In 1939 Viet-Nam exported something like 1-1/2 million tons of rice.

Analysts such as Rostow say an agricultural revolution is the necessary first step toward take-off in economic development. Our aid to roads and light industries, helpful though it has been, has not over the past seven years brought the take-off point visibly nearer in Viet-Nam. I think rice might. In any event, an increase in peasant income should help against the VC and perhaps enable the GVN to shoulder a little more of the cost of defending SEA.

Even if increased US aid for rice production is not possible, I believe we should use our influence to persuade the GVN to alter its price policy. I am certainly no expert on this matter, but conversations here and in Washington, with both Vietnamese and Americans, makes me think the GVN could safely increase the price of rice, perhaps could even insure a direct income increase for the peasant by controlling directly or indirectly the distribution channels. (If they can protect the harvest against the VC, I think they can protect the farmer against the middleman.)

If such a policy were announced by the President as a direct effort to help the farmer, it would have a lot of political impact. I am told a moderate price increase would not much affect living costs for urban Vietnamese, which the GVN generally controls in any event. Diemʼs policy of favoring and developing the agricultural sector, announced in his State of the Union message, suggests he could be persuaded. I am told only he could make the decision to change price policy. Certainly only he could get maximum political mileage out of it.

4. District Advisors.

Sector advisors have had a marked effect on the attitudes and performance of provincial officials. Although it varies greatly from province to province, I believe there is no doubt of the value of their influence on provincial administration. Much of this has been a matter of osmosis in day to day contact.

District, village and hamlet officials are not benefiting from this kind of contact because the sector advisor simply has too little time. While GVN reluctance to permit Americans to operate at district level might prove insuperable, I believe the assignment of district advisors should be considered as an important means of improving local administration.

District advisors would mean a personnel increase of about 250 men plus the added burden of supporting them. They would be in exposed positions in many cases and we could expect casualties. But I think they could do a very important job.

IV. Some Signs of Progress

A. Morale

Morale is greatly improved among government officials at all levels. I have the distinct impression that many if not most civil servants believe the GVN will win in the space of a year or two. It is certainly risky to try to judge the attitude of the people as a whole, but I think there can be little doubt that in their eyes, too, the GVN is now in a much more favorable position than it was in late 1961.

Supporting my impression that the people believe the GVN will win is the report that the government is getting more information from ordinary people. American advisors in the field told me of a number of instances in which villagers tipped off the authorities to impending VC attacks. Six months ago, I heard almost no instances of this kind of intelligence.

B. Better Military Performance

Though there were some vociferous dissents, our advisors say that the GVN forces are doing more and better night work. There is still room for much improvement in patrolling and ambushing. But the night no longer belongs only to the VC.

Handling and exploitation of VC prisoners is also better. While rough interrogation is still too common, the outright killing of prisoners has been cut by at least 80%, according to our advisors in the field. Whereas in the past almost every operation saw prisoners deliberately killed, this is now rare. The reason: pressure from our advisors. One man told me he fumed his own weapon on a Vietnamese officer to prevent the killing of a prisoner. Advisors often call for helicopters to rush prisoners out, thus getting them rapidly to competent interrogators as well as saving their skins.

C. Use of Montagnards

I was very favorably impressed by the job CIA and our Special Forces are doing with the Montagnards. Judging by what I saw and was told at Buon Enao and in northern Kontum, there is every reason to believe that we can choke off most infiltration via the high plateau in about a yearʼs time.

The GVN is also doing better by the Montagnards than ever before. While most Vietnamese officials still privately regard the Montagnards as something less than human, they have for the most part thoroughly grasped the importance of using the Montagnards against the VC. It is not true that the Montagnards are coming over to the GVN because of the GVNʼs benevolence. Their chief motivation is a natural desire to get out of a crossfire. But the GVN has recognized the opportunity presented, and while sometimes still moving far too slowly to suit our people, is honestly attempting to help the tribespeople. One example: an ARVN commander cut his own menʼs rations to provide food for the Montagnards until relief supplies arrived.

D. U.S. Advisors

The quality of our people in the field is high. They have gained more acceptance than I thought possible six months ago. They have steadily eroded, if not solved, many military and some local semi-political problems by ad hoc, personal pressure and persuasion. They are particularly impressive where I might have expected them to be weakest: the lower ranking officers, from lieutenant to major, are proving themselves adaptable and imaginative.

I think it worth pointing out that our military people are almost universally suffering from various degrees of acute frustration. They canʼt command, they only advise. This is surely the hardest role a good officer can play. To this must be added the frustrations of dealing intimately every day with the Vietnamese mind, an underdeveloped technology and transport system, a major language problem, and the unfamiliar tactics of an enemy they can rarely come to grips with. In spite of all this, they are doing a good job. My hat is off to them.

V. Some Soft Spots

A. SDC vs. Force Populaire

I am concerned by reports that the SDC may be dropped or cut in favor of an expanded Force Populaire. While the SDC has many faults as it is now constituted, it has borne the brunt of the VC attack for a long time. With better training and arms, it is beginning to take a heavy toll of VC. It is a local force, bound in most cases to the defense of the village by personal ties.

The Force Populaire is frankly experimental. It has to my knowledge taken no casualties. The number of VC killed or captured by the FP must be around 10-20, judging by the accounts of a number of people who should know. It has worked, I believe, exclusively in safe areas, and although it has been in existence for about a year has admittedly made no clear contribution to security. The concept as explained to me in Hue is excellent—but it is not clear that in actual practice it has been or can be applied.

The Force Populaire also raises some troublesome problems. It is not controlled by the province chief or by the division commander in the area. It is run by a provincial committee, with overall direction from Brother Can in Hue. In many cases it is not apparently meshed in any way with the strategic hamlet program, though I believe some province chiefs are trying hard to bring it into the overall plan. In at least one instance, the FP got itself into a lively firefight with the Civil Guard through this lack of coordination. The FP is engaged in essentially political work as an arm of the Ngo Dinh Can organization; there is here more than a hint of an armed political faction.

Though trained in part by special forces, the FP for some reason is an organization so secret that most MAAG advisors have never heard of it. This includes at least two senior advisors, one of them the senior advisor in a Corps area. I fail to understand the need for such secrecy, especially as the presence of FP in a village is not … a secret.

This is an interesting experiment, and I think we should continue to support it to some degree. The idea of direct personal contact, peasant to peasant, on behalf of the GVN has much to recommend it. But this organization can only supplement, not replace, the SDC. The FP demands of its members a very large measure of patriotism, political sophistication, practical psychology, initiative, and a willingness to undertake hard and dangerous work for no material advantage. Such people are in short supply.

SDC vs. Hamlet Militia

There is also discussion of dropping the SDC in favor of unpaid village and hamlet youth defenders. This may be possible ultimately, but at the moment would be very unwise. Inadequately trained and motivated though they may be, the SDC are generally still much better in these departments than the youth defenders. They are likely to be so for some time. Moreover, even when the youth defenders are in much better shape, they will still require a nearby reserve or strike force at the village level. The SDC can continue to serve that function. And of course, dropping the SDC would likely result in an increased rural underemployment problem, further depressing the rural economy and quite possibly adding very substantially to rural grievances against the GVN. A number of the ex-SDC might join the VC.

What is needed is an improved SDC. Our training and arms for the SDC was an important step in the right direction. We could protest vigorously any tendency by the GVN to throw away this aid. But I think we ought to go further.

1. More SDC Advisors. I am told we are spending 95% of our advisor strength on the ARVN. The SDC, which takes most of the casualties and sees most of the action, does not have the advantage of daily contact and example from our advisors. The SDC is trained at a center and allowed to return to their home villages and relapse into their old ways. Anyone who knows the rural Vietnamese knows that they seldom learn a new thing for once and for all. The SDC above all need continued training and contact with American advisors. I strongly recommend more contact training teams in the villages to brush up the SDC frequently. District advisors could also help in this respect.

2. Civic Action for All. An important part of our effort—and one that is paying off—is the emphasis on civic action for the ARVN. The ARVN has improved its image with the people in the course of the past year. Not so the SDC. They are still in there stealing chickens and pushing people around. The solution is not to replace them with Force Populaire or village youth. (Many would be the same people, anyhow.) What is needed is more emphasis on civic action training at the training centers. We have left this part of SDC training up to the Vietnamese in spite of our success in getting into the civic action training of ARVN. More contact with American advisors after the SDC have left the training centers would also improve their civic action performance.

B. VC Rehabilitation

The strategic hamlet program promises to reveal the political loyalties of most of the people in the hamlets. It is not clear, however, how the GVN intends to deal with elements inside the hamlets which are not active VC, but who nevertheless remain basically sympathetic to the Communists. In cases where most of the people are pro-GVN or neutral, identification may be enough. Strict control plus social pressures will probably be all that is required to bring these people around.

The ease with which the VC recruit men and support their activities in some provinces suggests, however, that at least in some areas large segments of hamlet populations will have to be classified as VC sympathizers. The GVN evidently intends to make these people third class citizens at best, political prisoners at worst. I donʼt think this will have the desired result. What is needed is a rehabilitation program, and I am not aware that the strategic hamlet effort now includes any systematic plan for winning over VC sympathizers and supporters.

One approach might be to make it clear to VC sympathizers and supporters that, while their past is known, the future is unprejudiced. Everyone starts even in the new hamlet, with equal access to agricultural credit, free medicine, schools, communal land, etc. However, if after six months, there is evidence of continued support for the VC, the guilty parties would have their rights and privileges abridged by the hamlet council. If they behaved for, say six months thereafter, the rights and privileges could be restored by the council.

C. Infiltration

Information on the nature and amount of infiltration remains unsatisfactory. As the Montagnard trail watchers and strike forces get into action, I think we will get a better picture of what is happening on the plateau. If all goes well, these forces may in fact pretty well stop infiltration across the highlands.

This will not end the threat of infiltration, however, for there remains the Cambodian frontier in the lowlands. I am not at all sure that strategic hamlets can keep infiltrators from moving directly into the delta from Cambodia. This will be all the more difficult if, as seems likely, GVN-RKG relations continue bad.

The threat of infiltration seems very serious. I believe Ho could probably double his hard core VC rather quickly by infiltration if it seemed necessary. He could do this before we could seal off the plateau. After the plateau is closed, it could still be done via Cambodia.

Such a move would be relatively cheap and safe for Ho and the Bloc, and the stakes are high. After Cuba, Khrushchev will be looking for a way to humiliate us and placate the ChiComs. It seems unlikely that he will want to restrain Ho. I donʼt think there can be any doubt about Hoʼs determination to reunite Viet-Nam. In short, I believe we ought to be prepared for a heavy increase in infiltration and the consequent increase in VC strength at any time.

D. Coordinating the CIDG

At Hoa Cam training center alone, I reamed we are training and arming Montagnard Commandos, Trail Watchers, Nungs, armed Civic Action teams, Force Populaire, Nong Son Security Force, District Volunteers, Quang Nam Volunteers, and Tam Ky Commandos. Colonel Hoai in Hue was said to boss the Montagnard Commandos. I am told provincial committees with a line to Brother Can run the Force Populaire, the District Volunteers are no doubt under the control of the District Chiefs, while various Catholic armed irregulars are controlled by their priests.

I am afraid these people will not be able to bring their force to bear effectively on the VC unless they are tied together more systematically. My thought is that there ought to be a CIDG committee, under the control of the Chief of Province, to represent and coordinate all such groups at the Province level. In Saigon a central bureau or committee could handle and coordinate on the national level. I am in favor of the esprit and dynamism of small, individual CIDG outfits and donʼt think they should be “formalized” or “standardized.” But they do need to be controlled and coordinated. Lessons reamed in one area might also be most usefully applied elsewhere by a central control mechanism.

E. The Use of Air Power

I am not convinced that the use of aircraft against the VC has been sufficiently refined even yet. I was told of a number of recent incidents in which friendly people or women and children were killed by air attacks.

Relieving posts and units under attack is certainly a very valuable and legitimate role for air power. In some cases, VC bases are isolated sufficiently to justify tactical bombing. But I am convinced that bombing “VC villages” rarely pays off in the sense that it hurts the VC more than the GVN. We cannot lose sight of the fact that this is a special kind of warfare and that our basic objective is to separate the VC from the people. This means we cannot treat areas under VC control as enemy territory subject to the rules of warfare that applied in Korea and World War II.

F. Chain of Command

The chain of command problem, while much improved as a result of U.S. pressures, is still troublesome. Division commanders cannot remove subordinate commanders. Division commanders still can and do refuse orders from Corps, often taking the matter to Diem. Major items of supply (trucks, radios, weapons, aircraft) are assigned by Saigon to a given unit. If the division commander wants to assign them to another unit in his command, he must get permission from Saigon. Transferring radios from hospital units not yet ready for them to fighting units that needed them took two months. The boys are hammering away on this, but we shouldnʼt overlook it.

Connected with chain of command difficulties is the matter of GVN reaction to combat losses. A number of MAAG advisors feel that good Vietnamese commanders are hamstrung by fear of casualties. They describe these officers as personally brave, but professionally cowards. By this they mean that Diem will remove or demote any officer who suffers heavy losses, even though he is successful.

The example brought most forcefully to my attention by MAAG advisors was that of Colonel Cao, commander of the 7th division. Although recently decorated for highly successful operations against the VC, Cao was reportedly called on the carpet by Diem because 18 CG were killed in a VC ambush. The President kept him waiting without breakfast or lunch, so frightened him—he was on pins and needles hoping to make Brigadier—that he cut back heavily on his operations. (Since my return, Caoʼs promotion has been announced.)

I cannot vouch for the accuracy of this story. As a matter of fact, Cao was carrying out a helicopter operation when I met him, and he certainly gave no indication of being frozen by fear of casualties. But I heard similar comments by advisors in other Corps areas, which leads me to think this is a real problem.

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 10/30/62-12/31/62. Secret. The source text was attached to a memorandum from Cottrell to the Special Group (CI), dated December 11, which stated that it was being circulated for the information of the members. On December 18, Forrestal sent a copy of the report to President Kennedy, saying that it was one of “the more informative reports we have.” (Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office File, Staff Memoranda, Forrestal) On the same day Robert Johnson also sent a copy to Rostow stating that it was excellent and well worth reading. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, R. Johnson Chron, 1962) On November 13, Heavner had written to Wood giving his initial impressions on the situation in Vietnam. A copy of this 4-page letter, which dealt mainly with the strategic hamlets, is ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 20.6 WG/VN-Meetings. Before leaving Vietnam Heavner had also prepared a 16-page memorandum for Nolting on his visit. Dated December 4 and comprising the following sections: General; Strategic Hamlets; SDC, Force Populaire, Village Defenders; and Random Observations on the Military Effort, this document is the same in substance as the report dated December 11. (Ibid., 1.A-2, Briefing Papers, GVN 1962)

2 In a memorandum dated December 17, Heavner added a paragraph “J” to the list of recommendations. It reads: “J. Develop urgently a large-scale program for greatly increasing rice production and rice exports in order to increase farmer income and provide the necessary agricultural base for further economic development.” (Ibid., Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, 10/30/62-12/31/62)

329. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 329. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 15, 1962—6 p.m.

598. Ref. Deptel 588.2 Deptʼs assumption first para reftel correct as far as US Farmgate aircraft concerned. As reported Embtel 567,3 Gen. Harkins refused permit use of US aircraft to deliver napalm in Zone D operation because of absence hard evidence of VC concentrations sufficiently large to promise military benefits outweighing political and psywar risks involved. On other hand, GVN has in its possession quantity of napalm provided under MAP, and uses it on basis its own judgment of requirements and effects. Thus US does not have direct control of RVNAFʼs use of napalm on SVN territory any more than it controls use of any other weapon in RVNAF arsenal provided under MAP. At same time, however, RVNAF does not have air delivery capability for large quantities napalm and, as in case of Zone D operation, had to call on us for additional delivery capability. Thus, in terms use large amounts napalm, US in fact has control and is exercising it.

Zone D operation constitutes first time RVNAF has proposed employ large quantities of napalm. Question has not arisen in past and is unlikely arise often in future. Regarding effects of using napalm on GVNʼs ability gain support of populace, we aware reports that during Indochina War napalm considered here as white colonialistsʼ weapon against yellow “natives”. However, we have no evidence of any kind suggesting this attitude has been transferred to GVNʼs use of napalm. Nor do we have any reason believe local people single out napalm or any other particular weapon used by GVN as reason for supporting VC or at least being anti-GVN. While it true that Hanoi from time to time accuses “US-Diem” of widespread and inhumane use of napalm, and other weapons no evidence this line we have has had effect in SVN or that it has been exploited outside SVN.

In Embassyʼs view, adverse political and psychological impact of napalm on attitudes of population would differ from impact of other weapons only to degree napalm more deadly as destroyer than rockets, bombs or large or small arms. Believe question is therefore not so much use of napalm as against use rockets or any other deadly weapon, but rather degree discrimination and care applied in use of all weapons. As indicated above, we are exercising discrimination and care in question use of US aircraft for delivery large quantities napalm.

As for GVN use of stocks napalm and other weapons of destruction, we must depend upon discrimination and care with which GVN prosecutes this war in accordance agreed objectives. Overall agreed policy objective is, of course, to win the support of the people. The expeditious prosecution of the war is a “sine qua non” of this. The overall objective, constantly reiterated and discussed between GVN and US officials in many contexts, is, we think, becoming more and more understood and adopted by GVN forces. This includes greater care and discrimination in target selection and in the use of weapons. Since any lethal weapon is disliked and feared by any enemy in direct proportion to its effectiveness, the use of napalm, crop destroyers, high explosive bombs, claymore mines, and others will predictably provoke protests from hostile propaganda forces.

With respect to last para reftel, COMUS MACV feels restraints already imposed are making it difficult enough to carry the war to the heart of the enemy and tend to set up inviolable sanctuaries where the VC can take a breather. In light of the above explanations, and taking into consideration the need for quick response and action in planning and execution of military operations, I agree with General Harkins that requirement of last para reftel is not necessary, and I request reconsideration. In any event, the instruction is so imprecise (e.g., what is definition of large amounts) that we feel discretion in this important matter should be left with Task Force Saigon.4

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/12-1562. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Document 326.

3 See Document 326, footnote 2.

4 On December 21, the Embassy in Saigon was granted the discretion requested in this telegram, but was asked to seek advance approval from the Departments of State and Defense for any operations that were likely to have significant political repercussions. (Telegram 617 to Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5614/12-2162)

330. Report by the Senate Majority Leader (Mansfield) 330. Report by the Senate Majority Leader (Mansfield)1

Washington, December 18, 1962.

SOUTHEAST ASIA—VIETNAM

We have problems of varying complexity with all of the nations in Southeast Asia. Clearly, however, the critical focus is south Viet Nam. Developments there in the next two or three years may well influence greatly the trends in the whole region for the following ten or twenty.

And at this point it is far from certain what will develop in Viet Nam. One thing is reasonably clear: From somewhere about 1956 or '57, the unusual combination of factors which had resulted in the establishment of the Republic under Ngo Dinh Diem began to lose its impulse. A drift set in at about that time, responsibility for which is only partially ascribable to the shortcomings of the Vietnamese government. Our aid programs, military and non-military, after all, were one of the principal sources of the origin and the continuance of that governmentʼs power and these were properly open to charges of being ill-conceived and badly administered. They did little with the time which was bought at Geneva in the sense of stimulating the growth of indigenous roots for the political structure in Saigon. That structure is, today, far more dependent on us for its existence than it was five years ago. If Vietnam is the cork in the Southeast Asian bottle then American aid is more than ever the cork in the Vietnamese bottle.

We have now had for some months new concepts and a new American approach in Viet Nam. But the purpose of both remains, in essentials, what the purpose of other approaches have been from the outset. Indeed, it was distressing on this visit to hear the situation described in much the same terms as on my last visit although it is seven years and billions of dollars later. Viet Nam, outside the cities, is still an insecure place which is run at least at night largely by the Vietcong. The government in Saigon is still seeking acceptance by the ordinary people in large areas of the countryside. Out of fear or indifference or hostility the peasants still withhold acquiescence, let alone approval of that government. In short, it would be well to face the fact that we are once again at the beginning of the beginning.

But as noted there are now new concepts and a new American approach. The new concepts, as undoubtedly you are aware, center on the strategic hamlets. The new approach involves the re-oriented and expanded economic aid program and the use of many thousands of supporting American military personnel as well as the special forces which are concentrating their efforts on the tribal people, the Montagnards.

Although the first results have scarcely been registered, the evaluations of the new approach—Vietnamese and American—in Saigon are extremely optimistic. Those bearing responsibility—Vietnamese and American—speak of success in the solution of the problem in terms of a year or two.

Having heard optimistic predictions of this kind, with the introduction of other “new concepts,” beginning with French General Navarre in Hanoi in 1953, certain reservations seem to me to be in order. It is true that Vietminh casualty counts have been rising but the accuracy of these counts is open to question. Moreover, it should be noted that the estimates of Vietcong core strength have also been rising. The total of 20,000 which is now calculated at CINCPAC is the highest which I have ever encountered since the Geneva accords of 1954.

Responsible Americans in Saigon believe that exceptional progress has been made in winning over the Montagnards by the special forces. This is an important achievement because the location of these tribal people has considerable strategic significance in terms of north-south supply trails. But it should also be recognized that in terms of the major struggle the Montagnards are peripheral. In the last analysis, the Saigon government will stand or fall on the basis not of the several hundred thousand primitive Montagnards, but the millions of Vietnamese in the villages, towns and cities.

Apart from these two tangibles—higher Vietminh casualties and progress in winning over the Montagnards—there are also reports of improvements in the security of road travel and in the movement of rice and other commodities out of the countryside into the cities. These are excellent indicators of progress but the reports are not yet conclusive as to trends.

At this point, therefore, the optimistic predictions of success must be regarded as deriving primarily from the development of the theory of the strategic hamlets by Mr. Ngo Dinh Nhu and by the injection of new energy which has been provided by additional American aid and personnel. The real tests are yet to come.

Reservations are in order because in the first place, the rapid success of the concept of the strategic hamlet would seem to depend on the assumption that the Vietminh will remain wedded to their present tactics and will be unable to devise significant and effective revisions to meet the new concepts and the new highly mobile firepower of the American-trained forces. That may be the case but it would be unwise to underestimate the resourcefulness of any group which has managed to survive years of the most rugged kind of warfare. In the second place, rapid success of the new concepts depends upon the assumption that the great bulk of the people in the countryside sustain the Vietminh merely out of fear or, at best, indifference. There is really no effective measure of the accuracy of this assumption. It may indeed contain a good deal of truth but the critical question is how much truth. The temptation to extrapolate our own reactions on to the Vietnamese peasant in this kind of a situation is as obvious as it is dangerous.

The fact is that only experience and the most acute observation and objective reporting will throw real light on the accuracy of this assumption. To date we have not had enough of any of those essential ingredients of sound judgment. If experience should prove that there is less rather than more truth in the assumption that fear or indifference are the keystones of the Vietcong hold over the countryside, the target date for success will be delayed indefinitely beyond the year or two of the present predictions.

This is not to say that even a serious error in this assumption renders success impossible. If we were prepared to increase the commitment of men and military aid to compensate for the error it is not impossible that the concept of the strategic hamlet could still be brought into existence, in time, despite widespread support of the peasants for the Vietcong. And if the Vietnamese government, with more aid, could then turn the secured hamlets into a significantly more satisfactory way of life than the peasants have known, then it is conceivable that a deep disaffection towards the Vietcong could be induced. But it would be well to recognize that any such reorientation involves an immense job of social engineering, dependent on great outlays of aid on our part for many years and a most responsive, alert and enlightened leadership in the government of Vietnam.

Even assuming that aid over a prolonged period would be available, the question still remains as to the capacity of the present Saigon government to carry out the task of social engineering. Ngo Dinh Diem remains a dedicated, sincere, hardworking, incorruptible and patriotic leader. But he is older and the problems which confront him are more complex than those which he faced when he pitted his genuine nationalism against, first, the French and Bao Dai and then against the sects with such effectiveness. The energizing role which he played in the past appears to be passing to other members of his family, particularly to Ngo Dinh Nhu. The latter is a person of great energy and intellect who is fascinated by the operations of political power and has consummate eagerness and ability in organizing and manipulating it. But it is Ngo Dinh Diem, not Ngo Dinh Nhu, who has such popular mandate to exercise power as there is in south Vietnam. In a situation of this kind there is a great danger of the corruption of unbridled power. This has implications far beyond the persistent reports and rumors of fiscal and similar irregularities which are, in any event, undocumented. More important is its effect on the organization of the machinery for carrying out the new concepts. The difficulties in Vietnam are not likely to be overcome by a handful of paid retainers and sycophants. The success of the new approach in Vietnam presupposes a great contribution of initiative and self-sacrifice from a substantial body of Vietnamese with capacities for leadership at all levels. Whether that contribution can be obtained remains to be seen. For in the last analysis it depends upon a diffusion of political power, essentially in a democratic pattern. The trends in the political life of Vietnam have not been until now in that direction despite lip service to the theory of developing democratic and popular institutions “from the bottom up” through the strategic hamlet program.

To summarize, our policies and activities are designed to meet an existing set of internal problems in south Vietnam. North Vietnam infiltrates some supplies and cadres into the south; together with the Vietnamese we are trying to shut off this flow. The Vietcong has had the offensive in guerrilla warfare in the countryside; we are attempting to aid the Vietnamese military in putting them on the defensive with the hope of eventually reducing them at least to ineffectiveness. Finally, the Vietnamese peasants have sustained the Vietcong guerrillas out of fear, indifference or blandishment and we are helping the Vietnamese in an effort to win the peasants away by offering them the security and other benefits which may be provided in the strategic hamlets.

That, in brief, is the present situation. As noted, there is optimism that success will be achieved quickly. My own view is that the problems can be made to yield to present remedies, provided the problems and their magnitude do not change significantly and provided that the remedies are pursued by both Vietnamese and Americans (and particularly the former) with great vigor and self-dedication.

Certainly, if these remedies do not work, it is difficult to conceive of alternatives, with the possible exception of a truly massive commitment of American military personnel and other resources—in short going to war fully ourselves against the guerrillas—and the establishment of some form of neocolonial rule in south Vietnam. That is an alternative which I most emphatically do not recommend. On the contrary, it seems to me most essential that we make crystal clear to the Vietnamese government and to our own people that while we will go to great lengths to help, the primary responsibility rests with the Vietnamese. Our role is and must remain secondary in present circumstances. It is their country, their future which is most at stake, not ours.

To ignore that reality will not only be immensely costly in terms of American lives and resources but it may also draw us inexorably into some variation of the unenviable position in Vietnam which was formerly occupied by the French. We are not, of course, at that point at this time. But the great increase in American military commitment this year has tended to point us in that general direction and we may well begin to slide rapidly toward it if any of the present remedies begin to falter in practice.

As indicated, our planning appears to be predicated on the assumption that existing internal problems in south Vietnam will remain about the same and can be overcome by greater effort and better techniques. But what if the problems do not remain the same? To all outward appearances, little if any thought has been given in Saigon, at least, to the possibilities of a change in the nature of the problems themselves. Nevertheless, they are very real possibilities and the initiative for instituting change rests in enemy hands largely because of the weakness of the Saigon government. The range of possible change includes a step-up in the infiltration of cadres and supplies by land or sea. It includes the use of part or all of the regular armed forces of north Vietnam, reported to be about 300,000 strong, under Vo Nguyen Giap. It includes, in the last analysis, the possibility of a major increase in any of many possible forms of Chinese Communist support for the Vietcong.

None of these possibilities may materialize. It would be folly, however, not to recognize their existence and to have as much clarification in advance of what our response to them will be if they do.

This sort of anticipatory thinking cannot be undertaken with respect to the situation in Vietnam alone. The problem there can be grasped, it seems to me, only as we have clearly in mind our interests with respect to all of Southeast Asia. If it is essential in our interests to maintain a quasi-permanent position of power on the Asian mainland as against the Chinese then we must be prepared to continue to pay the present cost in Vietnam indefinitely and to meet any escalation on the other side with at least a commensurate escalation of commitment of our own. This can go very far, indeed, in terms of lives and resources. Yet if it is essential to our interests then we would have no choice.

But if on the other hand it is, at best, only desirable rather than essential that a position of power be maintained on the mainland, then other courses are indicated. We would, then, properly view such improvement as may be obtained by the new approach in Vietnam primarily in terms of what it might contribute to strengthening our diplomatic hand in the Southeast Asian region. And we would use that hand as vigorously as possible and in every way possible not to deepen our costly involvement on the Asian mainland but to lighten it.

It is uncertain what the prospects for doing so may be, even if we were inclined to the latter course. The experience in Laos which, in effect, is an essay in that direction is not cause for sanguine expectation. On the one hand, there are the anticipated difficulties with the Pathet Lao. Their leader in Vientiane, Prince Souphanovong, is brilliant and capable but he is also hard-bitten and relentless. His relations with Souvanna Phouma are delicate and uncertain and there are reports that even the limited degree of cooperation which he has extended has come under attack from his own faction. The cooperation with Souvanna Phouma from the other Laotian group headed by Phoumi Nosavan has also been circumscribed and uncertain.

These difficulties, of course, were to be anticipated and much depends on Souvanna Phouma if they are to be surmounted. It is our policy to support him fully and the American Ambassador is making a noble effort to carry out that policy. The latter needs and must have the cooperation of all departments in this effort. Moreover, his views as to what is necessary should be most carefully regarded in the design of his instructions. This point needs stressing, for one has the distinct impression in Laos that a great deal of executive branch energy is going into the preparation for contingencies in anticipation of the failure of the policy of neutralization under Souvanna Phouma and not enough into making the policy work. The job will be sufficiently difficult even in the best of circumstances and it is not at all unlikely that Souvanna Phouma may tire of it and abandon it unless the efforts of every department and agency of our own government which may be involved are bent energetically to the achievement of our policy under the direction of the Ambassador.

If Laos does not yet offer much hope of an eventual lightening of our burdens throughout Southeast Asia, Cambodia stands in stark contrast. Its internal stability is exceptional for contemporary Southeast Asia. It is led by Prince Sihanouk with dedication, energy and astuteness. And it has made steady and most impressive social and economic progress in the past few years. It is an illustration of what can be achieved in the lush lands of the region in conditions of peace, with a vigorous and progressive indigenous leadership and a judicious and limited use of outside aid. It is also an experience which can shed light on the possibilities of eventually lightening our burdens in Southeast Asia.

For that reason if for no other, it seems to me essential that we go very far in attempting to find practicable solutions which will meet the Cambodian desire for reassurance that it will not be overwhelmed from either Vietnam on the east or Thailand on the west. Cambodian fears exist. They are probably excessive fears at least in present circumstances. Nevertheless, they are powerful and deeply felt fears based in part on history and it would be most unwise to underestimate their potential influence on Cambodian policy. It would be most unfortunate if they pushed Cambodia further in the direction of China.

Our relations with this little country have been, to say the least, erratic from the outset and, it seems to me, largely unnecessarily so. There have been unfortunate clashes of personality, lack of understanding and even more serious matters involved. Official relations now seem to me to be well-handled and insofar as we may be responsible for such strains as exist, they would appear ascribable to policy as it is formulated in Washington not as it is administered in Phnom Penh.

The Cambodians are apparently prepared for a further reduction in the remaining one-sided aid commitment which has already been reduced considerably. We should welcome this opportunity and at the same time seek to broaden mutually advantageous relationships. The key to bringing about this transition without alienating Cambodia is to be found in its interrelationships and ours with its neighbors, Thailand and Vietnam. It is, in my opinion, clearly desirable to search vigorously for this key.

It is apparent that in Thailand, the bent of our policy with respect not only to Cambodia but to Laos as well is not appreciated and, at best, enjoys only a grudging tolerance. Cambodia is held in low esteem and the resentments over the recent adverse International Court decision still smolder.

With respect to Laos, the Thais have either not wanted the policy of neutralization to work or have not believed that it would work from the outset. They are still clearly skeptical. It is probable that once it became clear that we would not commit ourselves militarily to the recapture of all of Laos, the Thais preferred a solution by military partition rather than the attempt at neutralization, with the United States committed to the defense of at least southern Laos. This may still be their expectation.

American actions in Thailand appear to support the Thai skepticism at least to the point of providing heavily for contingencies in the event neutralization fails in Laos. Several new jet-ports have been built in eastern Thailand. In the recent withdrawal of the American combat unit, a great deal of heavy transport equipment, particularly for fuel, has been left behind. And, finally, the United States military command intends to put back into Thailand in the near future, a contingent of forces about equal in number to those being withdrawn for the purpose of constructing a fuel pipe line across that country.

The cost of these various operations when added to the already immense and continuing input of aid of various kinds is cause for serious concern. Thailand is relatively prosperous. It has a very substantial foreign trade from which other nations such as Japan and Western Germany profit greatly along with Thailand. There is talk of aid from other sources but it is almost entirely talk of aid on a loan or trade basis, with a clear expectation of direct and tangible returns to the donors. At the same time, we are carrying, virtually, the entire burden of aid for Thailandʼs defense and other purposes which carry little in the way of tangible return. This sort of an arrangement leaves us with the onerous burdens while others reap the fruits.

It is an arrangement that will probably be continued as long as we are prepared to countenance it. Sudden changes in our willingness to sustain these burdens might produce serious adverse consequences. But it seems to me that a constant pressure must be maintained to bring about a progressive reduction in our commitment by having the Thais themselves and others take on more of the onerous burdens. That pressure is not in evidence in our policies and their administration at the present time.

Elsewhere in Southeast Asia, in Burma and in Malaya, we have a minimum of commitment. In the case of Burma, this fortuitous state of affairs would appear to be largely one of Burmese choice. The Burmese have settled the border question with China along the McCarthy line (an extension of the McMahon line) and to their satisfaction. They are fumed inward in their attitudes, seeking only to stay clear of the India-China dispute. They are also fearful of antagonizing China by too dose dealings with us. But there is no assurance that in the future a Burmese government, hard-pressed to maintain itself in an internal political situation which is never far from chaos, will not seek substantial aid from the United States. It seems to me that we must steel ourselves against that day. And, in all honesty, it seems to me that the key to staying clear of still another costly commitment on the Asian mainland is to be found in restraining our own bureaucratic eagerness to help.

In the case of Malaya, except for a large and expanding Peace Corps, we are maintaining relatively orthodox and inexpensive relationships with a minimum of commitment on our part. However, this excellent state of affairs may be strained by the effort to bring Malaysia into existence. It is probable that the British hope, by the unification of Malaya, Singapore, Brunei, Sarawak, and North Borneo, to lighten their burdens in that region while retaining as much as possible of their influence and their highly profitable economic position.

Without criticizing this attempt, it should be noted that our approach must be one of the greatest delicacy, primarily because of the attitudes of the Philippines. There are already indications of a measure of collaboration developing between the Philippines and Indonesia in resisting the formation of Malaysia. It is a collaboration which we should do nothing to stimulate by inadvertent statements or actions.

It is likely that Malaysia will come into existence some time next year. There are already feelers being put out for the establishment of an aid program from the United States. It seems to me, again, that we must resist this effort to deepen our commitment and, again, the key is to put restraints on our own bureaucratic eagernesses. It is one thing to provide loans to a nation such as Malaysia which is clearly a good risk or to send Peace Corpsmen to the remote areas of Brunei, Sarawak and North Borneo where a little technical knowledge can go a long way. But it is quite another thing to take on major and continuing tasks of military organization and supply and the internal development of still one more country in Southeast Asia, responsibilities which we assume in name at least and also to some degree in fact, every time we establish these aid-missions. It would seem appropriate that any continuing aid to Malaysia should remain the responsibility of the U.K. and the Commonwealth rather than being shifted to the United States.

Viewing Southeast Asia as a whole, the situation is one of varying conditions of stability. The future of freedom in the area is far from certain. Except for some significant and effective French efforts in Cambodia and Commonwealth efforts in the Malayan situation, the principal externally borne burdens fall upon us.

If we were to withdraw abruptly from beneath these burdens, there would be a major collapse in many places and what would follow is by no means certain. Obviously, much would depend upon the capacity and urge of the Chinese to move into the vacuum.

We cannot afford to withdraw suddenly from these burdens. While we must make every effort to have others share them, we would, I believe, be deluding ourselves if we expected very much help from other outside sources in the near future.

The real question which confronts us, therefore, is how much are we ourselves prepared to put into Southeast Asia and for how long in order to serve such interests as we may have in that region? Before we can answer this question, we must reassess our interests, using the words “vital” or “essential” with the greatest realism and restraint in the reassessment. When that has been done, we will be in a better position to estimate what we must, in fact, expend in the way of scarce resources, energy and lives in order to preserve those interests. We may well discover that it is in our interests to do less rather than more than we are now doing. If that is the case, we will do well to concentrate on a vigorous diplomacy which would be designed to lighten our commitments without bringing about sudden and catastrophic upheavals in Southeast Asia.

1 Source: Senate Document 93-11. Printed in U.S. Senate 93d Congress, 1st session, Two Reports on Vietnam and Southeast Asia to the President of the United States by Senator Mike Mansfield (Washington, April 1973), pp. 7-14. For Mansfieldʼs report to the Foreign Relations Committee, see U.S. Senate, Vietnam and Southeast Asia, Report of Senator Mike Mansfield … to the Committee on Foreign Relations (Washington, 1963).

331. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 331. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 19, 1962—6 p.m.

604. Deptel 603.2 All things are relative, and an “explosion” of the Vietnamese Armed Forces is not likely to take on the characteristics of a similar phenomenon occurring in the US military establishment. The word may be unfortunate but the objective, I think, is sound and essential: it is to get a relatively prompt return on the very substantial military investment that has been made here.3

General Harkins and the rest of us have fostered and watched the really formidable build-up of Vietnamese military and paramilitary capabilities over the last year, and we are very conscious of the fact that these increased capabilities have not yet been fully used.

There is no change in our (or GVNʼs) basic concept of operations. This basic concept remains that of extending the govtʼs authority and the services of govt throughout the country. The primary means of doing this continues to be the Strategic Hamlet Program in all its aspects. But the success of this program and the speed with which it proceeds depend absolutely on the parallel and coordinated military effort to destroy VC regular forces or, at a minimum, to keep them off balance. The explosion operation—for which we shall find another name and which is not to be advertised as a once-and-for-all nationwide offensive—is, we believe, a sound means of using to the fullest one of our major resources in the overall counterinsurgency operation.

There is no detailed plan of operations as yet. Such a plan will only be developed as VC strongholds and units throughout the country are identified and marked by intelligence and operahona1 reconnaissance. After this has been done, there will be an effort to strike these strongholds and units simultaneously insofar as possible. There is no thought that this will be a one-time operation: what is involved is moving to a higher intensity of operations which it is recognized may have to be continued indefinitely. The emphasis will not be on large operations but rather on simultaneous or consecutive attacks on identified VC units with the forces required for each. There is no possibility, we recognize, of achieving strategic surprise. There is no thought of diverting resources from clear-and-hold operations or the Strategic Hamlet Program. On the contrary, a fuller employment of available forces should bring more rapid progress in overall pacification.

In short, I believe this concept is sound and psychologically necessary at this juncture. The concerns registered in reftel we have very much in mind and will try to guard against them. This is not meant to be a dramatic operation but it appears timely and necessary in the near future to spur on a sustained, vigorous offensive. The forces and organization on our side are ready for this, or nearly so, and the VC are hurting. I feel strongly that we should not hold back from trying to exploit these factors to the utmost.

In conversation with Diem today touching on this question, I gathered that he is also thinking in the terms indicated above, and that, having achieved something in the nature of a national mobilization, he too is eager to pursue the present advantage.

To be clear, I should like to repeat that we should be very careful not to bill this concept or operation as the final climax of the struggle here.

General Harkins concurs with the above.4

Nolting

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751K.5/12-1962. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC for Polad.

2 Telegram 603, December 14, asked for a description and status of the Explosion Plan. (Ibid., 751K.5/12-1462)

3 Next to the first paragraph in the source text Heavner had written: “Shall we call it ‘poof’.”

4 On the source text between the last line of text and the signature Heavner had written: “Oh alright already.”

332. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 332. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, December 19, 1962.

RFE-66

SUBJECT

Capsule Assessment of the Effort in South Vietnam

The strategic concept for South Vietnam calls for military, political, economic, and social actions on such a scale and so coordinated as to constitute a national response to the Viet Cong challenge. Broadly, the concept calls for: 1) developing military and para-military counterguerrilla capabilities;

2) separating and protecting the population from the Viet Cong, and

3) applying the political, economic, and social measures necessary to convert military successes into political gains.

There appears to be no reason as yet to question the soundness of the concept. But there is a very real question as to how well and wholeheartedly it is being put into effect. The purpose of this paper is to assess the implementation of the concept during 1962.

Counterguerrilla Capabilities

This phase of the concept is relatively separable and non-political and the one in which direct US aid and advice play the largest role.

A. Progress

There has been notable progress in improving counterguerrilla capabilities, largely as a direct result of US military aid and advice. —Vietnamʼs forces are now supplied with the weapons and instructed in the tactics suitable for counterguerrilla warfare.

—US helicopters and radios have vastly improved Vietnamese tachca1 mobility.

—Vietnamese forces are beginning to engage the Viet Cong in small-unit achons. Night operations, though skill limited, are increasing.

—Nearly 2,000 US-trained Montagnards are now conducting armed patrols designed to provide intelligence and, to some extent, to interdict Viet Cong access routes through Laos.

—Self Defense Corps and Civil Guard units have been roughly doubled in the past year and are being further expanded in order to provide local defense to the strategic hamlets.

—During September and October, the GVN forces were able for the first time to capture more weapons from the Viet Cong than they lost

B. Problems

These increased capabilities, however, have not yet been exploited as effectively as they might be. —GVN military forces continue to rely heavily on large-scale operations and conventional tactics.

—Excessive use of air strikes in the absence of ground contact with the enemy continues to kill a lot of innocent peasants.

—Inadequate delegation of authority and political interference by the Vietnamese leadership has restricted initiative in the field.

—Independent and offensive deployment of Civil Guard and SDC units has weakened strategic hamlet defense and produced heavy casualties.

Isolating the Viet Cong and Winning the Peasants

Establishment of strategic hamlets and systematic military-political pacification are distinct but necessarily integrated phases of the strategic concept. The purpose of these measures is to isolate and protect the peasants from the Communists, to gain their support in the counterguerrilla effort, and, ultimately, to produce lasting political and socio-economic gains at the local level.

A. Progress

The government has given high priority to the strategic hamlet program which since March has been progressively infused with a systematic military-political pacification effort. —According to the GVN, more than 3,500 strategic hamlets have been completed, more than 2,000 are under construction. The current rate of construction is 300-400 a month. It is not certain, however, how much of the strategic hamlet program has been carried out. In many, nothing seems to have been done but to construct a barbed wire or bamboo fence.

—The hamlets have become a major Viet Cong target, suggesting that Viet Cong feel that their access to the people is being threatened. However, we cannot generalize about the success with which hamlets have withstood Viet Cong attacks.

—In March 1962 President Diem approved the “Delta Pacification Plan”2 which provides for a systematic military-political pacification of eleven provinces integrated with the strategic hamlet program. Similar plans have since been drawn up for individual provinces elsewhere. Pacification operations are actually in progress in six provinces—Binh Duong (Operation Sunrise, later expanded to parts of Tay Ninh and Phuoc Tuy), Phu Yen (Operation Sea Swallow), Binh Dinh (Operation Letʼs Go), and Quang Ngai (Operation Royal Phoenix). Plans for four more provinces (Vinh Long, Dinh Tuong, Vinh Binh, and Long An) have recently been approved.

—Preliminary results of the integrated pacification programs are encouraging. The strategic hamlets in these areas are generally well organized and defended. Considerable effort is being devoted to follow-up social and political measures aimed at improving the lot of the peasants and developing their identification with the governmentʼs counterinsurgency effort. Peasant discontent over mistreatment, forced labor, and probably inadequate compensation has been reduced perceptibly in recent operations.

B. Problems

However, the hamlet program on the whole has been precipitous and uncoordinated and the pacification plans slow to be implemented. —Vietnamese leadership looks upon the strategic hamlet program as a panacea, and there is skill considerable confusion among local officials as to the objectives of the program and procedures for implementing it.

—Strategic hamlets have been and are still being thrown together in the absence of a coordinated pacification effort, such as conceived in the Delta Plan, and with only perfunctory attention to defense, social, economic, and administrative improvements. In spite of government efforts to maintain standards and to provide personnel to administer such hamlets effectively, many are inadequately defended and few are providing benefits to the peasants.

—Pacification operations have been applied to only six of the South Vietnamʼs 41 provinces and have been completed in none. Although Diem formally assigned top priority to the Delta Plan provinces in August, he has failed-probably for political reasons-to subordinate the strategic hamlet program to the Delta Plan and, indeed, to the general pacification effort itself.

Assessment

The GVN has developed an effective strategic concept for counterinsurgency and has in fact mounted a nabona1 effort to implement it. The principal defects appear to arise mainly from improper emphasis applied to various aspects of the concept.

—The Army has overemphasized large-scale actions and the use of artillery and airpower, as compared with small-unit actions and intelligence collections. Although emphasis on patrols and ambushes appears to be increasing, continued and excessive use of air power and crop destruction-however well controlled-may well develop a militant opposition from the peasants and their positive identification with the Viet Cong.

—The GVN has overemphasized the establishment of strategic hamlets per se and has only begun to fit them into integrated military-political pacification efforts.

—GVN failure to emphasize political, social, and economic reform at the outset may deprive the entire effort of much of its impact. Much depends on the ability of the government to show convincing evidence of its intent to improve the lot of the peasants. Instead, government efforts appear to be aimed largely at increasing government control over the peasants.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Secret; Noforn. Signed by Hilsman. A stamp on the source text shows that it was received by the NSC on December 26. Copies were also circulated to the Special Group (CI) on December 31. Also printed in part in Hilsman, To Move a Nation, pp. 451-453.

2 See Document 51.

333. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 333. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, December 21, 1962.

INCREASE IN U.S. AIR FORCE IN SOUTH VIETNAM

I attach a memorandum from Secretary Gilpatric to you recommending an increase in the U.S. air capability in South Vietnam.

The memorandum also recommends an investigation of the possibility of obtaining Chinese Nationalist pilots to fly C-47 aircraft for the GVN. I understand that they are to be used only on transport missions thus releasing the SVN pilots now so engaged for combat. Although there are a number of Chinese Nationalists working for the GVN, none are pilots.

Despite his worries about increasing U.S. military presence in South Vietnam at this time and the use of air power for strategic attacks on targets which are not clearly identified as solely Viet Cong, Governor Harriman approves Secretary Gilpatricʼs proposal. Governor Harriman believes that the proposal is justified, because close-in air support to the increased activities of the ARVN in defending strategic hamlets is essential to the success of the program.

We are still very sensitive to the necessity of assuring that air strike targets are selected so as to minimize the adverse political consequences of killing uncommitted peasants. This is one of the problems which Roger Hilsman and myself will try to look into during our visit to South Vietnam.2

MVForrestal3

[Attachment]

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the President

Washington, December 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Augmentation of U.S. Air Unit in Vietnam

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and I have reviewed two requests from the Commander in Chief, Pacific, both of which are related to providing additional combat air capability in support of military operations in South Vietnam (SVN). The first is a request for early augmentation of Farmgate by 18 aircraft (5 T-28s, 11 B-26s, 2 C-47s) and 117 USAF personnel (95 combat, 22 air base support). Farmgate is the current code name of the Air Force Jungle Jim Squadron that you authorized on 11 October 1961 to be introduced into Vietnam.4 The second request is for approval to initiate talks with the Government of Vietnam (GVN) on the subject of the use of Chinese Nationalists as Vietnamese Air Force C-47 pilots.

2. A review of operations by the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) and paramilitary forces for the past six months shows that practically all ground actions now are coordinated with some air support effort. This has resulted in continually increasing requirements for air support. Appreciation of the role of air support by the Vietnamese is evidenced by the increasing numbers of combat missions flown the past several months in support of convoys, strategic hamlet defense, heliborne assault, interdiction, conventional ground operations, and paramilitary operations. In September 1962, the Vietnam Air Force (VNAF) fighter aircraft flew 620 combat sorties as compared with 150 combat sorties the previous January. This increase dramatically illustrates the growth in the number of air support sorties. The impact of these increasing requests for air support has been so great that requirements exceed the combined capabilities of the VNAF and Farmgate. In fact, CINCPAC states: “We are daily losing opportunities to destroy Viet Cong due to inability of VNAF to answer valid requests for air strikes. This situation results primarily from VNAF pilot shortage. Farmgate pilots are being overflown averaging 100 hours per month and cannot fill the gap.” Farmgate, and for all practical purposes the VNAF, has reached optimum operating capabilities. Their combined efforts are not able to fill all valid requests for air support.

3. During the next several months, which CINCPAC states will be critical, the need for air support is expected to continue to increase because of the following factors: a. Increase in offensive operations as the Vietnamese forces continue to become more active and aggressive.

b. The addition of the ninth division to the Army by the end of 1962, and the steadily expanding capabilities of the Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps.

c. Increased number of air mobile operations made possible by the recent addition of two helicopter companies.

d. Support of President Diemʼs nation-wide offensive planned for early 1963.

e. Expansion of the Citizens Irregular Defense Groups and paramilitary programs.

f. Improvement in weather which favors military operations supportable by air.

4. In addition to the above, General Harkins visualizes dispersal of certain strike teams for air support into three areas of SVN. This decentralization is designed to provide an air strike capability in each of these areas and thereby decrease the reaction time for air support. In the past, the majority of Farmgate aircraft have been concentrated in the Saigon area due to limitations in maintenance, availability of pilots, and equipment. As a result, penalties have been paid in terms of targets lost and slow reaction times. The dispersal of strike teams will alleviate this problem, but at the same time will increase the requirement for facilities, pilots, and equipment to accomplish the air support role. Therefore, to meet increasing requirements for air support which will be necessitated by the foregoing developments, additional air support capability is needed now in SVN.

5. The continual growth of coordinated ground and air operations induced by the increasing numbers of heliborne operations and the steady increase of air support capabilities in SVN over the past year has been instrumental in producing a unifying effect within the RVNAF. Prior to the influx of air support/heliborne operations, military planning on the part of the Vietnamese forces basically was isolated, noncoordinated, “do what you can” action with very little rapport between the armed forces and other elements of the GVN. With the continuing growth of air capability, there has been a marked improvement in coordinated military planning and in the use of all national resources. Significantly, the growth of air support and heliborne operations has given U.S. advisors a firm entree into RVNAF planning and has resulted in a marked increase in military initiative and successes. This entree must continue to be exploited.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and I have reviewed the requirement for air support in SVN. It is our opinion that the requirement will increase in the next few months as set forth by CINCPAC and that every reasonable effort should be expended to insure that adequate and timely air support is available for current military and paramilitary operations as well as for the planned nation-wide offensive. Recognizing the concern over direct U.S. commitment in SVN, we have examined a number of possible solutions. It is considered that actions now underway to increase VNAF pilot training and aircraft equipage ultimately will make possible the desired reductions in direct U.S. commitment. Programs are now underway to increase Vietnamese student pilot training and to provide additional combat aircraft phased with the expanded pilot output which will result. Currently student pilots total 131 for fixed wing aircraft and 66 for helicopters. In about 12 months it may be possible to reduce U.S. participation in combat close support operations (Farmgate) as this new group of Vietnamese pilots becomes operationally ready. The extent of this reduction will depend on the extent of the need for Farmgate aircraft to train the VNAF in special tactics and on the number of valid air support requests as ground operations expand in the coming months. CINCPAC does not at this time foresee a need for further Farmgate augmentation beyond that recommended herein.

7. In the judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, the overriding conclusion is that an immediate increase in the air support capability is needed and should be provided without losing sight of the necessity for continuing to increase the capability of the VNAF to fill Vietnamese air support requirements. From our review of possible methods of increasing air support capabilities immediately, we conclude that the most favorable options are those recommended by CINCPAC: immediate augmentation of Farmgate as outlined in paragraph 1 and introduction of 30 Chinese Nationalist pilots. We anticipate that the latter could not be realized as an increase in RVNAF capabilities earlier than four months after initiating discussions with the GVN.

8. Therefore, I recommend that you approve the augmentation of Farmgate as requested by CINCPAC and initiation of discussions with the GVN on the possible use of 30 Chinese Nationalist pilots to fly transport aircraft in the RVNAF. The Department of State concurs in this recommendation.5

Roswell Gilpatric

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series. Top Secret.

2 In January 1963.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 156.

5 On December 31, McGeorge Bundy sent a memorandum to Gilpatric stating that the President had approved the recommendations set forth in paragraph 8. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country Series)

334. Memorandum for the Files by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner) 334. Memorandum for the Files by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group (Heavner)1

Washington, December 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

Senator Mansfieldʼs Reactions After Visiting Viet-Nam

According to Frank Meloy, who accompanied Senator Mansfield on his recent visit to Viet-Nam, the Senatorʼs chief impressions of the Viet-Nam situation are as follows: 1. Senator Mansfield still believes that Diem is personally incorruptible. He sees no alternative to Diem, and feels we must continue our present policy. However the Senator was disappointed by Diemʼs two and one-half hour monologue during which the Senator got the impression that Diem is a good deal older and more withdrawn from reality than when he last saw him. The Senator was a little miffed because Diem insisted upon recounting the whole history of his regime as though the Senator were a stranger to the Viet-Nam situation. The Senator also got the impression that the Nhuʼs now had more real power than ever before, and he considers this unfortunate.

2. Senator Mansfield had an overall impression of having faced the same problems and the same kind of situation in 1954 and 1955. He feels we are in a sense back again in the beginning.

3. The Senator feels that in the years from 1955 through perhaps 1959 Diem failed to get rice roots support among the peasants, and that the early drive and enthusiasm which characterized his government was somehow lost. He believes the key to winning the present struggle is not just extending the authority of the government but the extension of popular support and acceptance of the government. The government must be closer to the people.

4. The Senator was extremely critical of the past AID program. He directed his criticism in particular against former USOM Director Arthur Gardiner, whom he regards as a “disaster”. The Senator feels that part of the blame for the lost opportunity during the years 1955 to 1959 rests with our misguided AID program and our misdirected military training effort. (He feels the military training effort was misdirected in that it was aimed exclusively at meeting the threat of overt invasion from the north rather than the threat of guerrilla warfare.)

5. Nevertheless the Senator feels that the thrust of our present AID and military effort is right. He feels the strategic hamlet program may well succeed. He thinks we must continue our present efforts in pretty much their present form.

6. At the same time the Senator was dismayed by the prospect of huge and endless aid expenditures for Viet-Nam. He was not impressed by General Harkins estimate that the war can be won in one year—in fact, he was apparently annoyed by Harkins “undue optimism.”

7. If the present effort in Viet-Nam fails, Senator Mansfield believes our only alternative is to attempt to neutralize the whole area.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, 22.1 Mansfield Visit to Saigon. Secret; Limit Distribution.

Index Index

Action Plan for Vietnam: Draft plan, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 235]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Economic actions, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 235]

Final draft, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Information actions, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 235]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Military actions, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 235]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 235]

Political actions, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 235]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 235]

Adenauer, Konrad, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 301]

Agency for International Development (AID), 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184] Advisers at provincial level, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Civic action program, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 233]

Emergency Medical Program for Vietnam, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202]

Strategic hamlet program, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 300]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 63], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139], 437n [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 223], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Agreement for Mutual Defense Assistance in Indochina, 1950, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 108], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108]

Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act (P.L. 480), 1954, 494n [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 700n [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]

Agriculture, U.S. Department of, 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266]

Ainsworth, Tom, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259]

Air Force, U.S., involvement in counterinsurgency operations, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Air Force, Vietnamese, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329] Air support, need for, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333]-796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 333]

Delta Pacification Plan, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 113]

Limitations on armaments, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Presidential palace, bombing of, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 93]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 93], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93]

Alexander, Roy, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Alsop, Joseph, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Anderson, Adm. George w., 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248]

Anderson, Richard S., 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]

Anspacher, John M., 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 167], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 171]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 171], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 179]

Anthis, Brig. Gen. Roland H., 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]-691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298]

ANZUS Council, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]

Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) (see also Ranger companies): Aggressiveness in battle, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 277]

Amnesty plan, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Battalion sizes, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Border control, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]

Command structure, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 233]

Crimes and misbehavior, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Dedication of troops, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Defensive positions, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42]

Defoliant operations, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294]

Delta Pacification Plan, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 113], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 113]

Force level increases, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 233]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233]

Guerrilla tactics, adoption of, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 42]-86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42]

Leadership problems, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 244], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 244]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]

McNamaraʼs visit, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187]

Medical facilities, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 173]

Replacement units, need for, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187]

Stahrʼs assessment of, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165]-339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165]

Training for, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Vulnerability of, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165]

Associated Press (AP), 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]

Australia, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233] Military assistance to Vietnam, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 230], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 588n [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

Bagley, Worth H., 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185] Counterinsurgency operations, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163] Information programs, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 167], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 171]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 171]

Media coverage of field operations, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

SEATO Plan 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 83]-174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Crop destruction program, 331n [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 170].

Defoliant operations, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Delta Pacification Plan, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 147]

Honolulu Conference (March 1962), 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

International conference on Vietnam, 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Operation Sunrise, 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 151]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

RVNAF force levels, recommendations for, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

Southeast Asia Task Force, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 215]

Strategic hamlet program, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 314]

Vietnam, RepUblic of, political reforms, 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 249]

Ball, George w., 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233] Counterinsurgency operations, 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132] .

International conference on Vietnam, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

International Control Commission, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Noltingʼs offer to resign, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 40]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Bao Dai, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199]

Barbour, Robert E., 698n [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302], 738n [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Barnard, Robert J., 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 613n [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Barrington, James, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247]

Barwick, Sir Garfield, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]

Battle, Lucius D., 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]n, 171n [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]

Baumgartner, Herbert, 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Beach, Keyes, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62]

Ben Tuong hamlet, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 173], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 173], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 173], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 187]

Bigart, Homer, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 150], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]

Binh Hoa operation(January 1962), 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 42]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 173]

Bloomfield, Lincoln, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Bogardus, George E, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Boggs, Marion w., 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323]

Bosco, Father, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Bowles, Chester A.: Southeast Asia mission, proposed 516-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 241], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 267]

U.S. Far East policies, assessment of, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

U.S. political objectives in Southeast Asia, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 214]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Brent, Joseph L., 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

Bridgham, Philip, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Brown, Harold, 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Browne, Malcolm, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70]-155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 203], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]

Brubeck, William H., 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Buchanan, Col., 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Bui Van Luong, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228]

Bunce, William K., 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Bundy, McGeorge, 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69], 183n [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 206n [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135], 299n [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 233], 580n [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 679n [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 734n [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 797n [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Bundy, William P., 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 93], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 524n [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 567n [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275] RVNAF force levels, recommendations for, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 109]-234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Burke, Robert T., 698n [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302]

Burma, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 142], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 241], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 267], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 330]

Burris, Col. Howard L., 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 112]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 269]

Buu Hoan, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284]

Bymside, Capt., 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248]-554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]

Ca Mau operation, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]

Cambodia, 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 142], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 191], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 267] Attacks on Vietnamese civilians, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203]

Border control, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35]S, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 330]-785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 330]

Neutrality for, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327]

Nhuʼs assessment of, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

United States, relations with, 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 330]-785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 330]

U.S. regional military command, response to, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 296], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 325]

Vietnamese (RVN) attacks into, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 296] Binh Hoa operation, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 42]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Can Lao Party, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Canada (see also International Control Commission), 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

Cao, Col., 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 93], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 277], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Cao, Gen., 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]

Carroll, Lt. Gen. Joseph H, 506n [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 237]

Carson, Rachel, 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266]

Carter, Marshall S., 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239]

Catholic Youth Program, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]

Celebrezze, Anthony J., 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202]

Central Intelligence Agency, U.S. (CIA), 445n [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239] Presidential palace attack, report on, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

Central Intelligence Organization, Vietnamese (CIO), 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 35], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 138], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297]

“Charter for a Free and Independent Southeast Asia,” proposed, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 241], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 241]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 241], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 267]

Chayes, Abram J., 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 97], 221n [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]

Chen Yi, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Child, Frank C., 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]

China, Peopleʼs Republic of, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274] “Food for peace” deal, possible, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 190]

Internal situation, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 190]

International conference on Vietnam, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Intervention in Vietnam, possible, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 60], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 142]

Southeast Asia policy, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]

Spread of Communism, approach to, 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

U.S. regional military command, response to, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 189]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of: Relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

U.S. attacks, possible response to, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 213]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 213]

China, Republic of, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 333]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Chuong, Madame, 285n [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Cinnamon crop, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 127]

Citizensʼ Irregular Defense Groups. See Civilian Irregular Defense Groups.

Civic action program (see also Strategic hamlet program): Administration by Vietnamese, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139]

Civic action teams, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 38], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 42], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 122]-258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 139]

Civilian program, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 38], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 66], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 98]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 98]

Community, impact on, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98]

Country Team, required actions by, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 98]

Definition and purpose of, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30]

Governmental structure, establishment of, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 122]

Human rights concepts and, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 132]

Integrated program, need for, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 98], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 153]-322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Lansdaleʼs assessments of, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 122]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 122], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 132]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

Military used for civil projects, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 38], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 98], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 123], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 235], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 244], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

Organizations and cadres, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 98]

Personnel and materiel requirements, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 42], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98]

Popular support, methods to achieve, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 122]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 122]

Propaganda activities, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98]

Provincial rehabilitation activities, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Provincial surveys and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Rural development approach, 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 153], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 233]

Special Group (CI) papers on, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 98]-206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Strategy for Vietnam and, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 98]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 98], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98]-206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134]

Task Force on Vietnamʼs assessment of, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233]

Taylorʼs recommendationʼ for, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42]

Third country assistance, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Time phasing plan, 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

U.S. involvement at village level, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114]

Vietnamese attitude toward, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 38], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]

Village-government ties promoted through, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]

Civil Guard, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29] Arms for, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 203]

Crimes and misbehavior, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Defended villages, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 42]

Delta Pacification Plan, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 51], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 51], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 113]

Force level increases, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297] Defense Department position, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 109]-234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Hilsmanʼs position, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 42]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 42], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 139]

JCS position, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

Taylor Report recommendation, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 42]

Military effectiveness, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 81], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139]

Relief duties, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187]

Strategic hamlet program, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 187]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Training for, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 42], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 235], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]

U.S. support and advice, 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 269]

Vietnamese complaints re U.S. support, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Civilian Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG), 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]-776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]

Clark, Bill, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Cleveland, Robert G., 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Clifton, Brig. Gen. Chester v., 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]

Cline, Ray, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Coffin, Frank M., 200n [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 98], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Collins, Gen. J. Lawton, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 35]

“Colonization” charge against U.S., 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]-702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Communist defectors: Amnesty for, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 235], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Laos situation and, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]

Propaganda uses, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 235]

Strategic hamlet program and, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 227]

Communist insurgency (see also Communist subversion issue under International Control Commission): Administration of controlled areas, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 42]

Air drops, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Casualties, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 229], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]-650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283]

Communist aggression, evidence of, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233]

Developments (October 1961-October 1962), 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]-681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 297], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]

Economic impact,.271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 127]

Escalation of, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 69], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108]-232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Feltʼs assessment of, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 81]

Food and medical shortages, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Future developments, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 297], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 330]

Guerrilla tactics, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 81]

Heavnerʼs assessment of, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 328], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

Hilsmanʼs assessment of, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42]

Infiltration increases, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

Infiltration routes, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 68], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 243]-523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 243]

Intelligence Estimate on, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Interagency Intelligence Committee assessment of, 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Kidnappings, 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 297]

Laos, activities in, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102];708-710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]

Leadership training, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Local resources, reliance on, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 42]

Military strategy, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 42], 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]

Military strength, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 81], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Mine warfare, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

Nationalism and, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Political and propaganda activities, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 81], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 112]

Popular attitude toward Communists, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 330]

Radio station, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Recruits for, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 268]

Saigon activities, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]

“Secret papers” of, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

Southeast Asia Task Forceʼs assessment of, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 230]

Soviet support, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108]

Strategic hamlet program, impact of, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 127], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Strategic hamlets, attacks on, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 173], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 314], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Taylorʼs assessment of, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 288]

Underground operations, possible, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 277]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, link to, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Village-level strategy, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 297]

Communist sympathizers, rehabilitation for, 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 328]

COMUSMACV. See Military Assistance Command, U.S.

Congress, U.S.: Acts and resolutions of: Agreement for Mutual Defense Assistance in Indochina, 1950, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 108], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108]

Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act (P.L. 480), 1954, 494n [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 700n [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]

Foreign Assistance Act, 1961, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 108], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]

Formosa Resolution, 1955, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]

Middle East Resolution, 1957, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]

Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Noltingʼs testimony, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, inquiriesre, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68];222-232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108]

U.S. military policy in Vietnam, involvement in, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]-225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]

Visits to Vietnam by Congressmen, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327] Mansfieldʼs visit, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 330]-787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 330], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 334]

Corcoran, Thomas J., 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 24]

Cottrell, Sterling J., 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 50n [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 221n [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], , 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]n, 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275] 648-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328] Action Plan for Vietnam, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 235]

Civic action program, 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64], 140n [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 66], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 304n [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Organizational and administrative problems, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Third country involvement, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Crop destruction program, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 331n [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 256]

Delta Pacification Plan, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Diem, U.S. support for, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 68]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 68]

Geneva Accords, U.S. policy re, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68]-145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68] International Control Commission, 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]

Laotian-Vietnamese relations, 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 323n [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 95n [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45], 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 172]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 172], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 177], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 156]

Provincial surveys, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Reunification of Vietnam, 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Southeast Asia Task Force, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 215], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Strategic hamlet program, 273n [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 242], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 134n [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 68], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, possible U.S. military operations against, 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Vietnam, Republic of: Governmental advisers, U.S., 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]

Strategic importance to U.S., 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68]-146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 68]

Counterinsurgency operations (see also Civic action program; Crop destruction program; Defoliant operations; Delta Pacification Plan; Strategic hamlet program; U.S. military assistance to Vietnam; U.S. military involvement in Vietnam): Air power used in Air support, need for, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333]-796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 333]

B-26 units, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]

Binh Hoa operation, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 42]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]-100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 49]

Chinese Nationalist pilots for, 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 333]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Civilians, impact on, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302]

Farmgate operation, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]

Guidelines for, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67]

Helicopters, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]-691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]

Interdiction role, 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

LeMayʼs assessment of, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Restrictions on, 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 47], 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Target selection, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149]

U.S. direct involvement, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Anti-aircraft operations, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126]-265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246]

Battalion-sized operations, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 244]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298]

Border control, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 235], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Ca Mau operation, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]

Campaign Plan, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13]

Clear-and-hold operations (see also Operation Hai Yen II; Operation Sunrise), 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203]-419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 297]

Communication equipment, capture of, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244]

Coordination of U.S. and Vietnamese personnel, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 6], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 297]

“Cutting the forest” operations (ambushes), 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Defended villages, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 42], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 51]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 51]

Deterioration of anti-Communist effort, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 268]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268]

Developments (October 1961-October 1962), 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]-686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]

Diemʼs position, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

Economic situation in Vietnam and, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 127]

Explosion Plan, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]-715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305] Communist response, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 277]-628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 277], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277]

Harkinsʼs presentation to Diem, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277]

Harrimanʼs assessment of, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 300]

Noltingʼs assessment of, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 331]-789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Planning for, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 277], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 315]-731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Strategic hamlet program and, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 277]-629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]

Taylorʼs assessment of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]

Failure of operations, impact on U.S., 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 142], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 297]

Field commands, elimination of, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]

Frontier posts, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

Future developments, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 297]

Geographical phasing, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Goals of, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 11]

Governmental organization in Vietnam and, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 127]

Guerrilla tactics, adoption of, 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 42]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279]

Heavnerʼs assessment of, 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 328], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]

Heavy artillery for, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Helicopters used in, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]-691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]

High-tension lines, protection of, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]

Hilsmanʼs assessment of, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 332]

Increase in number of, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 81]

Informants, treatment of, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67]

Information programs, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 167], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198] Loyalty of people, methods to obtain, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]-270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 171]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 171]

Intelligence operations, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 229]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 229], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 235]

Leadership training, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

McNamaraʼs assessment of, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187]

Maritime operations, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]

Media coverage of field operations, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Media coverage of U.S. participation, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 150], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Napalm used in, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 329]

Outcome possibilities, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 142]-301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 142]

Personnel and materiel requirements, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 42]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Piaster funding for, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 206], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 211], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 216]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 216], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Plan for, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 11]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Police force involvement, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Political activities, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11]

Popular participation in war effort, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]

Progress report (Bureau of Intelligence and Research), 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Radar installations, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

Research and experimentation program, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196]

SEATO Plan 7, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 83]-174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Spoiling attacks, 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 297]

Strategic Concept for South Vietnam, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Successes of, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]-650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Third country involvement, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]Time phasing, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Truce option, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 112]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Trueheartʼs assessment of, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

U.S. public interest in, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 278]

U.S. sense of urgency re, 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 269]

Vietnamese casualties, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 68]

Vietnamese responsibility for, 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 244]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]

Village radios and, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 139]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139]

Village-level activities, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

War-weariness and, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 265]

“Winning or losing” issue, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 187], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269] Kennedyʼs position, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86]

Trend of events, means of measuring, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281]-648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]-663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

U.S. reports on, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

“X-factor” questions for U.S. military, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 237]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]

Zone “D” operation, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246]

Crawford, Kenneth, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Crop destruction program, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196] Civilians, impact on, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 43], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58]

Communists, impact on, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276]

Cottrellʼs assessment of, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]

Forrestalʼs assessment of, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 170]

Harrimanʼs opposition to, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 256], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276]

Johnsonʼs assessment of, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Kennedyʼs approval of, 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Montagnards, impact on, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285]

Murrowʼs attitude toward, 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Political repercussions, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 262]-586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 270], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294]

Precedent for, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 262], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]

Resettlement and food distribution programs, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 58], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58]

State Department position, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Strategic goals, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250]-562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271]

Strategic hamlet program and, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Superstitions of peasants and, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Target selection, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 170], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236] Differentiation between Viet Cong and Montagnard crops, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294]

Vacated Montagnard crops, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276]

Test operations, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 187], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 198], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]-690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Timing of, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276]

U.S. authority over, 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]

U.S. Embassy position, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 43]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Vietnamese support for, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 58]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Cutler, Robert, 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]

Cuu, Lt., 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 93], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 93], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 93], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]

Czyzak, John T., 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]

Dang Due Khoi, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 199], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Decker, Gen. George H., 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Joint Chiefs of Staff; McNamara, Robert S.; Military Assistance Command, U.S.): Amnesty plan for Communist defectors, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Civic action program, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134]

Counterinsurgency operations, piaster funding for, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 223]

Defoliant operations, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 156]

Provincial surveys, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74]

RVNAF force levels, recommendations for, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 109]-234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Defoliant operations (see also Crop destruction program), 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298] Defense Department recommendation for, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Effectiveness of, 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Kennedyʼs approval of, 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Objectives and scope of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

Public relations aspects, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Safety of chemicals, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294]

Target selection, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 41]

Test operations, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 41], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 187], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

U.S. authority over, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 317]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Zone “D” operation, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]

Delmore, Brig. Gen. Fred J., 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]

Delta Pacification Plan (see also Operation Sunrise), 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 11], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98]-206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 332] Command structure, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]

Communist reaction, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Concurrent operations, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 157]

Control of population, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 51]-105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 51], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 113]

Country Team concurrence, 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Defensive measures, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 113]

Diemʼs decree on, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Distribution of duties, 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 113]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 113]

Geographical phasing, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 51], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 113]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113]Goals of, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 51], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 113]

Implementing instructions, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]

Operational plans for, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205]

Plaine des Jones defense line, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205]

Popular support, efforts to obtain, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 51], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 113]

Provincial surveys and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 111], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Responsibility for implementation, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Roles of civil and military personnel, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 51]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51]

Security framework, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 51]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 51],

Strategic hamlet program, incorporation into, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]

Task Force on Vietnam agreement on, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52] Thompsonʼs analysis of, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 147]

Thompsonʼs proposal for, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

U.S. Missions' agreement on, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139]

Vietnamese support for, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139]

Den, Dr., 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Denson, J. B., 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Desai, M. J., 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 274]

Diefenbach, D. A., 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]

Diehl, William, 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem.

Dong, Maj., 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Donnell-Hickey Report, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116]

Due Loi, Madame, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Dulles, John Foster, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 305]

Dung, Lt. Col., 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244]

Duong Van Minh, Gen., 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 6], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 13], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 123], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 268] Dutton, Frederick G., 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 278]

Eggleston, Brig. Gen. Howard, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93]

Eisenhower, Dwight O., 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]

Elegant, Robert, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Ellis, William A., 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Emergency Medical Program for Vietnam, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202]

Evans, Allan, 246n [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Explosion Plan. See under Counterinsurgency operations.

Fall, Bernard, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Far East, Bowles' assessment of U.S. policies in, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Felt, Adm. Harry D. (CINCPAC), 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77] ANZUS, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Civic action program, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 98]

Communist defectors, amnesty for, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Communist insurgency, assessment of, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 81]

Counterinsurgency operations: Airpower used in, 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 47], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333]

Explosion Plan, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]-715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Helicopters used in, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]

Crop destruction program, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Defoliant operations, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 41], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 317]

Delta Pacification Plan, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 157]

Honolulu Conferences: January 1962, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

February 1962, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

March 1962, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

July 1962, 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]

Laos: Communist activities in, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 305]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 53]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 53]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203]

Neutrality for Vietnam, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]

Operation Sunrise, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Desertions, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Force level increases, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 105], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 105]

Training for, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248]

Strategic hamlet program: Dependent housing, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Information campaign re, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Thailand, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, FY 1963 program, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333]

Vietnam, Republic of, political situation, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81]

Fippin, William H., 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 227], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]; 553, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Fishel, Wesley R., 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 24]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69]-152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Fitzgerald, Desmond, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Food-denial operations. See Crop destruction program.

Force Populaire, 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 257], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 303]-705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 328]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 328], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

Foreign Assistance Act, 1961, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 108], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]

Formosa Resolution, 1955, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]

Forrestal, Michael v., 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141], 299n [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 198], 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259]-581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]-650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 314], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333] Crop destruction program, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 170]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 206]

Fowler, James, 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Fox, Guy, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Fraley, Bert, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 122]

France, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 142], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 172], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 214], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321]-743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327]

Fulbright, J. William, 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 241]

Furst, Walter, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212]n, 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225]

Galbraith, John Kenneth, 186n [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 183], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274] International conference on Vietnam, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 164]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 151], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 156]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, U.S. contacts with, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Gardiner, Arthur Z., 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Geneva Accords (see also International Control Commission): Communist violations, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 137]

U.S. policy re, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68]-145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]-226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 301]

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 176n [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 524n [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244], 567n [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314] Binh Hoa operation, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]-101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Civic action program, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 122]

Crop destruction program, 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276]

RVNAF force level increases, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Grant, James P., 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 90]

Greece, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165]

Green, Marshall, 387n [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Greenfield, James L., 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]

Gromyko, Andrei, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Gundevia, Yezdezard D., 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 60], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Halberstam, David, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]-746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 322], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 325]

Hamilton, Fowler, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 441n [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Hamlett, Lt. Gen. Barksdale, 552n [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248]

Hannah, John A., 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69]

Harkins, Gen. Paul D., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 254n [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228], 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294] Army of the Republic of Vietnam: Aggressiveness in battle, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 277]

Battalion sizes, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Leadership problems, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 244], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 244]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]

Civic action program: Military used for civil projects, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 244]

U.S. involvement at village level, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114]

Civil Guard, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244]

Communist insurgency: Leadership training, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Underground operations, possible, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 277]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244]

Battalion-sized operations, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 244]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244]

Border control, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134].

Coordination, lack of, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244]

“Cutting the forest” operations (ambushes), 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Explosion Plan, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 315], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Field commands, elimination of, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]

Heavy artillery for, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Helicopters used in, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]

High-tension lines, protection of, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]

Leadership training, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Maritime operations, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]

Napalm used in, 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 329]

Research and experimentation program, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196]

Vietnamese responsibility for, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 244]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]

Crop destruction program, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251], 613n [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Defoliant operations, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Delta Pacification Plan, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 157]

Diem, meetings with, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277]

Honolulu Conferences: February 1962, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

March 1962, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

July 1962, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 248]

October 1962, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]

Laos situation, 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 322] Expulsions of reporters, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Field operations, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 159n [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 75], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

U.S. participation in combat, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]

U.S. policy statement re, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 159n [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 75], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Military Assistance Command, U.S.: Named commander of, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86]

Terms of reference, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]

Operation Sunrise, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Military capabilities, improvements in, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Relations with, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

Training for, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248]

Women, military training for, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Strategic hamlet program, 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 248]

Taylor-Nhu meeting, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: Air Force, increased role for, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 333]

Rotation for personnel, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]

U.S. regional military command, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 189], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]

Vietnam, Republic of: Morale of people, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 277]

Political reforms, 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Harriman, W. Averell, 50n [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 215n [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104], 220n [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 254n [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 441n [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 323], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] Bowles mission to Southeast Asia, proposed, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Cambodia: Neutrality for, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

Chen, meeting with, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Civic action program, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 137n [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

Explosion Plan, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 300]

Helicopters used in, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300]

Napalm used in, 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Plan for, 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Progress report, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Crop destruction program, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295] Opposition to, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 256], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276]

Defoliant operations, 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41]

Diem, U.S. support for, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148]

Honolulu Conference (February 1962), 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

International conference on Vietnam, 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158]

International Control Commission: Citations of violations, 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]

U.S. introduction of forces issue, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 274]

Kennedy-Diem communications, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]

Laos: Communist activities in, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246]

Conference on, 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 267]

Troop withdrawals, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 663n [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Expulsions of reporters, 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 318]

Field operations, 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Newsweek ban, 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

U.S. participation in combat, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

U.S. policy statement re, 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Vietnamese Government, reporters' relations with, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 171n [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 172], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 177], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Nehru, meeting with, 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 151]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 156], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176]

Presidential palace attack, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Provincial surveys, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101],

Southeast Asia Task Force, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Strategic hamlet program, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 314]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333]

U.S. over-optimism re Vietnam, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of: Meeting with officials of, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

United States, contacts with, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Yalta Agreements, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]

Harris, Russell L., 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Heavner, Theodore J. C., 137n [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64], 140n [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 66], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191], 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217], 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 499n [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 235], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 281], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 679n [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 788n [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 331], 789n [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] Mansfieldʼs Vietnam visit, 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 334]

Provincial tour, report on, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 173]-365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Report on Vietnam, 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Strategic hamlet program, 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257]-575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 257]

Heble, John, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 303], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 303]

Heeney, A. D. P., 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 97]

Heho-Lawksawk-Taunggyi Operation (Burma), 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 42]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 42]

Heinz, Rear Adm. Luther C., 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 304n [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Hendry, James B., 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Herbicide operations. See Defoliant operations.

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Hickey-Donnell Report, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116]

Hieu. See Ngo Trong Hieu.

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 99n [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 105], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176] Assessment of Vietnam situation, 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 332]

Communist insurgency, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 243]-523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 243]

Counterinsurgency operations, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 332]

Air power used in, 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Progress reports, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Systematic plan, 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139]

Crop destruction program, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250]-562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Operation Sunrise, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Strategic Concept for Vietnam, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Strategic hamlet program, 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 332]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 332]

Vietnam, Republic of, political situation, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Ho Chi Minh, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 190], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199], 458n [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 218], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

Hoa, Father, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]

Hoai, Col., 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

Hoang Khac Thanh, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Hoang Nguyen, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Hoang Van Lac, Lt. Col., 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Hohler, Henry A.E, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205]

Holyoake, K. J., 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Hong Kong, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]

Honolulu Conferences: January 1962, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

February 1962, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77]

March 1962, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

July 1962, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

October 1962, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298]-691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298]

Hooten, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Horgan, Rogers B., 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]

Hubbard, Wharton D., 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]

Hue, Archbishop of. See Ngo Dinh Thuc.

Hughes, Thomas L., 246n [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 241]

Hunt, George, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Huyen, Col., 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Huynh Huu Nghia, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31]

India (see also International Control Commission), 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172] U.S. regional military command, response to, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189]

Vietnam situation, policy on, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108]

Indonesia, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 142], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 330]

Information service, Vietnamese, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 278], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 297]

International conference on Vietnam, proposed: Chinese Peopleʼs Republic position, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Communist bloc support, U.S. response to, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 188], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Parthasarathiʼs position, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 183]

Sihanoukʼs position, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158]

Soviet position, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.K. position, 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.S. position: Galbraithʼs attitude toward, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 164]

Noltingʼs attitude toward, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Vietnamese Democratic Republic support, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 168]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 188]

International Control Commission (ICC), 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 265] Canadian strategy, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Citations of violations, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Communist activities, increased monitoring of, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130]

Communist attacks on monitors, 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136]

Communist subversion issue: Canadian position, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 97]

Evidencere, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209]

Indian position, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 60], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 90]

Ruling on, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S. position, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 55], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 90]-185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Hanoi visit, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]

International law and, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Laos troop withdrawals, monitoring of, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274] ,

Report on Vietnam, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230]-481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 233] Issuance of, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

U.S. introduction of forces issue: Canadian position, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 97]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 97]

Indian position, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 60], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 201], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 274]

Ruling on, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S.-Indian talks re, 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 90]

U.S. position, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55]-119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 166], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 194]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196],, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 201], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 274]

Vietnamese Democratic Republic propaganda against, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203]

International Monetary Fund, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284]

Jabloski, Gen., 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Jaffe, Adrian, 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]

James, Wayne, 304n [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Janow, Seymour J., 119n [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Japan, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 112], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Johnson, Robert H., 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 249], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328] Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 177]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

RVNAF command structure, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12]-23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Strategic hamlet program, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281]-648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]-133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 63]

Vietnam, Republic of, situation in central areas, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 303]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 70n [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 40], 160n [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 255n [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 276n [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298] Civic action program, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64], 200n [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 98]

Counterinsurgency operations:

Air power used in, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Anti-aircraft operations, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126]-265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Village-level activities, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Crop destruction program, 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Defoliant operations, 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Diem, assessment of, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Diemʼs replacement, consideration of, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Hilsman-JCS meeting, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Honolulu Conference (july 1962), 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248]

International Control Commission, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 128n [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61], 171n [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

RVNAF force level increases, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 109]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]

Vietnam visit, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Joint Action Program, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 233]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81] Counterinsurgency operations, napalm used in, 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Crop destruction program, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271]

Defoliant operations, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 317]

Delta Pacification Plan, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 157]

Diemʼs replacement, consideration of, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Hilsmanʼs meeting with, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

International Control Commission, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 25]

RVNAF force level increases, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 20]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

Southeast Asia, strategic importance of, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 333] Air Force, increased role for, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 333], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 333]

Jorden, William J., 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259]

Jorden Report, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Karnow, Stanley, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Kaysen, Carl, 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Kennedy, John E, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 750n [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333] Cambodian-Vietnamese relations, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292]

Civic action program, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 137n [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 64], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]

Communist defectors, amnesty for, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292]

Counterinsurgency operations: Anti-aircraft operations, 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Binh Hoa operation, 99n [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]

Piaster funding for, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Police force involvement, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Third country involvement, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

“Winning or losing” issue, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86]

Crop destruction program, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176] Approval of, 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

State Department position, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Target selection, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292]

Test operations, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Defoliant operations, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 734n [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318] Approval of, 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Defense Department recommendationfor, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Test operations, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Diem: Communications with, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 191], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

U.S. support for, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148]

Emergency Medical Program for Vietnam, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202]

Far East, U.S. policies in, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142]

International conference on Vietnam, 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

International Control Commission, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126]

Laos, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 292]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 301], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Nolting, meeting with, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 151], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Southeast Asia, U.S. political objectives in, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 214], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238]

Special Group (Counterinsurgency), 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108] Air Force, increased role for, 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333], 797n [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Contingency plan for, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]

Position on, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, U.S. contacts with, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Kennedy, Robert E, 230n [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284]

Kent, Col. J. R., 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 325n [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 156], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 255] Diem, assessment of, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Kessner, Joe, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Khanh. See Nguyen Khanh Brig. Gen. Khien, Col., 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244]

Khrushchev, Nikita S, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 238], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

“Kien Hoa“ papers, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

Knox, Newton B., 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Koh Rokar incident, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 296]

Korea, Republic of, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 191] Military assistance to Vietnam, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

Korean war, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 214]

Koren, Henry L. T., 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Krulak, Maj. Gen. Victor H., 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 567n [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 314]

Lac. See Hoang Van Lac, Lt. Col., 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Lalouette, Roger, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]

Langen, Odin, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]

Lansdale, Brig. Gen. Edward G., 60n [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35], 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275] Civic action program, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 122]-258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

Diem, assessments of, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 37], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86]

Media interview, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Prisoners of war in South Vietnam, 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]-569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 255]

“X-factor” questions for u.S. military, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 237]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]

Laos, 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84] Communist activities in, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305]-710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]

Communist infiltration to Vietnam through, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 243]-523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 243]

Communist reactions to U.S. courses of action, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 213]

Conference on, 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 234], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 267]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267]

French policy toward, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321]-743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 330]-784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 330]

Military situation, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187]

Neutrality issue, U.S.-Vietnamese discussions re, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 218], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 323]

Soviet policy toward, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 238], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 267]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Troop withdrawals, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

U.K. policy toward, 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

U.S. combat forces for, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 207]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 207]

U.S. policy toward, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 190], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 234], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267]

U.S. regional military command, response to, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 189]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 292]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 301], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 309]

Le Than, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 93]

Le Van Kim, Gen., 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 268]

Le Van Ty, Gen., 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]

Lebanon, U.S. deployment of forces (1958), 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]

LeMay, Gen. Curtis, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]n, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 50n [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 379n [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 524n [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244] Crop destruction program, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Hilsman-JCS meeting, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces:Command structure, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Force levelincreases, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 20]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22]

Thailand, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Vietnam visit, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196]

Levitt, Scott, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86]

Levy, Col. Robert M., 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]

Life magazine, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Little, Edward. S., 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 399n [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Loftus, Becker, 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Long An hamlet, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]

Luong. See Bui Van Luong.

Luong Son hamlet, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 187]

Macapagal, Diosadado, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 267]

McConaughy, Walter P., 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

McCone, John A., 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

MacDonald, Malcolm, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 244]

McGarr, Lt. Gen. Lionel C., 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86] Counterinsurgency operations: Airpower used in, 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Clear-and-hold operations, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

Diemʼs position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]

Zone “D” operation, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]

Crop destruction program, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Defoliant operations, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 41]

Diem, meeting with, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13]

Honolulu Conference (January 1962), 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]

Johnson, Lyndon B., letter to, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 79]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 53], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

RVNAF training, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Strategic hamlet program, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]

McNamara, Robert S., 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 441n [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239], 524n [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244] Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 69n [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]

Binh Hoa operation, 99n [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]

Diemʼs position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

Explosion Plan, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 277], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 315]

Helicopters used in, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]

Piaster funding for, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 223]

U.S. sense of urgency re, 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269]-603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 269]

Visit to front, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 187]

“Winning or losing” issue, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86]

“X-factor” questions for U.S. military, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 237]

Crop destruction program, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295] Test operations, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]-690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]

Vacated Montagnard crops, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]

Defoliant operations: Defense Department recommendation for, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Effectiveness of, 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 317]

Increase in, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 317]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Kennedyʼs approval of, 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Test operations, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 41], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

U.S. authority over, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 317]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Honolulu Conferences: January 1962, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

February 1962; 155, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

March 1962, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

July 1962, 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

October 1962, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]-691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Military Assistance Command, U.S.: Establishment of, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9]

Terms of reference, 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 25], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

Montagnards, military training for, 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Operation Sunrise, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 187]-381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 156]

Prisoners of war, 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Provincial surveys, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Command structure, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Force level increases, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 20]

Training for, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248]

Self Defense Corps, arms for, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

Southeast Asia, strategic importance of, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22]

Strategic hamlet program: Assessment of, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 187]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]

Communist attacks, ability to withstand, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Funding for, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Information campaign re, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Paramilitary forces, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Priority constructions, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Thailand, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

U.S.economic assistance to Vietnam, 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

U.S.military assistance, FY 1963 program, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S.military involvement in Vietnam, contingency plan for, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]

Vietnam, Republic of, economic situation, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248]

Vietnam visit, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Maechling, Charles, 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 160n [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Magathan, Wallace C., Jr., 119n [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Malaya, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 314], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 330]

Malaysian Federation, 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 267], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 330]-787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 330]

Malraux, Andre, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199]

Manell, Abram E., 323n [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]

Manfull, Melvin R, 70n [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 40], 582n [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 698n [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302], 738n [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Manning, Robert, 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199]

Mansfield, Mike, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 214], 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 241], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 267], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295] Vietnam visit: Meeting with Nhu, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Reports on, 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 330]-787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 330], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 334]

Mao Tse Tung, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 305]

Marcy, Carl, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Marshall, Gen. George C., 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Martin, Edwin w., 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 29]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 77], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Martin, Harold H., 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 325]

Mau. See Vu Van Mau.

Maung Maung Gyi, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247]

Mayer, Charles, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Mecklin, John, 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 203], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 322]

Media coverage of Vietnam (see also U.S. information policies and programs in Vietnam): Caliber of U.S. reporters, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323]

Classified information, access to, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 322]

Diem, criticism of, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311]

Expulsion of reporters, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]-725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322]

U.S. response, 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 312], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 322]

Field operations, U.S. policy re coverage of, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

“naccuraciesl” in, 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Indoctrination briefing for reporters, 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 325]-759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 325]

Lansdaleʼs interview, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Military press briefings, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 322], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 322]

Newsweek ban, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 318]

Nhuʼs control of government policy, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322]-745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]

Non-American correspondents, U.S. policy toward, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Positive publicity, U.S. efforts re, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 75]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]-759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 325]

Presidential palace attack: Coverage of, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96]

Responsibility for, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Restrictions on reporters, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]-749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 322]

U.S. liaison with media, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. Mission, media relations with, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

U.S. participation in combat, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 150], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. policy statement re, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Vietnamese Government, reporters'relations with, 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 203], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 323]

Washington news leaks, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

Meloy, Francis E., 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Mendenhall, Joseph A., 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 11], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 24]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31], 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 353n [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 173], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 268]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Menon, V. K. Krishna, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Meyer, Carl, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Michigan State University Group in Vietnam, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 69], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) (see also McGarr, Lt. Gen. Lionel C.), 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 38], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 79], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173] Civic action program, 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 123]

Delta Pacification Plan, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

“Paper-mill” charge against, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 86]

Personnel increase, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 269]

Self Defense Corps and, 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 269]

Military Assistance Command, U.S. (MACV) (see also Harkins, Gen. Paul D.; U.S. military assistance to Vietnam), 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320] Communist insurgency: Food and medical shortages, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Infiltration routes, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 243]

Diem informed of, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Establishment of, decision re, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 6], 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 6], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Harkins named commander, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 86]

Harkinsʼ arrival in Saigon, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]

McGarrʼs attitude toward, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]

Media coverage of Vietnam and, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]-746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 322], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 322], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 322]

Mission and tasks, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 53], 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68]

Press announcement re, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Terms of reference, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 40], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 53], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]-129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Military Assistance Command (Thailand), U.S., 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country (see also U.S. military assistance to Vietnam): Australia, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 230], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 588n [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

Korea, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

New Zealand, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

United Kingdom, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

U.S. policy, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 172]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 172], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 177]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Military command, U.S. See Military Assistance Command, U.S.

Military operations, Communist. See Communist insurgency.

Military operations, U.S.-Vietnamese. See Counterinsurgency operations.

Moffatt, Hugh, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Monroe, Bill, 734n [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Montagnards, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 42], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196] Crop destruction program and, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 294]

Flight from highlands, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]

Military training for, 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 328]-772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 328]

Resettlement of, 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327]

Strategic importance to Vietnam, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 330]

Vietnamese attitudes toward, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Montgomery, James, M., 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257]

Moore, Daniel E., 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Morse, Wayne, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108]

Mundt, Carl, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Murphy, Charlie, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Murrow, Edward R., 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

National Academy for Strategic Hamlets, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187]

National Broadcasting Company (NBC), 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

National Security Action Memoranda (NSAM): 111 (Nov. 22, 1961), 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

124 (Jan. 18, 1962), 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27] 131, 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

132 (Feb. 19, 1962), 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

178 (Aug. 9, 1962), 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Navy, Vietnamese, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149] Delta Pacification Plan, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 113]

Junk Force, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233]-494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 269], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 297]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297]

Nehru, Braj Kumar, 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 90], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Neilson, N. Paul, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Neubert, Joseph w., 390n [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]

Neustadt, Richard, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 214]

Neutrality for Vietnam, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 228]-475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 234], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]

The New York Times, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 318]

New Yorker magazine, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]

New Zealand, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

Newhouse, John, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Newsweek magazine, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 318], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Ngo Dinh Can, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 303], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 314], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 328], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 328]

Ngo Dinh Diem: Agricultural situation, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Alternatives, U.S. consideration of, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 35], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268]-600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 268]

Anti-Communist convictions, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23]

Army of the Republic of Vietnam, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 244]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 277]

Cambodia, neutrality for, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327] ]

Casualties, reaction to, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]

Central Vietnam situation, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303]

Civic action program, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 98], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 244]

Civil Guard: Training for, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244]

Vietnamese complaints re U.S. support, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Commercial development, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23]

Communist insurgency: General plan of conquest, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]

Morale problems, 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Saigon activities, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]

“Secret papers” of, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]“

Training for leaders, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, link to, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Counterinsurgency operations, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13] Air power used in, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Battalion-sized operations, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 244]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244]

Border control, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]

Clear-and-hold operations, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]

“Cutting the forest” operations (ambushes), 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Explosion Plan, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Failure of military effort, responsibility for, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 268]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268]

Field commands, elimination of, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]

Frontier posts, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

Heavy artillery for, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Helicopters used in, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244]

High-tension lines, protection of, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]

Leadership training, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 244]

Organizational and administrative problems, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184]

Vietnamese responsibility for, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 244]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]

Village-level activities, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23]

Zone “D” operation, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 13], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13]

Coup against, possible, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 6], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 42], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 173]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 173] Chuongʼs assessment of, 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Nhuʼs response, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 229]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Successor groups, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 218]

U.S. consideration of, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 268]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

U.S. contingency plan re, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]

U.S. military officers and, 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 232]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 232]

U.S. response, 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 218]

Crop destruction program, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 43], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Delta Pacification Plan, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152] Command structure, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127]

Decree on, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Support for, 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117]

“Evil influences” on, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Fishelʼs assessment of, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Government officials, assessment of, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Harkins, meetings with, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277]

Johnsonʼs assessment of, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Kennedy, communications with, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 191], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Lansdaleʼs assessments of, 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 37], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86]

Laos: Conference on, 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277]

Relations with Vietnam, 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 292], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 309] .

McGarr, meeting with, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 330], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Mecklin, meeting with, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Criticism from reporters, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311]

Expulsion of reporters, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Michigan State University Group, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 69], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., informed of, 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203]

Montagnards: Military training for, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Resettlement of, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244]

Morale of the people, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 277]

National Assembly speech, 695n [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 300]

Neutrality for Vietnam, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277]

Northerners and Catholics, favoritism toward, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Operation Sunrise, 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Pathasarathiʼs assessment of, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 183]

People,contacts with, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199]-411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 199]

Political corruption, campaign against, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 108]

Political prisoners, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

Political reforms, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 35], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Political support, loss of, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 24], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Presidential palace attack, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 93], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Provincial surveys, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Command structure, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12]-23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Force level increases, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42]

Relations with, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 6], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35]

Training for, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

Women, military training for, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Road program, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23]-43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23]

Stahrʼs assessment of, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 165]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165]

Strategic hamlet program, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248] Communist insurgency, impact on, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Delta Pacification Plan incorporated into, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205]

Priority constructions, 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244]

Relocations for, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93]

Taylor, meeting with, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

Thuanʼs resignation, rumors about, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]

U.S. assessment of, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 37]

U.S. influence with, methods to improve, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 37]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 206]

U.S. military representative for, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 35]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

U.S. regional military command, response to, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

U.S. support for, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 68]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 68], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 173]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 173]

U.S.-Vietnamese relations, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Yuenʼs assessment of, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 228]

Ngo Dinh Luyen, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 268]

Ngo Dinh Nhu, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268] Americans, attitude toward, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322]

Cambodia, perspective on, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

Cambodian policy toward U.S., 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323]

Central Vietnam situation, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 303], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303]

Communist defectors, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Coup against Diem, possible response to, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 229]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Crop destruction program, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270]

Explosion Plan, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]-715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Fishelʼs assessment of, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]

Land reform, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

Laos: Communist activities in, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305]-710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]

Neutrality issue, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 323]

Relations with Vietnam, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Mansfield, meeting with, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 330]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Caliber of U.S. reporters, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323]

Control of government policy re, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322]-745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]

Expulsion of reporters, 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322]

Military press briefings, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Vietnamese Government, reporters' relations with, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 323]

Michigan State University Group, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 69]

Neutrality for Vietnam, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]

Province rehabilitation program, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

RVNAF desertions, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Southeast Asia, social revolutions needed in, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]

Strategic hamlet program, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 297] Arms for villagers, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]

Assessment of, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 227]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 227]

Construction program, acceleration of, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]-312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Delta Pacification Plan incorporated into, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Democratic values and, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

Dependent housing, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]-716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Guerrilla operations against Communists and, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

Long-term plan for, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 279]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]-752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

Priority constructions, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

Strategy against Communism, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

“Will to fight” developed by, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 323]

Taylor, meeting with, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 279]

Thuanʼs resignation, rumors about, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]

U.S. military personnel in Vietnam, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 279]

U.S. visit, proposed, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Ngo Dinh Nhu, Madame, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 93], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 199], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 322], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]

Ngo Dinh Thuc (Archbishop of Hue), 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 93], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 268]

Ngo Trong Hieu, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 66], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 197], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 203], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]

Nguyen Dinh Thuan, 23n [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 13], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 268], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283] Cambodian-Vietnamese relations, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Catholicism, conversion to, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31]

Central Vietnam situation, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303]

Civic action program, 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Civil Guard, Vietnamese complaints re

U.S. support, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Communist defectors, amnesty for, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292]

Communist insurgency: Escalation off possible, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Morale problems, 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Anti-aircraft operations, 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Coordination of U.S. and Vietnamese personnel, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Successes of, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]

Crop destruction program, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 58], 613n [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292]-670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292]

Delta Pacification Plan, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]

Laos: Conference on, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239]

French policy toward, 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321]-743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Relations with Vietnam, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 292]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 309]

Long-term perspective on Vietnam, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 265]

Media coverage of Vietnam:

Expulsion of reporters, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133]

Vietnamese Government, reporters' relations with, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290]

Military press briefings, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Michigan State University Group, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 69], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 69], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 172]

Montagnards, resettlement of, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Personality of, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69]

Political reforms, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Provincial surveys, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 111]

Resignation, rumors about, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Reunification of Vietnam, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 265]

RVNAF command structure, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7]

Strategic hamlet program: Delta Pacification Plan incorporated into, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Socioeconomic programs, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

Television for Vietnam, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292]

U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284] Kennedy, meeting with, 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

Rostow, meeting with, 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Rusk and Harriman, meetings with, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

Summaries off 666-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Wilson, meeting with, 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Nguyen Khanh, Brig. Gen., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 93], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 244], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 322]

Nguyen Luong, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]

Nguyen Ngoc Tho, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 228], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]

Nguyen Thai, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69]

Nguyen Thi Truyen, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96]

Nguyen Thien Ke, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 173]

Nguyen Van Luong, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]

Nguyen Van Vinh, Maj. Gen., 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 137], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 168]

Nhu. See Ngo Dinh Nhu .

Nitze, Paul H., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Nolting, Frederick E., Jr., 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 11], 23n [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 50n [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 54], 215n [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104], 220n [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106], 254n [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]-437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228], 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 232], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328] Action Plan for Vietnam, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 235]

Army of the Republic of Vietnam, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Cambodian policy toward U.S., 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323]

Cambodian-Vietnamese relations, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 296], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Civic action program, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 38], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 98] Provincial rehabilitation activities, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

U.S. involvement at village level, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114]

Civil Guard, Vietnamese complaints re U.S. support, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

“Colonization” charge against U.S., 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]-702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Communist defectors, amnesty for, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Communist insurgency: Escalation of, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Food and medical shortages, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Morale problems, 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77], 234n [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302]

Explosion Plan, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 331]-789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Helicopters used in, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]

Napalm used in, 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 329]

Piaster funding for, 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 211], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 216]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 216], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230]

Crop destruction program, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 276] Position on, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 58], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58]-124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

U.S. authority over, 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Vacated Montagnard crops, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]

Defoliant operations, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

Delta Pacification Plan, 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58] Command structure, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]

Operational plans for, 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Provincial surveys and, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Vietnamese support for, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117]-252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Heavnerʼs report, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 173]

Honolulu Conferences: January 1962, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]

February 1962, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 77]

March 1962, 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

July 1962, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 248], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

October 1962, 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298]

International conference on Vietnam, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

International Control Commission, 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55] U.S. introduction of forces issue, 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 194]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Laos: Communist activities in, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 305]

Conference on, 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239]

French policy toward, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 301], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 309]

Long-term perspective on Vietnam, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 265]

Mansfieldʼs visit, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323]

Media coverage of Vietnam (see also U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam below, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323] Expulsion of reporters, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 312], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Field operations, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 59]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Newsweek ban, 673n [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

Non-American correspondents, U.S. policy toward, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Positive publicity, U.S. efforts ref 757

U.S. participation in combat, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 150]

U.S. policy statement re, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Vietnamese government, reporters' relations with, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 323]

Michigan State University Group, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70]

Military Assistance Command, U.S.: Diem informed of, 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Press announcement re, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45]

Terms of reference, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14]n, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 40], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 53], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 61]-129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Montagnards, resettlement of, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Neutrality for Vietnam, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305]

Operation Sunrise, 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Presidential palace attack, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 93], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 93], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 93], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Provincial surveys, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Command structure, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Relations with, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

Resignation, offer of 48, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 40]

Senate testimony, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Southeast Asia, need for social revolutions, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]

Strategic hamlet program: Delta Pacification Plan incorporated into, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]

Elections, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]

Guerrilla operations against Communists and, 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

Nhuʼs program of accelerated construction, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]

Paramilitary forces, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]-739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]

Poorest inhabitants, unpaid work by, 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]

Priority constructions, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]-540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 245], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 248]

Relocations for, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Retaken villages and, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

Socio-economic programs, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

Strategy against Communism, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

Taylor-Diem meeting, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Taylor-Nhu meeting, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

Thuanʼs resignation, rumors about, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 258]-579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 258]

U.S. information programs and policies , in Vietnam (see also Media coverage of Vietnam above), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S. over-optimism in Vietnam, 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

U.S. regional military command, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

U.S. visit (January 1962), 7n [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]

Vietnam, Republic of: Economic situation, 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 211], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 216]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 216], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248]

Government officials, training for, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248]

Land reforms, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Northerners and Catholics, favoritism toward, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Political reforms, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Political situation, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]

OʼDaniel, Gen. John w., 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 37]

OʼDonnell; Adm. Edward J., 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

Operation Binh Minh. See Operation Sunrise.

Operation Hai Yen II, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203]-419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 230], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 262], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 297]

Operation Sunrise, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 117], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 123], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 297] Media reports on, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Name for, 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 150]

Phases of, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139]

Plan for, 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103]

Progress reports, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]

Resettlement problems, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Southeast Asia Task Forceʼs assessment of, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 230]

Successes of, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 187]-381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

U.S. concerns about, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Owen, Henry D., 703n [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Pakistan, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172]

Parrott, Raymond C., 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Parthasarathi, G., 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 60], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 183], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Peace Corps, U.S., 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Pell, Claiborne, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

Personalism philosophy, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69]

Peters, Richard B., 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30]

Peterson, Avery E, 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Pezzullo,Lawrence, 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 276n [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Phan Phu Quoc, Lt., 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 93], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 93]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Phan Van Tao, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 425n [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 203], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311]

Philippines, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 191], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 241], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 330]

Phillips, Rufus, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 227]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 227], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 300], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

Phoumi Nosavan, Gen., 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 189], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 189], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321]

Plakies, John, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67]

Political settlement in Vietnam (see also International conference on Vietnam), 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179] Defense Department position, 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 156]

Galbraithʼs proposal, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141]

Kennedyʼs decision against, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176]

U.S. consideration of, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 148]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 151]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Presidential palace, attack on, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287] Aftermath, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Casualties, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Communist reaction, 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Diemʼs account, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93]

Goals of, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

Initial report on, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

Military response, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Officers' explanations for, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 93]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 93]

Precipitating events, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 93]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

U.S. Contingency Plan and, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Prisoners of war, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149] Communist prisoners, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 237]-510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 237], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 328]

Lansdaleʼs recommendations re, 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]-569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 255]

U.S. prisoners, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203]

Provincial surveys, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 138], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233] Broadened scope of, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 100]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Civic action program and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Defense Department criticisms, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74]

Delta Pacification Plan and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 111], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Political data, failure to collect, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 64]

Public Health Service, U.S., 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202]

Pushkin, Georgi M., 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 274]

Quan, Capt, 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 173]

Quoc, Lt. See Phan Phu Quoc, Lt.

Ramsey, Henry C., 703n [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Ranger companies, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 138], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 233], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244] Delta Pacification Plan, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 113]

Force level increases, proposed, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 42]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Raymond, Jack, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) (see also Air Force, Vietnamese; Army of the Republic of Vietnam; Civil Guard; Navy, Vietnamese; Ranger companies; Self Defense Corps): Casualties, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Catholicism issue, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 24]-46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31]

Civilian Irregular Defense Groups, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]-776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]

Command structure, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 138], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 235], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 328]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329] Delegation of authority problem, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 35], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 35]

Reforms, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12]-23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 35]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 35], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138]-291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

U.S. reports on, 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Communications system, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]

Coordination within, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44]

Crop destruction program, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 236]

Delta Pacification Plan, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 51]

Desertions, 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 187], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Developments (October 1961-October 1962), 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 297]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297]

Diemʼs relations with, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35]

Force level increases, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42] Defense Department position, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 109]-234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Diemʼs position, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42]

JCS position, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 20]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

Progress in implementing, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 269]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

200,000 level, U.S. agreement to, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Force Populaire, 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 257], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 303]-705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 328]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 328], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 328]

Harkinsʼ relations with, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

Increase in operations, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187]

Intelligence program. See Central Intelligence Organization.

Military capabilities, improvements in, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Officer training, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]

Paramilitary forces, proliferation of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]

Performance of, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Province chiefs, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 35]

Training for, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 54]-115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248]

Special Forces for, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 235]

Women, military training for, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Republican Youth Program, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]

Reston, James, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62]

Rettie, E. R., 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130]

Reunification of Vietnam, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 257], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 265] Propaganda aspects, 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

U.S. policy, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Rice, Edward E., 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 97], 221n [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 276n [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 323n [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 396n [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 250], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 256], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 268], 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]648, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 303], 707n [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Rice crop, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 127], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 203], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257]-572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 328]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328]

Richardson, John, 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228], 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Richardson, Lt. Gen., 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]

Riley, Vice Adm. Herbert D., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 126], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248]

Robinson, James, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310]-722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 311]-725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 312]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199]-411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 199], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247]

Rostow, Walt W., 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 50n [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 299n [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 249], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257], 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328] Laos situation, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 207]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 207]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third counny, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 172], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 177]

Montagnards, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 275]

Strategic hamlet program, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, proposed U.S. military operations against, 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 190]

Vietnam, Republic of: Central Vietnam, situation in, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Government officials, training for, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275]

Rowan, Carl T., 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Rowen, Harry S., 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 271]

Rowny, Maj. Gen. Edward L., 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300]

Rubber production, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 127]

Rusk, Dean: ANZUS, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Bowles mission to Southeast Asia,proposed, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 517n [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 241], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Cambodian-Vietnamese relations, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285]

Civic action program: Civilian program, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 66]

Definition and purpose of, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30]

Military used for civil projects, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Time phasing plan, 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Communist infiltration routes, 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 243]

Counterinsurgency operations: Anti-aircraft operations, 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Napalm used in, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Piaster funding for, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Police force involvement, 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Crop destruction program: Montagnards, impact on, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285]

State Department position, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Test operations, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Defoliant operations, 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Geneva Accords, U.S. policy on, 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

International conference on Vietnam, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

International Control Commission: Citations of violations, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

U.S. introduction of forces issue, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55]-119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 90]

Kennedy-Diem communications, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 191], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238]

Laos: Communist activities in, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246]

U.S. combat forces for, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 207]

U.S. policy toward, 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 234], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Mau, meeting with, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Media coverage of Vietnam (see also U.S. information policies and programs in Vietnam below), 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65] “Inaccuracies” in, 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

U.S. participation in combat, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S. policy statement re, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Vietnamese government, reporters' relations with, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 59n [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34] Terms of reference, 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 588n [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265]

Nehru-Harriman meeting, 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 156]

Provincial surveys, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]-210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Southeast Asia Task Force, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Special Group (Counterinsurgency), 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Strategic hamlet program: Delta Pacification Plan incorporated into, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Priority constructions, 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 242]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]-655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

U.S. information programsand policies in Vietnam (see also Media coverage of Vietnam above), 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of: U.S. contacts with, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

U.S. military operations against, proposed, 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

Vietnam, Republic of: Political situation, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Strategic importance to U.S., 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Saigon: Communist activities in, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]

Sister city in U.S., 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Trade fair, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233]

Salans, Carl H, 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Salinger, Pierre, 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 206n [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Sarris, Louis G., 221n [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Saturday Evening Post, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]-758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 325]

Saund, D.S., 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

Scott, Joseph W., 246n [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Seelye, Talcott W., 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70]-155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Self Defense Corps, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13] Arms for, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 203]

Civic action training, 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 328]

Crimes and misbehavior, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Defended villages, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 42]

Delta Pacification Plan, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 51], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 51]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 51], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 113]

Force level increases, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 42], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297] Defense Department position, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 109]-234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Hilsmanʼs position, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 42]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 42], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 139]

JCS position, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

Taylor Report recommendations, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 42]

MAAG support, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233]

Military effectiveness, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 81], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 81], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139]

Pay and benefits, 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 173]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 173]

Reduction in, pOssible, 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 328], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 328]

Relief duties, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 187]

Strategic hamlet program, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 173]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 173], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 187]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Training for, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 42], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 235], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 248], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 248]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]

U.S. support and advice, 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 269], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 328]-774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 328]

Shaw, Dr., 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 198]

Sheehan, Neil, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 322]

Shoup, Gen. David M., 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 270], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 327], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 330]

Silver, Warren A., 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 63], 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225]

Simpson, Howie, 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199]

Smith, Bromley, 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41], 283n [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]n

Smith, Gordon, 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 232]

Smith, Margaret Chase, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323]

Smith, Walter Bedell, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Sochurek, Howard, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 42]-81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 42], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 48], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 86]

Sorensen, Thomas C., 590n [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 266]

Souphanovong, Prince, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 330]

Southeast Asia: Attitudes toward U.S., 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267]

Buffer area approach, 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 267]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 267]

Chinese Peopleʼs Republic policy toward, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]

Communist plan of conquest, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 218]

Mansfieldʼs report on, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 330]-787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 330]

Nhuʼs perspective on, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]

Strategic importance, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22]

U.S. political objectives, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 214]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 238]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 238], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 267], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 330], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 330]

U.S. regional military command, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]

Southeast Asia Task Force (see also Action Plan for Vietnam), 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287] Directorʼs responsibilities, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 215]

Establishment of, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Functions of, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Members of, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Organization of, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 215]

Status report on Vietnam, 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO): Council meeting, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305]

Counterinsurgency plan for Vietnam, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 83]-174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Dissolution of, proposed, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 142]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 142], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Economic and military assistance to Vietnam, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

Southern Liberation Front, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81]

Souvanna Phouma, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 274], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 305], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 323], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 330]

Soviet Union International conference on Vietnam, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Laos, policy toward, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 238], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 267]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Spread of Communism, approach to, 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of: Relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

U.S. attacks, possible response to, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 213]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 213]

Vietnam policy, 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108]

Spain, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]

Special Group (Counterinsurgency), 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 157n [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328], 789n [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] Civic action program, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 98]-206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 122]-260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Establishment and functions of, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Meetings, 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]-405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Reorganization, proposed, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 132]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Southeast Asia Task Force and, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 215]

Special National Intelligence Estimates (SNIE): 10-62 (Feb. 21, 1961), 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

58-5/1-62 (June 12, 1962), 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 213]

Spurgin, C. Richard, 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212], 603n [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 269]

Stahr, Elvis J., Jr., 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 165]-339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 165]

Staley, Eugene, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

Staley/Thuc Report, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23]

Stalin, Joseph, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]

Stoneman, Walter G., 247n [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 304n [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]-322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212], 460n [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Strategic hamlet program: Agriculture and, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257]-572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 328]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328]

Border hamlets, proposed, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 42]

Central Vietnam hamlets, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 303]

Chiefs, training for, 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 328]-769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 328]

CIA assessment of, 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 239]

Communications systems, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 187]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 196], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 203], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230]

Communist attacks, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 173], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 314], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Communist defectors and, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 227]

Communist insurgency, impact on, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 127], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Congress of hamlets, proposed, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 257], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 328]

Control of population, 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 203], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230]

Crop destruction program and, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Defenses of, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 42]

Delta Pacification Plan, strategic framework for;103-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 51], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113]

Delta Pacification Plan incorporated into, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]

Democratic values and, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

Dependent housing, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]-716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

District advisers for, 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328]

Education, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 257], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275]

Elections, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 227]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 227], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 303], 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 328]

Establishment of hamlets, cadres for, 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 173]-363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]

Explosion Plan and, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 277]-629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]

Fences issue, 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 328]-766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 328]

Funding for, 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 242], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298]

Government officials' involvementin, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 257], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Guerrilla operations against Communists and, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

“Hamlet kit” for, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 297], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 314], 729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 314]

Heavnerʼs assessment of, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 328], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 328]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328]

Hilsmanʼs assessment of, 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 332]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 332]

Information campaign re, 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Intelligence aspects, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42]

Key to military victory, 273n [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Land reform, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257]-573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 257]

Local administration, effect of, 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 328], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 328]

Loyalties of inhabitants, exposure of, 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 328]

McNamaraʼs assessment of, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 187]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 330]-782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 330]

Military authority over, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 227]

National policy, designation as, 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Nhuʼs assessment of, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 227]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 227]

Nhuʼs program of accelerated construction, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]-312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Operation Sunrise and, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 114]-246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 187]-381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187]

Organizational problem, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 229]

Paramilitary forces, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 54], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 165], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 248], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 328] Arms for, 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 300], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]-739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]

Commando teams, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 227]

Montagnards, 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253].

Self Defense Corps, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 173]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 173]

Training for, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 187]

Plan for, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 279]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]-752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

Popular attitudes toward, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]

Priority constructions, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 205]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 229], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 242], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 244]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 244], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]-540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 245], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 248]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 268]-598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

Progress reports, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 203], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 297], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 297]-682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 297]

Proposal for, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 42]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 42]

Protection for villagers through, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]

Provincial concepts of, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 173]-361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 173]

Relocations for, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 93], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302]

Retaken villages and, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 320]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

Salary problems, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 173]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 173], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 229]

Shortage problems, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 173]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 173], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187]

Socioeconomic programs, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]-269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 228], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 268], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 300], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 328]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328]

Strategic concept of, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42]-79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 42]

Strategic Hamlet Committee, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 204], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 233]

Strategy against Communism, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

Successes of, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 187], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Time requirements, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 79]

Trend of events, means of measuring, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281]-648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Two-thirds concept, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 279], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 279]

Types of hamlets, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

U.S. advisers in provinces, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 173]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 173], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 173]-360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 173]

U.S. economic assistance for, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 173]-360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 173], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221]

Volunteers for, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 227]

“Will to fight” developed by, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 323]

Sukarno, Achmed, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Sullivan, William H., 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Sully, Francois, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199], 602n [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 285], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]

Swezey, Anthony Clinton, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246]

Sylvester, Arthur, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 379n [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 248]

Tam An Village, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139]

Tan Phu hamlet, 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139]

Task Force on Vietnam, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 25], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185] Civic action program, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 153], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 233]

Counterinsurgency operations, outline plan for, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 11]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

Delta Pacification Plan, 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Economic assistance to Vietnam, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 63], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67]

Final Report, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 233]-497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Information programs and policies, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Southeast Asia Task Force and, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 215]

Thompson, meeting with, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 147]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2],l1n, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 39], 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 54], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 184], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 441n [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228] Civic action program, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42], 200n [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 98]

Communist insurgency, assessment of, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 288]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 57n [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]

Binh Hoa operation, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 49]

Explosion Plan, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 315]-731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Information programs, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 167], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 171]

SEATO Plan 7, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 83]

Village-level activities, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

“Winning or losing” issue, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]-663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Crop destruction program, 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 176], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Defoliant operations, 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 41], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Delta Pacification Plan, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Hilsman report, 73n [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 42]

Honolulu Conferences: March 1962, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 125]

October 1962, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 298]

International conference on Vietnam, 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 158]

Media coverage of Vietnam: Field operations, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Positive publicity, U.S. efforts re, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]

Military Assistance Command, U.S., 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19]

Military assistance to Vietnam, third country, 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Montagnards, military training for, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Operation Sunrise, 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Political settlement in Vietnam, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 151]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: Force level increases, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Paramilitary forces, proliferation of, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]

Southeast Asia Task Force, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Strategic hamlet program: Communist attacks, ability to withstand, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]-738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Democratic values and, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]-639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 279]

Guerrilla operations against Communists and, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]-637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

Long-term plan for, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 279]

Priority constructions, 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 279]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 279]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221]

U.S. regional military command, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]

Vietnam, Republic of, political reforms, 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Vietnam visit: Diem,meeting with, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 280]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280]

Nhu, meeting with, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 279]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 279]

Report on, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 288]-663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

World tour, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277]

Taylor, Milton C., 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]

Thailand, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 142]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 172], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269] Subversion, capability to resist, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

U.S. policy toward, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 330]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 330]

U.S. troop deployments in, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Village-level organizing, need for, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]

Thanh, Col., 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Thao, Col., 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 116], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 173], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 173], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 173], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 173], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]

Thieu, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 93]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 93]

Tho. See Nguyen Ngoc Tho.

Thompson, Llewellyn, 174 [Pg. 174 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Thompson, R. G. K., 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 82n [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 42], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 105], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 179], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 245] Army of the Republic of Vietnam, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Civic action program, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Civil Guard, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Communist insurgency, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Counterinsurgency operations: Air power used in, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149]

Information programs, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Time phasing, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Villages, importance of, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

Crop destruction program, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Delta Pacification Plan, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 147], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149]

Diem, assessment of, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

Operation Sunrise, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Prisoners of war, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 149]

Ranger companies, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 149]

Self Defense Corps, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Strategic hamlet program, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]-312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 149]

Vietnam, Republic of, political reforms, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Thong, Col., 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 244]

Thuan. See Nguyen Dinh Thuan.

Thuc, Dean, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 203]

Time magazine, 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 311]

Timmes, Maj. Gen. Charles J., 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 123], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 232]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 232], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298]

Timmons, Benson E.l., 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 60], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 201]

Trach, Col., 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Tran Quoc Buu, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 268]

Tran Van Chuong, 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Tran Van Don, Maj. Gen., 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277]

Tran Van Tho, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203]

Tranh, Col., 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 244]

Truce in Vietnam,possible, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 112]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Trueheart, William C., 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23], 205n [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 98], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 353n [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 173], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228], 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 277], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281], 698n [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 302], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 303], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 310] Civil Guard, Vietnamese complaints re U.S. support, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]

Communist insurgency, 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Counterinsurgency operations, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128] Air power used in, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Anti-aircraft operations, 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Explosion Plan, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 277], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 277], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 277], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 277], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 277]

Crop destruction program, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 58]

Delta Pacification Plan, 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 111]

International conference on Vietnam, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 168]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

International Control Commission, 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 166]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99]

Province rehabilitation program, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Provincial surveys, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 100]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 111]

Southeast Asia Task Force, 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 286]

Status report, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 203]-426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Strategic hamlet program, 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 205]-430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Thuanʼs U.S. visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285]

Truong Buu Khanh, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 23], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]

Truong Vinh Le, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 323]

Tunku, Abdul Rahman, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Tuyen, Dr., 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 96], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 268], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Ty, Gen. See Le Van Ty, Gen.

Ung Van Kiem, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247]

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See, Soviet Union.

United Kingdom, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 172], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 191], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 265] International conference on Vietnam, 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Laos policy toward, 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Military assistance to Vietnam, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]

U.S. information program, cooperation with, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

United Nations, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108] Vietnam situation, consideration of, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 233]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 278] Administration of, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 63]

“Buy American” restrictions, waiver of, 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 223], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292]

Cash grants to support international convertibility of local currency, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 206], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 216]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 216], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

General guidelines, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12]

Import financing, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 225]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 233]

Joint U.S.-Vietnamese communique, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Prioritization of projects, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 68], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 74], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 139]

Road program, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23]-43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23]

Strategic hamlet program and, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 173]-360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 173], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221]

Third country assistance, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 108], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 212], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 233]

U.S. FY 1962 program, 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 63]

U.S. FY 1963 program, 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 63], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248]-556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 258]-579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 258]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA) (see also U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam), 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam (see also Media coverage of Vietnam): Action Plan, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 235]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Communists, new name for, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 179]

Counterinsurgency information activities, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]-270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 167], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 171]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 171], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Defoliant operations, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Diemʼs image, work on, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 199]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199]

Magnitude of, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 278]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 278]

Mecklinʼs assignment to, 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Media contacts with USIS, 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Military assistance, public relations aspects of, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Movies used in, 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298]

Positive media coverage, methods to obtain, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 75]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 288]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]-759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 325]

Psychological warfare, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]

U.K. cooperation, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

Vietnamʼs information service, advisers for, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

U.S. Information Service (USIS) (see also U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam), 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 167], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 199], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 203], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 320]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam (see also Military Assistance Command, U.S.; Military assistance to Vietnam, third country; U.S. introduction of forces issue under International Control Commission; U.S. military involvement in Vietnam), 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233] Developments (October 1961-October 1962), 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 297]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297]

Increase, need for, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221]

Joint U.S.-Vietnamese communique on, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Materiel, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 221], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 244]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 244], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]

Public relations aspects, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

Training problem, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23]

U.S.direct allocation of resources, 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 206]

U.S. program for FY 1963, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam (see also U.S. introduction of forces issue under International Control Commission):

Advisers: Number of, 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 297]

Role of, 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 328]

Air operations, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 246 [Pg. 246 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]-247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 298], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 333]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Appropriations for, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]

Casualties, 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 297]

Commitment, possible, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 330]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 330]

Congressional participation in decisionmaking, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]-225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]

Constitutional questions, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 108]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108]

Contingency plan for, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 233]

Geneva Accords and, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]-226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]

Information for troops about Vietnam, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 279]

Kennedyʼs position, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 67], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68]

Korea and Lebanon, comparisons with, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 108]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 108]

Media coverage of, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 99], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 150], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Non-combat purpose of, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]

Rotation for personnel, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 279], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 288]

Senate inquiries re, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 108]-232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 108]

U.S.public opinion on, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 259], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

U.S.News and World Report, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 59], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 62]

Usher, Richard E., 323n [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Valeo, Frank, 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Vien, Lt. Col., 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 277]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 277]

Viet Congo See Communist insurgency.

Vietnam. See: Action Plan for Vietnam

Communist defectors

Communist insurgency

Counterinsurgency operations

Crop destruction program

Defoliant operations

Delta Pacification Plan

International conference on Vietnam, proposed

Media coverage of Vietnam

Neutrality for Vietnam

Political settlement in Vietnam

Presidential palace, attack on

Reunification of Vietnam

U.S.information programs and policies in Vietnam

U.S.military involvement in Vietnam

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of

Vietnam, Republic of

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (DRY): Air strikes against, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292]

Chinese Peopleʼs Republic assistance,attitude toward, 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]

Communist bloc, relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 137]

Communist bloc reactions to possible U.S. operations against, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 213]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 213]

Communist insurgency, link to, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Economic development in Republic of Vietnam, response to, 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 323]-754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 323]

Government opposition in, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 305]

Harrimanʼs meeting with officials, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Internal problems, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]

International conference on Vietnam,support for, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 168]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 188]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 188]

International Control Commission: Propaganda against, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203]

Visit by, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]

Prisoners of war, treatment of, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203]

Propaganda activities, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 203]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 203], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209]-437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

United States, contacts with, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

U.S.military intervention, protests against, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

U.S. military operations against, possible, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 190], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 213]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 213]

U.S.regional military command, response to, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 189]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 189]

Withdrawal from combat, possible.See Political settlement in Vietnam.

Vietnam, Republic of (RVN): See also: Air Force, Vietnamese

Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN)

Civic Action Program

Civil Guard

Military Assistance Command, U.S.

Navy, Vietnamese

Provincial surveys

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF)

Saigon

Self Defense Corps

Strategic Hamlet Program

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam

Administrative subdivisions, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 302]

Agricultural situation, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 127], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 203], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257]-572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 280], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 283], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 328]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 328]

Amnesty program for Communist defectors, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 235], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 292], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 305]

Bilateral treaty with U.S., proposed, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233]

Cambodia, relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 285], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 296], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 321], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 325]

Censorship of U.S. scholars, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70]

Central Vietnam, situation in, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 303]

Commercial development, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Communist sympathizers, rehabilitation program for, 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 328]

Constitutional changes, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287]

Constitutional Court, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 127]

Developments (October 1961-October 1962), 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 297], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 297]-686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]

Economic reforms, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 233], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 297]-686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]

Economic situation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 69], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 203]-422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 203], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 248]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248] Counterinsurgency operations and, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 127]

Deficits and piaster shortages, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 206], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 211], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], , 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 216]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 216], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 230], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 248]

Foreign exchange reserves, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 210]

Long-range development programs, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 233], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 233]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 233], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 235], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

U.S. advisers for, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 269]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Educated class, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 127]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]

Education, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 203]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 257], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275]

Flood relief operations, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 233]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233]

Government officials, training for, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 244]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 248], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 257]-574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 257], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 275], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 297], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 303]

Information service, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 203], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 233], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 278], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 297]

Intelligence service. See Central Intelligence Organization.

Land reform, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257]-573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 257], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 275], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 302], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 323]

Laos, relations with, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 287]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 287], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 292]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 292], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 292], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 301], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 305]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 305], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 309]

Lottery scandal, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Medical assistance, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 202], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 248]

Morale of people, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 277], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 328]

National Economic Council, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 127]

National Internal Security Council, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 35], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 138], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 233], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 233]

Northerners and Catholics, favoritism toward, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 302]

Police service, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 139], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 203]

Political prisoners, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Political refonns, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 108], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149] Noltingʼs speech on, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67]

U.S. policy re, 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

U.S. report re, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 233]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 233], 556 [Pg. 556 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]-560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 249]

Political situation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 42]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138] Conuption, 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 108], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 302] Diemʼs loss of support, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 24], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]-l51, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Governmental organization, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 127]

Opposition, legal, 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 257]-575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 257]

Provinces, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81]

U.S. assessments of, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 42]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 42], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

U.S. governmental advisers, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 138], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]

U.S. support for government, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 108]

Province rehabilitation program, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

Provincial Councils, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 173]

Psychological shock, need for, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69]-152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Public health, 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 203], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 203], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 297]

Public works, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 203]

Road program, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 12], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23]-43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 23], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 203]

Rural police

Social Purification Law, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 209]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 209]

Strategic importance to U.S., 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 68]-146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 68], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Television for, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 290]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Underdevelopment in, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 323]

U.S. agricultural assistance, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 116], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 116]

U.S. Congressional delegations (see also Mansfield, Mike), 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 327]

U.S. Economic Counselor, assignment of, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 67]

Women, military training for, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 277]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 277]

Vietnamese Peopleʼs Revolutionary Party, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 81], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 102], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Vietnamese Special Financial Group, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 63]

Vinh, Col., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 244]

Vo Nguyen Giap, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 23], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 330]

Voice of America, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

Vu Van Mau, 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 239], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 246]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281], 673n [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 299], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Vu Van Thai, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69]

Walton, Frank E., 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169]

Washington Post, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 62], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Weede, Maj. Gen. Richard, 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 169], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228], 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Weinthal, Ted, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

White, John P., 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Williams, Hayden, 60n [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 35], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 156], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Wilson, Donald M., 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 16], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 65], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 199], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Withdrawal of troops proposal. See Political settlement in Vietnam.

Wood, Chalmers B., 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 95n [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 45], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 144n [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 68], 221n [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 153], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 163], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 188], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 197], 443n [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 212], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 217], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 235], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 242], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 256], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 257], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 269], 603n [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 269], 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 616n [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 275], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 281], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 285], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 666n [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 679n [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 298]-691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 298], 693n [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]-759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 325], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 763n [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 328]

Y, Col., 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 127]

Yalta Agreements, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 305]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 305]

Yarmolinsky, Adam, 567n [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Young, Kenneth, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 125]

Youth Corps, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 187]

Yu Quoc Thuc, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 284]

Yuen Tse Kien, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 228]-475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Zablocki, Clement, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 295]

Zone “D” operation, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 13]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 13], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 29]
